 Cricket in New Zealand National cricket teams National sports teams of New Zealand New Zealand in international cricket Cricket in Sri Lanka National cricket teams National sports teams of Sri Lanka Sri Lanka in international cricket Sri Lankan terrorism victims Cricket terminology Batting (cricket) Scoring (cricket) Articles containing video clips Cricket laws and regulations Cricket Cricket World Cup International Cricket Council events Quadrennial sporting events Recurring sporting events established in 1975 World championships Batting (cricket) Cricket captaincy and tactics Cricket terminology Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Friuli-Venezia Giulia Udinese Calcio Association football clubs established in 1896 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs 1896 establishments in Italy Sport in Udine A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy Former capitals of Italy Milan Populated places established in the 1st millennium BC Reuters Companies established in 1851 Media companies based in London Multilingual news services News agencies based in the United Kingdom Financial news agencies 1851 establishments in the United Kingdom Webby Award winners Entertainment companies of the United States Film production companies of the United States Companies based in California Defunct record labels of the United States Record labels based in California Pop record labels Rock record labels Defunct companies in the Greater Los Angeles Area Record labels established in 1992 Record labels disestablished in 2007 Warner Music labels Labels distributed by Warner Music Group Madonna (entertainer) Warner Bros. Records Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1984 births Atalanta B.C. players ACF Fiorentina players U.C. Sampdoria players Inter Milan players A.C. Milan players Hellas Verona F.C. players Association football forwards Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Living people People from Pescia Serie A players Serie B players Italy international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players Italy youth international footballers 1988 births Living people People from Lisieux French footballers French expatriate footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Serie A players AS Cherbourg Football players SM Caen players Udinese Calcio players Expatriate footballers in Italy Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1994 births People from Meulan-en-Yvelines French footballers French people of Senegalese descent SM Caen players A.C. Milan players Montpellier HSC players Genoa C.F.C. players Ligue 1 players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy French expatriate footballers Living people France under-21 international footballers France youth international footballers Association football forwards Association football wingers Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1985 births Living people Italian footballers U.C. Sampdoria players A.S. Pizzighettone players F.C. Crotone players Liverpool F.C. players A.C. Pisa 1909 players A.S. Avellino 1912 players F.C. Bari 1908 players Udinese Calcio players Torino F.C. players Association football goalkeepers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers People from Lecco Premier League players Serie A players Serie B players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom 1981 births Association football midfielders Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Living people Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Olympic footballers of Italy Sportspeople from Rome Serie A players S.S. Lazio players Udinese Calcio players A.C. Chievo Verona players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills