 Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners Terminology used in multiple sports Association football terminology Basketball terminology Tennis terminology Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1991 births Living people A.F.C. Tubize players Belgian expatriates in France Belgian expatriates in England Belgian footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgium youth international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Chelsea F.C. players Ligue 1 players Lille OSC players People from La Louvière Premier League players Walloon sportspeople 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football wingers Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners 1991 births Living people A.F.C. Tubize players Belgian expatriates in France Belgian expatriates in England Belgian footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgium youth international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Chelsea F.C. players Ligue 1 players Lille OSC players People from La Louvière Premier League players Walloon sportspeople 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football wingers Terminology used in multiple sports Association football terminology Basketball terminology Tennis terminology FA Cup Finals FA Cup Tournament systems Football venues in Wales Rugby union stadiums in Wales Swansea City A.F.C. Ospreys (rugby team) Sports venues in Swansea Stadiums in Swansea Buildings and structures in Swansea Sports venues completed in 2005 Premier League venues Football League venues Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1960 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid UEFA Cup winning managers Spanish football managers Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla managers Liverpool F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Valencia CF managers CA Osasuna managers CF Extremadura managers CD Tenerife managers Real Valladolid managers La Liga managers Segunda División managers Premier League managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy UEFA Pro Licence holders Polytechnic University of Madrid alumni Linares CF players S.S.C. Napoli managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Spanish expatriate football managers Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Oviedo Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Association football midfielders Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Real Oviedo players Celta de Vigo B players Celta de Vigo players Rayo Vallecano footballers UP Langreo footballers Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players Serie A players S.S.C. Napoli players Spain international footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Wales Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in Wales Spanish expatriates in Italy 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Plzeň Association football goalkeepers Czech footballers Czech Republic youth international footballers Czech Republic under-21 international footballers Czech Republic international footballers FK Chmel Blšany players AC Sparta Prague players Czech expatriate footballers Czech expatriates in France Czech expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Stade Rennais F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Czech First League players FIFA Century Club 1978 births Living people Sportspeople from Munich German footballers German expatriate footballers Association football goalkeepers SpVgg Unterhaching players Hannover 96 players Hertha BSC players German expatriates in Austria Hertha BSC II players FC Energie Cottbus players FC Red Bull Salzburg players Swansea City A.F.C. players SV Werder Bremen players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Austria Expatriate footballers in Wales German expatriates in Wales Footballers from Bavaria Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Terminology used in multiple sports Banks based in Virginia American companies established in 1988 Banks established in 1988 1988 establishments in Virginia Companies based in McLean, Virginia Companies based in Richmond, Virginia Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Sports terminology Tournament systems Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations Belgium 1831 establishments in Belgium Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Federal monarchies French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1830 Western Europe Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology  1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match Swansea Cities in Wales Counties of Wales Glamorgan Populated coastal places in Wales Populated places established in the 12th century Port cities and towns in Wales Principal areas of Wales Seaside resorts in Wales Swansea Bay Historiography of the American Civil War American Civil War Confederate States of America Cultural history of the American Civil War History of the Southern United States Historical revisionism (negationism) History of the United States (1849–65) History of the United States (1865–1918) Politics of the Southern United States Reconstruction Era Riots and civil disorder in South Carolina Riots and civil unrest during the Reconstruction Era White supremacy in the United States Delaware Former British colonies States and territories established in 1787 States of the East Coast of the United States States of the United States States of the Mid-Atlantic 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club Association football terminology 1985 births Living people Sportspeople from Paris French people of Senegalese descent French footballers French Muslims Senegalese footballers Senegal international footballers Senegalese Muslims Association football forwards FC Rouen players R.E. Mouscron players TSG 1899 Hoffenheim players West Ham United F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Shanghai Shenhua F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Premier League players Süper Lig players Chinese Super League players Senegalese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate footballers in China Senegalese expatriates in Germany Senegalese expatriates in France Senegalese expatriates in Belgium Senegalese expatriates in Turkey 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players Senegalese expatriates in England FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Preston North End F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Sport in Preston 1880 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire 1987 births Living people People from Cádiz Spanish footballers Andalusian footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Cádiz CF players FC Barcelona B players UD Almería players RCD Mallorca players Serie A players Genoa C.F.C. players Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players Qatar Stars League players Lekhwiya SC players Spain under-21 international footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Wales Expatriate footballers in Qatar Spanish expatriates in Italy Spanish expatriates in Wales Spanish expatriates in Qatar 1982 births Living people Association football midfielders English footballers Arsenal F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Sportspeople from London 1987 births Living people People from Northern District (Israel) Israeli Jews Jewish sportspeople Israeli footballers Israel international footballers Israeli people of Romanian-Jewish descent Maccabiah Games competitors for Israel Maccabiah Games footballers Maccabiah Games gold medalists Hapoel Nazareth Illit F.C. players Maccabi Netanya F.C. players Hapoel Tel Aviv F.C. players 1. FC Kaiserslautern players Swansea City A.F.C. players FC Nantes players Maccabi Haifa F.C. players Beitar Jerusalem F.C. players Israeli Premier League players Bundesliga players Premier League players Ligue 1 players Expatriate footballers in Germany Israeli expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in Wales Israeli expatriates in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in France Israeli expatriates in France Israeli expatriate footballers 1993 births Living people Footballers from Neath Welsh footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Swansea City A.F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Premier League players 1987 births Living people Canadian soccer players Canadian people of Filipino descent Canadian people of Jamaican descent Dutch people of Filipino descent Dutch people of Jamaican descent Dutch footballers Association football midfielders Eredivisie players Feyenoord players La Liga players RCD Mallorca players Villarreal CF players Swansea City A.F.C. players S.S.C. Napoli players Carpi FC 1909 players Premier League players Serie A players Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of the Netherlands Canadian expatriate soccer players Dutch expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Wales Expatriate footballers in Italy Canadian emigrants to the Netherlands People from Scarborough, Toronto Black Canadian sportspeople Soccer people from Ontario Canadian sportspeople of Asian descent Naturalised citizens of the Netherlands Canadian expatriates in Spain Dutch expatriates in Spain Canadian expatriates in Wales Dutch expatriates in Wales Canadian expatriates in Italy Dutch expatriates in Italy 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Pamplona Spanish footballers Basque footballers Navarrese footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División B players CA Osasuna players Ligue 1 players Olympique de Marseille players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Spain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in France 1991 births Brazil international footballers Brazil under-20 international footballers Brazil youth international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian footballers Brazilian Roman Catholics Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Chelsea F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic medalists in football Olympic silver medalists for Brazil People from Americana, São Paulo Premier League players São Paulo FC players Sport Club Internacional players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1987 births Living people Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Joinville Esporte Clube players Cruzeiro Esporte Clube players S.L. Benfica footballers Chelsea F.C. players Jiangsu Suning F.C. players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Primeira Liga players Premier League players Chinese Super League players Brazilian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in China Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in China Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics 1985 births Living people People from Dronfield Sportspeople from Derbyshire English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Aston Villa F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players English people of Irish descent 1982 births Living people People from Montsià Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football defenders Segunda División B players Tercera División players CF Reus Deportiu footballers Girona FC players UE Sant Andreu footballers Terrassa FC footballers Premier League players The Football League players Swansea City A.F.C. players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Wales Spanish expatriates in Wales 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Wolverhampton English footballers Welsh footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Hednesford Town F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Welsh descent 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from County Tipperary Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football forwards Cork City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Southampton F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Tipperary hurlers Gortnahoe-Glengoole hurlers UEFA Euro 2012 players Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1962 births English football referees Living people Sportspeople from St Helens, Merseyside FA Cup Final referees The Football League referees Premier League referees British people of Montserratian descent 1987 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent Association football wingers Southampton F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black English sportspeople People from Trowbridge Living people