 Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1981 births Sportspeople from Dakar Living people French people of Cape Verdean descent French people of Guinean descent French footballers French expatriate footballers France international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Association football fullbacks A.C. Monza Brianza 1912 players OGC Nice players AS Monaco FC players Manchester United F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Naturalized citizens of France Running Man (TV series) contestants French expatriates in England French expatriates in Italy Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Oviedo Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Association football midfielders Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Real Oviedo players Celta de Vigo B players Celta de Vigo players Rayo Vallecano footballers UP Langreo footballers Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players Serie A players S.S.C. Napoli players Spain international footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Wales Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in Wales Spanish expatriates in Italy Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1969 births Living people Sportspeople from Renfrewshire Expatriate footballers in Germany Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers St Mirren F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Borussia Dortmund players Celtic F.C. players Livingston F.C. players 1998 FIFA World Cup players Scottish Football League players Bundesliga players Scottish Premier League players Scottish expatriate footballers Scottish football managers Livingston F.C. managers Wycombe Wanderers F.C. managers Colchester United F.C. managers Norwich City F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Premier League managers People educated at Linwood High School Scottish Football League representative players Scotland under-21 international footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Manchester 1st-century establishments in Roman Britain 79 establishments Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North West England Local government districts of North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 1st century Germany national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries National sports teams of Germany Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in North Rhine-Westphalia FC Schalke 04 1904 establishments in Germany Multi-sport clubs in Germany 1989 births Living people People from Seclin French people of Ghanaian descent Ghanaian footballers French footballers Ghana international footballers 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players African Muslims Olympique de Marseille players FC Lorient players Swansea City A.F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players Ghanaian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Association football forwards Association football wingers FC Nania players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Ghanaian Muslims Ghana under-20 international footballers French Muslims Olympique de Marseille Association football clubs established in 1899 G-14 clubs Football clubs in Marseille 1899 establishments in France Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Tournament systems Belgium 1831 establishments in Belgium Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Federal monarchies French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1830 Western Europe Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Belgium national football team 1904 establishments in Belgium Articles containing video clips European national association football teams Football in Belgium National sports teams of Belgium Belgium at the Olympics England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 2018 FIFA World Cup 2018 in association football 2018 in Russian sport FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by Russia Scheduled association football competitions