 1961 births Living people People from Slough People educated at Herschel Grammar School English footballers England youth international footballers English expatriate footballers English people of Irish descent Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Fulham F.C. players IFK Norrköping players Oxford United F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Djurgårdens IF Fotboll players Cardiff City F.C. players Exeter City F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players South China AA footballers Slough Town F.C. players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong English football managers Slough Town F.C. managers Woking F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers National League (English football) managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Reading F.C. non-playing staff Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Living people Russian businesspeople Russian football chairmen and investors Chairmen of Reading F.C. Russian emigrants to the United Kingdom Alumni of Cass Business School Reading F.C. Association football clubs established in 1871 Sport in Reading, Berkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs 1871 establishments in England Football clubs in Berkshire Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Association football terminology 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from County Antrim Association footballers from Northern Ireland Ballymena United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Reading F.C. non-playing staff Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff Expatriate football managers from Northern Ireland The Football League managers Watford F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers 1921–22 in English football 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons Compositions by Meredith Monk 2003 compositions Compositions for symphony orchestra Gambling companies of the United Kingdom Bookmakers Poker companies Gambling websites Sky plc CVC Capital Partners companies Football clubs in England Sport in Swindon Swindon Town F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1879 Football League Cup winners Southern Football League clubs 1879 establishments in England Football clubs in Wiltshire 1968 births Living people Italian footballers A.C. Milan players Celtic F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players S.S.C. Napoli players West Ham United F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players S.S. Lazio players Juventus F.C. players Atletico Roma F.C. players Premier League players Scottish Premier League players Serie A players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Italian neo-fascists Ternana Calcio players Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Expatriate football managers in England Italian football managers UEFA Pro Licence holders The Football League managers Sportspeople from Rome Swindon Town F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers Italian expatriate football managers Football venues in England Sports venues in Reading, Berkshire Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Reading F.C. London Irish Sports venues completed in 1998 Football League venues Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England 1965 births Living people Sportspeople from Birkenhead English footballers Association football goalkeepers Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Bangor City F.C. players The Football League players English football managers Bangor City F.C. managers Scunthorpe United F.C. managers Southampton F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Sheffield United F.C. managers Managers in the Welsh Premier League The Football League managers Premier League managers Physiotherapists Alumni of the University of Salford Association football terminology Australian rules football terminology American football terminology Association football academies 1967 births Living people Sportspeople from County Galway Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Association football forwards West Ham United F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Exeter City F.C. players The Football League players Republic of Ireland football managers Exeter City F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Reading F.C. non-playing staff Premier League managers The Football League managers National League (English football) managers Cancer survivors Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1965 births Living people People from St Albans English footballers Association football fullbacks Watford F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Watford F.C. non-playing staff English football managers Watford F.C. managers UEFA Pro Licence holders Reading F.C. non-playing staff 1978 births People from Park Royal Living people English people of Grenadian descent Association football forwards Grenadian footballers Grenada international footballers Hayes F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Members of the Order of the British Empire Sportspeople from London Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from County Waterford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Association football forwards Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Waterford United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players The Football League players Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Villanova University Roman Catholic universities and colleges in the United States Big East Conference schools Education in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Universities and colleges in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Radnor Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania Educational institutions established in 1842 Universities and colleges in Delaware County, Pennsylvania 1842 establishments in the United States Roman Catholic Universities and colleges in Pennsylvania Association of Catholic Colleges and Universities Augustinian universities and colleges V-12 Navy College Training Program 1993 births Living people Bahamian basketball players Bahamian expatriate basketball people in the United States Oklahoma Sooners men's basketball players People from Grand Bahama Point guards Shooting guards Oklahoma Sooners men's basketball University of Oklahoma Norman, Oklahoma Universities and colleges in Oklahoma Education in Cleveland County, Oklahoma Flagship universities in the United States Schools of public health in the United States School buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in Oklahoma Universities and colleges in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma Educational institutions established in 1890 Historic American Landscapes Survey in Oklahoma Visitor attractions in Cleveland County, Oklahoma V-12 Navy College Training Program  Sports terminology Villanova Wildcats men's basketball 1994 births Living people Basketball players from Pennsylvania People from Langhorne, Pennsylvania Point guards Sportspeople from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Villanova Wildcats men's basketball players Oklahoma Sooners football Sports clubs established in 1895 1895 establishments in Oklahoma Territory Basketball terminology Basketball statistics  Basketball terminology Rules of basketball Basketball strategy Netball terminology Netball strategy American football terminology Houston, Texas Capitals of former nations Cities in Fort Bend County, Texas Cities in Harris County, Texas Cities in Montgomery County, Texas Cities in Texas County seats in Texas Populated coastal places in Texas Populated places established in 1836 Port cities and towns of the United States Gulf Coast Basketball terminology Basketball strategy Living people Curlers from Saskatchewan Curlers from New Brunswick Curlers from Manitoba Sportspeople from Regina, Saskatchewan Sportspeople from Winnipeg Sportspeople from Moncton People from Orillia Canadian women curlers Year of birth uncertain Sports venues completed in 2002 National Football League venues NCAA bowl game venues Retractable-roof stadiums in the United States Retractable-roof stadiums Rodeo venues in the United States CONCACAF Gold Cup stadiums American football venues in Houston, Texas Houston Texans Big 12 Championship Game venues 2002 establishments in Texas Music venues in Houston, Texas Soccer venues in Texas College basketball venues in the United States Basketball venues in Texas 1789 establishments in Maryland Big East Conference schools Educational institutions established in the 1780s Georgetown University Georgetown (Washington, D.C.) Jesuit universities and colleges in the United States Roman Catholic Universities and colleges in Washington, D.C. Universities and colleges in Washington, D.C. Association of Catholic Colleges and Universities Roman Catholic universities and colleges in the United States Oklahoma States of the United States States and territories established in 1907 Southern United States Cherokee-speaking countries and territories 1999 songs 1999 singles Slipknot (band) songs Songs written by Corey Taylor Songs written by Paul Gray (American musician) Roadrunner Records singles Rap metal songs 1991 births Living people Basketball players from Oklahoma Centers (basketball) Gonzaga Bulldogs men's basketball players Oklahoma Sooners men's basketball players Parade High School All-Americans (boys' basketball) People from Ardmore, Oklahoma Power forwards (basketball) 2015–16 Big East Conference men's basketball season Villanova Wildcats men's basketball seasons  College basketball in the United States Historiography of the American Civil War American Civil War Confederate States of America Cultural history of the American Civil War History of the Southern United States Historical revisionism (negationism) History of the United States (1849–65) History of the United States (1865–1918) Politics of the Southern United States Reconstruction Era Riots and civil disorder in South Carolina Riots and civil unrest during the Reconstruction Era White supremacy in the United States 1961 births Living people Basketball players from Pennsylvania Bucknell Bison men's basketball players College men's basketball head coaches in the United States Drexel Dragons men's basketball coaches Hofstra Pride men's basketball coaches UNLV Runnin' Rebels basketball coaches Villanova Wildcats men's basketball coaches 1995 births Living people Basketball players from Maryland People from Silver Spring, Maryland Shooting guards Villanova Wildcats men's basketball players Basketball terminology Basketball statistics Kentucky Wildcats men's basketball Sports clubs established in 1903 1903 establishments in Kentucky  Basketball strategy Basketball terminology Comedy duos Comedy characters Counterparts to the protagonist Vaudeville tropes Sports terminology NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship Census-designated places in Sequoyah County, Oklahoma Census-designated places in Oklahoma Fort Smith metropolitan area 1952 births Living people American men's basketball players Atlanta Hawks draft picks Atlanta Hawks head coaches Basketball players from Kansas College men's basketball head coaches in the United States Florida Gators men's basketball coaches Illinois Fighting Illini men's basketball coaches Kansas State Wildcats men's basketball coaches Kansas State Wildcats men's basketball players New York Knicks assistant coaches Oklahoma Sooners men's basketball coaches People from Shawnee County, Kansas Pittsburg State Gorillas men's basketball coaches Sportspeople from Manhattan, Kansas UNLV Runnin' Rebels basketball coaches