 Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Paris French people of Senegalese descent French footballers French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers Senegalese footballers Senegal international footballers Association football fullbacks Association football wingers French Muslims Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy RCF Paris players AS Monaco FC players Arsenal F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players Serie A players The Football League players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players Laws of association football Association football terminology Milton Keynes Dons F.C. The Football League clubs Sport in Milton Keynes Wimbledon F.C. Football League Trophy winners Football clubs in Buckinghamshire 2004 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 2004 Football clubs in England Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1947 births Living people A.F.C. Bournemouth managers A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football midfielders Brentford F.C. players English autobiographers English footballers English football managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players People from Poplar, London Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Seattle Sounders (1974–83) players Southampton F.C. managers Sportspeople from London The Football League managers The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. players FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England  Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports 1978 births Living people Sportspeople from Liverpool English footballers Association football forwards Burscough F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Bury F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Waterloo Dock A.F.C. players 1985 births Living people English footballers Association football midfielders Bristol City F.C. players Forest Green Rovers F.C. players Weston-super-Mare A.F.C. players Exeter City F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players 1984 births Living people British people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Association football midfielders Premier League players The Football League players Everton F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Sportspeople from Liverpool 1982 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent English people of Guyanese descent England international footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players Arsenal F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players A.C. Perugia Calcio players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Muangthong United F.C. players Thai Premier League players J2 League players Júbilo Iwata players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Thailand Black British sportspeople People from Islington Sportspeople from London Living people English expatriates in Italy English expatriates in Thailand Chinese poems Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1981 births Living people Association football forwards English footballers England semi-pro international footballers Aston Villa F.C. players Chesham United F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Billericay Town F.C. players Yeading F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Millwall F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players Black British sportspeople Sportspeople from London People from Hammersmith Maidenhead United F.C. players 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Fingal Republic of Ireland association footballers League of Ireland players Drogheda United F.C. players Dundalk F.C. players Finn Harps F.C. players Sporting Fingal F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Millwall F.C. players The Football League players League of Ireland XI players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers 1984 births Living people People from Kingston upon Thames English footballers Association football defenders Wimbledon F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players The Football League players 1982 births Living people Israeli Jews Jewish sportspeople Israeli footballers Maccabi Tel Aviv F.C. players Israel international footballers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Israeli Premier League players Premier League players The Football League players Israeli expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Israeli expatriates in the United Kingdom Football players from Rishon LeZion Standard Liège players Expatriate footballers in Belgium Israeli expatriates in Belgium Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology 1985 births Living people People from Peckham English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers English Christians Association football central defenders West Ham United F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Saint Lucian descent English people of Irish descent Black English sportspeople Bursaspor footballers Expatriate footballers in Turkey English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Turkey Süper Lig players Race and law Antalyaspor footballers Reading F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom People acquitted of assault Association football terminology 1986 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentina youth international footballers Sportspeople from Rosario, Santa Fe Association football midfielders Rosario Central footballers Atlético de Rafaela footballers Instituto footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Queens Park Rangers F.C. players U.S. Città di Palermo players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players 1981 births Living people People from Barking Sportspeople from London English people of Trinidad and Tobago descent English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Senrab F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players Bath City F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Southern Football League players Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Football League Third Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe Football League Fourth Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Nice Communes of Alpes-Maritimes Prefectures in France Massalian colonies Physical exercise Cycling Articles containing video clips 1980 births British Tour de France stage winners Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Commonwealth Games silver medallists for England Cyclists at the 1998 Commonwealth Games Cyclists at the 2002 Commonwealth Games Cyclists at the 2000 Summer Olympics Cyclists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Cyclists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Cyclists at the 2012 Summer Olympics English male cyclists English Olympic medallists English people of Australian descent British Giro d'Italia stage winners Living people Olympic cyclists of Great Britain Olympic gold medallists for Great Britain Olympic silver medallists for Great Britain Olympic bronze medallists for Great Britain Olympic medalists in cycling Medalists at the 2000 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Sportspeople from Ghent People from Eccleston, Lancashire People from Maida Vale Tour de France winners UCI Road World Champions (elite men) BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners Knights Bachelor People educated at St Augustine's Church of England High School Sports players and officials awarded knighthoods British cycling road race champions English knights Cyclists at the 2014 Commonwealth Games Commonwealth Games competitors for England 2012 Tour de France stage winners Tour de France cyclists Vuelta a España cyclists Giro d'Italia cyclists UCI Track Cycling World Champions (men) Tour de France Cycle races in France Grand Tour (cycling) Recurring sporting events established in 1903 UCI ProTour races UCI World Tour races 1903 establishments in France Annual sporting events in France Cycling teams based in the United Kingdom Sports clubs established in 2009 UCI WorldTeams 2009 establishments in the United Kingdom Team Sky Racing BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom National members of the European Cycling Union Cycle racing in the United Kingdom Cycling organisations in the United Kingdom Sports governing bodies in the United Kingdom Cycle racing organisations Sports organisations established in 1959 Organisations based in Manchester 1959 establishments in the United Kingdom Villages in Lancashire Geography of West Lancashire Civil parishes in Lancashire Driving Tests Thorax (human anatomy) Skeletal system Filling stations Distribution, retailing, and wholesaling Fuels Articles with inconsistent citation formats English first-class cricket teams Lancashire County Cricket Club Cricket in Lancashire Sport in Trafford Sports clubs established in 1864 1864 establishments in England  1943 births Living people American economists Labor economists Dartmouth College alumni Harvard University alumni Harvard University faculty 2012 Summer Olympics 2012 in London Summer Olympics in London 2012 in British sport 2012 in multi-sport events Summer Olympic Games Olympic Games in the United Kingdom Gestures Fingers NHS Foundation Trusts Organisations based in Lancashire City of Preston, Lancashire Health in Lancashire Dermatologic terminology Hematology Injuries Medical signs Police forces of England Organisations based in Lancashire Organizations established in 1839 1839 establishments in England Race (human categorization) Euro NCAP small family cars Hatchbacks Front-wheel-drive vehicles Sedans Station wagons Coupes Convertibles Hardtop convertibles 1970s automobiles 1980s automobiles 1990s automobiles 2000s automobiles 2010s automobiles Vehicles introduced in 1979 Vauxhall vehicles Compact cars Rally cars Wigan Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester Geography of Greenwich Time zones Time in the United Kingdom BBC Sport Sports radio in the United Kingdom Sports television in the United Kingdom Ambulances Medical technology Emergency medical services Towns and villages in St Helens, Merseyside Civil parishes in Merseyside Great Britain Islands of the British Isles Northern Europe Western Europe Metropolitan or continental parts of states Summer Olympic Games Recurring sporting events established in 1896 Olympic Games Quadrennial sporting events 1957 births Living people Australian cycling coaches Australian male cyclists Cyclists at the 1978 Commonwealth Games Officers of the Order of the British Empire Cyclists from New South Wales New South Wales Institute of Sport alumni People from the North West Slopes Commonwealth Games gold medallists for Australia Manchester 1st-century establishments in Roman Britain 79 establishments Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North West England Local government districts of North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 1st century Cornell University faculty 1922 births 2006 deaths Members of the French Academy of Sciences University of the Sciences alumni University of Illinois alumni Alexander von Humboldt Fellows Brookhaven National Laboratory staff Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences Denmark Countries in Europe Danish-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union Scandinavia States and territories established in 1814 Copenhagen Capitals in Europe Cities and towns in Capital Region of Denmark Municipal seats in Capital Region of Denmark Municipal seats of Denmark Populated places established in the 11th century Port cities and towns in Denmark Port cities and towns of the Baltic Sea Transport in the United Kingdom Department for Transport 2002 establishments in the United Kingdom 1973 births Academics of the University of Sussex Alumni of Fitzwilliam College, Cambridge British male cyclists Journalists from Northern Ireland Cycling journalists Cyclists at the 2006 Commonwealth Games Cyclists at the 2010 Commonwealth Games Commonwealth Games competitors for Northern Ireland Living people Sportspeople from Belfast British weekly magazines English-language magazines British sports magazines Cycling magazines in the United Kingdom Magazines established in 1891 1891 establishments in the United Kingdom Former Time Warner subsidiaries