 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England 1986 births Living people Portuguese people of Bissau-Guinean descent Portuguese footballers Association football forwards S.C. Farense players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Panionios G.S.S. players Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in England Sportspeople from Lisbon Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Greece Portuguese expatriates in Greece Portuguese expatriates in Scotland Hibernian F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Scotland Scottish Premier League players Barnsley F.C. players Portuguese expatriates in England West Ham United F.C. players Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal youth international footballers Portuguese expatriates in Turkey Expatriate footballers in Turkey Akhisar Belediyespor footballers Charlton Athletic F.C. players Blackpool F.C. Football clubs in England Sport in Blackpool Association football clubs established in 1887 The Football League clubs Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners 1887 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire 1954 births Living people Alumni of the University of Bolton Blackpool F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players British association football commentators British expatriate sportspeople in the United States Coventry City F.C. players English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Ireland English expatriates in the United States English football managers English footballers Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football central defenders League of Ireland managers League of Ireland players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Limerick F.C. managers Limerick F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Notts County F.C. managers People from Dudley Premier League managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League managers The Football League players Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93) players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe FA Cup Finals FA Cup Association football terminology Sports terminology 1983 births Living people People from Croydon Footballers from Greater London English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Chelsea F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Sierra Leonean descent English people of Nigerian descent Sierra Leone Creole people Black English sportspeople Celtic F.C. players Scottish Professional Football League players London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports 1963 births Living people People from Kingswood, South Gloucestershire English footballers Association football midfielders Brentford F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Wimbledon F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players English football managers Bristol Rovers F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Plymouth Argyle F.C. managers Leicester City F.C. managers Blackpool F.C. managers Crystal Palace F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers English autobiographers Millwall F.C. managers Sportspeople from Gloucestershire Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Glasgow Association football forwards Scottish footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players National Soccer League (Australia) players The Football League players Premier League players Expatriate soccer players in Australia Blackpool F.C. players Dumbarton F.C. players Hibernian F.C. players Northern Spirit FC players Queen of the South F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Fleetwood Town F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1981 births Living people People from Abingdon-on-Thames English footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers Association football utility players Luton Town F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1967 births Living people People from Ilford Black English sportspeople Association football midfielders English footballers English people of Barbadian descent English people of Trinidad and Tobago descent England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Inter Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Macclesfield Town F.C. players The Football League players The Football League managers Premier League players Serie A players Macclesfield Town F.C. managers Milton Keynes Dons F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Notts County F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players Blackpool F.C. managers Football League Championship play-off Finals Blackpool F.C. matches Cardiff City F.C. matches 2010 Football League play-offs 2009–10 Football League Championship Events at Wembley Stadium 2009–10 in Welsh football 2010 in London Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Stockport English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football wingers Liverpool F.C. players Notts County F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Derby County F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Black English sportspeople English people of Barbadian descent English people of Trinidad and Tobago descent Association football clubs established in 1887 Barnsley F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in South Yorkshire Sport in Barnsley FA Cup winners 1887 establishments in England Midland Football League (1889) 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Leicester City F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Leicester Association football clubs established in 1884 Football League Cup winners Midland Football League (1889) Football League Championship clubs 1884 establishments in England Football clubs in Leicestershire  2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons 1981 births Living people English footballers Northwich Victoria F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Grays Athletic F.C. players Dagenham & Redbridge F.C. players Lincoln City F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Association football forwards Isthmian League players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players Sportspeople from Liverpool 1980 births Living people People from Chertsey English footballers England youth international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Norwich City F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1991 births Living people People from Aylesbury English footballers English people of Scottish descent Association football midfielders Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players England youth international footballers Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Wycombe Wanderers F.C. Association football clubs established in 1887 The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs High Wycombe 1887 establishments in England Isthmian League Football clubs in Buckinghamshire Fan-owned English League football clubs Fan-owned football clubs 1981 births Living people French footballers Ivorian footballers Ivory Coast international footballers Ivorian expatriate footballers Association football defenders Nîmes Olympique players Arsenal F.C. players Borussia Dortmund players Borussia Dortmund II players Hamburger SV players West Ham United F.C. players Bundesliga players Ligue 2 players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany French people of Ivorian descent 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Ivorian expatriates in Germany Ivorian expatriates in the United Kingdom The Football League players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Scotland Dundee United F.C. players Hamburger SV II players People from Essonne Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology  1980 births Living people People from Stepney English footballers Association football fullbacks 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players A.S. Roma players LA Galaxy players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriates in Italy Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English people of Barbadian descent Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club 1986 births Living people People from Girona Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players RCD Espanyol B footballers RCD Espanyol footballers Rayo Vallecano footballers Girona FC players The Football League players Blackpool F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Chesterfield F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England  Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology 1981 births Living people Sportspeople from Belfast Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland youth international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Sunderland A.F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Liverpool English footballers England under-21 international footballers English people of Irish descent English people of Dutch descent Association football midfielders Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players People educated at Liverpool Blue Coat School English football managers Leyton Orient F.C. managers Leyton Orient F.C. players The Football League managers Terminology used in multiple sports 1982 births Living people People from Oldham English footballers Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Association football goalkeepers Rochdale A.F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Burnley F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players People educated at North Chadderton School English people of Scottish descent 1971 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent Association football forwards England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers First Division/Premier League top scorers Arsenal F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black English sportspeople Huddersfield Town A.F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from Nottingham Living people Morocco Countries in Africa North African countries Arabic-speaking countries and territories French-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Arab League Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Muslim-majority countries States and territories established in 1956 Articles containing Arabic-language text Defunct tennis tournaments in Germany Clay court tennis tournaments ATP Tour World Team Cup May sporting events South Africa Countries in Africa English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the African Union Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1910 Commonwealth republics Afrikaans-speaking countries and territories Bantu countries and territories BRICS nations Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP