 Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team 1979 births Association football midfielders Brescia Calcio players Inter Milan players Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Living people A.C. Milan players Juventus F.C. players New York City FC players Reggina Calcio players Olympic footballers of Italy Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Olympic medalists in football People from the Province of Brescia Serie A players Serie B players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Officers of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Italian expatriates in the United States Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 1957 births Living people People from the Province of Brescia Italian footballers Italian football managers Atalanta B.C. players Juventus F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Lega Pro players Atalanta B.C. managers Hellas Verona F.C. managers Parma F.C. managers A.S. Roma managers ACF Fiorentina managers Serie A managers U.S. Cremonese players Italy national football team managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers 1977 births Living people A.S. Varese 1910 players Empoli F.C. players Association football forwards Italian footballers Italy international footballers Sportspeople from Naples Serie A players Serie B players Udinese Calcio players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1982 births Living people People from Bari Italian footballers Association football forwards Serie A players F.C. Bari 1908 players A.S. Roma players U.C. Sampdoria players A.C. Milan players Inter Milan players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Parma F.C. players Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1979 births Living people People from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Home Farm F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Laws of association football Association football terminology Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italian Roman Catholics Parma F.C. players Juventus F.C. players FIFA 100 Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players Association football goalkeepers Serie A players Serie B players FIFA World Cup-winning players People from Carrara 1978 births Living people FIFA Century Club 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2011–12 UEFA Champions League UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Croatia Balkans Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Croatian-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Member states of NATO Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Southeastern Europe Central Europe Gdańsk 980s establishments Populated places established in the 10th century Members of the Hanseatic League City counties of Poland Cities and towns in Pomeranian Voivodeship West Prussia Free City of Danzig Port cities and towns of the Baltic Sea Time balls Geographical naming disputes Lübeck law 2006 FIFA World Cup 2006 in association football 2005–06 in German football FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by Germany UEFA Euro 2012 Republic of Ireland at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Croatian football 1979 births Living people Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Irish expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in Australia Irish expatriates in Australia Melbourne City FC players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players A-League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club Leicester Celtic A.F.C. players Nigeria national football team African national association football teams National sports teams of Nigeria 1939 births Living people 1962 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.C. Milan players ACF Fiorentina managers A.S. Varese 1910 players Association football defenders Cagliari Calcio managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Inter Milan managers FC Bayern Munich managers Expatriate football managers in Austria FC Red Bull Salzburg managers Footballers at the 1960 Summer Olympics Bundesliga managers Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers Italy national football team managers Juventus F.C. managers Olympic footballers of Italy People from the Province of Milan Expatriate football managers in Portugal S.L. Benfica managers Primeira Liga managers Expatriate football managers in the Republic of Ireland Republic of Ireland national football team managers Serie A players Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 2004 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers VfB Stuttgart managers Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in Ireland UEFA Cup winning managers Italian Roman Catholics 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Watford F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Irish expatriates in England Stella Maris F.C. players Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations The Blitz Battle of Britain 1940 in London 1941 in London 1940 in military history 1941 in military history 1940 in the United Kingdom 1941 in the United Kingdom Battles and military actions in London Airstrikes Dublin (city) 841 establishments Capitals in Europe Cities in the Republic of Ireland County towns in the Republic of Ireland Leinster Local administrative units of the Republic of Ireland Populated coastal places in the Republic of Ireland Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Staple ports University towns in Ireland Viking Age populated places Populated places established in the 9th century Villages in County Down Civil parish of Loughinisland The Troubles in County Down County Down Ulster Counties of Northern Ireland 1994 FIFA World Cup 1994 in association football FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by the United States 1994 in American soccer Sports in Stanford, California North American national association football teams United States men's national soccer team United States Soccer Federation 1962 births Living people 1990 FIFA World Cup players 1994 FIFA World Cup players Aston Villa F.C. players British association football commentators British radio personalities Crystal Palace F.C. players National League (English football) players Fulham F.C. players Irish association football commentators Liverpool F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Premier League players Reading F.C. players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Scottish people of Irish descent Sportspeople from Glasgow Stevenage F.C. players UEFA Euro 1988 players West Ham United F.C. players The Football League players 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from County Wexford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Gaelic footballers who switched code St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Cork City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Colorado Rapids players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Designated Players (MLS) Wexford Youths F.C. players 1984 births A.S. Livorno Calcio players ACF Fiorentina players Association football fullbacks Association football central defenders Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Juventus F.C. players Living people Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Olympic footballers of Italy People from Pisa Serie A players Serie B players University of Turin alumni Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Olympic medalists in football 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1984 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Peterborough United F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Orlando City SC players Colorado Rapids players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate soccer players in the United States 1976 births Living people People from Lifford Sportspeople from County Donegal Association football goalkeepers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland FIFA Century Club Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Celtic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Leicester City F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Leicester Association football clubs established in 1884 Football League Cup winners Midland Football League (1889) Football League Championship clubs 1884 establishments in England Football clubs in Leicestershire 1984 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Bury F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Cherry Orchard F.C. players Music in Dublin (city) Music venues in Ireland Italian language Fusional languages Languages of Italy Languages of San Marino Languages of Slovenia Languages of Switzerland Languages of Vatican City Subject–verb–object languages Ireland Celtic nations Divided regions International islands Northern Europe Western Europe Italian footballers Italy international footballers A.S. Roma players Serie A players Italy under-21 international footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Sportspeople from Rome 1983 births Living people Association football midfielders 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Campania People from the Province of Benevento Italian footballers Association football midfielders A.C. Milan players S.S.C. Napoli players U.C. Sampdoria players Piacenza Calcio 1919 players Modena F.C. players Empoli F.C. players Torino F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Italy under-21 international footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Italy Italy international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Tennis terminology Glossaries of sports Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Reserve team football Association football terminology Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 2013–14 in European football 2014 UEFA European Under-17 Championship UEFA European Under-17 Championship qualification Tournament systems UEFA Euro 2012 UEFA European Championship Finals Spain national football team matches Italy national football team matches Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Sport in Kiev Italy–Spain relations 21st century in Kiev European national under-19 association football teams England national youth football team UEFA European Under-19 Championship UEFA competitions Under-19 association football competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1948 Croatia Balkans Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Croatian-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Member states of NATO Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Southeastern Europe Central Europe European national association football teams Poland national football team National sports teams of Poland 1921 establishments in Poland Greece Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Southeastern Europe States and territories established in 1821 UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe 1944 births People from Belfast FIFA officials Living people Officers of the Order of the British Empire Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1993 births Living people Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers Association football defenders Manchester United F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Poland Central Europe Eastern Europe Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1918 Netherlands Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Kingdom of the Netherlands Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Western Europe Germany Central Europe Countries in Europe Federal republics G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1871 Western Europe Articles containing video clips Norway Countries in Europe Nordic countries Scandinavia Northern Europe Liberal democracies States and territories established in 872 States and territories established in 1905 Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Germanic countries and territories England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Ukraine 1991 establishments in Ukraine Areas of traditional spread of Ukrainians and Ukrainian language Countries in Europe Eastern Europe Kievan Rus' Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Ukrainian-speaking countries and territories Russia BRICS nations Caspian littoral states Central Asian countries Countries in Europe East Asian countries Eastern Europe Federal republics G8 nations G20 nations Member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations North Asian countries Northeast Asian countries Russian-speaking countries and territories Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 862 Western Asian countries E7 nations Largest cities of Europe templates Serbia templates Serbia Balkans Countries in Europe Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Republics Serbian-speaking countries and territories Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 2006 Southeastern Europe Turkey Countries in Europe Western Asian countries Eastern Mediterranean Near Eastern countries Middle Eastern countries Modern Turkic states G20 nations Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1923 1923 establishments in Turkey Eurasia Southeastern Europe Western Asia Muslim-majority countries E7 nations Tennis terminology Glossaries of sports Lithuania Baltic states Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe Republics States and territories established in 1918 States and territories established in 1990