 Gonzaga Bulldogs men's basketball Basketball clubs established in 1907 North Carolina Tar Heels men's basketball Basketball clubs established in 1910 1993 births Living people Centers (basketball) Gonzaga Bulldogs men's basketball players People from Toruń Polish basketball players Polish expatriate basketball people in the United States  Basketball positions Basketball terminology Centers (basketball) Basketball 1891 introductions Canadian inventions Sports originating in the United States Team sports Summer Olympic sports Ball games Articles containing video clips  1995 births Living people Basketball players from Texas McDonald's High School All-Americans North Carolina Tar Heels men's basketball players Parade High School All-Americans (boys' basketball) Shooting guards Small forwards Sportspeople from Harris County, Texas 1994 births Living people American men's basketball players Basketball players from Oregon McDonald's High School All-Americans Parade High School All-Americans (boys' basketball) People from Clackamas County, Oregon Point guards Washington Huskies men's basketball players 1995 births Living people Basketball players from North Carolina McDonald's High School All-Americans North Carolina Tar Heels men's basketball players Power forwards (basketball) Sportspeople from Charlotte, North Carolina   Basketball terminology Basketball statistics Basketball terminology Basketball equipment Point guards Basketball positions Basketball terminology North Carolina Tar Heels Piano Articles containing video clips Chordophones Compositions for piano Italian inventions Keyboard instruments Percussion instruments Rhythm section C instruments Place of birth missing (living people) 1977 births Living people American basketball coaches American expatriate basketball people in France American expatriate basketball people in Germany American expatriate basketball people in Ireland Basketball players from Illinois College men's basketball head coaches in the United States Irish basketball players People from Northbrook, Illinois Point guards UNC Wilmington Seahawks men's basketball coaches UNC Wilmington Seahawks men's basketball players Wright State Raiders men's basketball coaches Basketball terminology Duke Blue Devils men's basketball Kentucky Wildcats men's basketball College basketball games in the United States 1991–92 NCAA Division I men's basketball season NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship Sports in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 1992 in Pennsylvania Basketball terminology Basketball statistics 1984 births Living people African-American basketball players American expatriate basketball people in Turkey Basketball players at the 2005 NCAA Men's Division I Final Four Basketball players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Basketball players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Basketball players from Texas Basketball players from West Virginia Beşiktaş men's basketball players Brooklyn Nets players Dallas Mavericks players Illinois Fighting Illini men's basketball players Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics National Basketball Association All-Stars New Jersey Nets players Olympic basketball players of the United States Olympic gold medalists for the United States Olympic medalists in basketball People from Denton County, Texas People from Parkersburg, West Virginia Point guards United States men's national basketball team players Utah Jazz draft picks Utah Jazz players Online chat Text messaging 1985 introductions 1950 births Living people College men's basketball head coaches in the United States High school basketball coaches in the United States Kansas Jayhawks men's basketball coaches Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame inductees North Carolina Tar Heels men's basketball coaches People from McDowell County, North Carolina People from Mitchell County, North Carolina Sportspeople from Asheville, North Carolina University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill alumni Houston, Texas Capitals of former nations Cities in Fort Bend County, Texas Cities in Harris County, Texas Cities in Montgomery County, Texas Cities in Texas County seats in Texas Populated coastal places in Texas Populated places established in 1836 Port cities and towns of the United States Gulf Coast John Williams 1932 births 20th-century American musicians 20th-century classical composers 20th-century conductors (music) 21st-century American musicians 21st-century classical composers 21st-century conductors (music) American classical composers American conductors (music) American film score composers American male classical composers American music arrangers American people of English descent Annie Award winners Best Original Music Score Academy Award winners Brit Award winners Grammy Award winners Guggenheim Fellows Honorary Members of the Royal Academy of Music Juilliard School alumni Kennedy Center honorees Living people Male film score composers People from Floral Park, New York People from Queens, New York Songwriters Hall of Fame inductees United States Air Force personnel United States National Medal of Arts recipients UCLA School of the Arts and Architecture alumni Knitting tools and materials Crochet Sewing Weaving Fibers Textiles Yarn Animal hair products Monday Night Football 1970 American television series debuts 1970s American television series 1980s American television series 1990s American television series 2000s American television series 2010s American television series American Broadcasting Company network shows ABC Sports English-language television programming ESPN network shows Georgia Bulldogs football Sports clubs established in 1892 Basketball terminology Handball terminology Phoenix, Arizona Phoenix metropolitan area Cities in Maricopa County, Arizona County seats in Arizona Populated places in the Sonoran Desert Populated places established in 1868 1868 establishments in Arizona Territory Cities in Arizona 1995 songs 1996 singles R. Kelly songs The Isley Brothers songs Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs number-one singles Songs written by R. Kelly Song recordings produced by R. Kelly Music videos directed by Hype Williams Jive Records singles Songs about betrayal University of South Carolina University of South Carolina System Universities and colleges in South Carolina Buildings and structures in Columbia, South Carolina Buildings and structures with revolving restaurants Education in Columbia, South Carolina Flagship universities in the United States Schools of public health in the United States Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Visitor attractions in Columbia, South Carolina V-12 Navy College Training Program National Basketball Association draft Recurring sporting events established in 1950 Drafts (sports) Sports terminology Basketball positions Harmonica  French basketball players Gonzaga Bulldogs basketball Power forwards (basketball) 1998 births People from Paris Living people Basketball coaches Basketball personnel Sports coaches 1962 births Living people American basketball coaches Basketball players from Oregon American men's basketball players College men's basketball head coaches in the United States Gonzaga Bulldogs men's basketball coaches Linfield College alumni People from Lane County, Oregon Sportspeople from Spokane, Washington Point guards University of Oregon alumni Basketball terminology Twista EPs 2005 EPs Atlantic Records EPs Debut EPs English-language EPs 1948 films 1940s comedy films 20th Century Fox films American films American comedy films American black-and-white films English-language films Film scores by Alfred Newman Films about suburbia Films based on novels Films directed by Walter Lang Child care occupations in fiction National Basketball Association Professional sports leagues in the United States Professional sports leagues in Canada Basketball leagues in the United States Basketball leagues in Canada Sports leagues established in 1946 Organizations based in New York City Television series by Warner Bros. Television American Broadcasting Company network shows 2007 American television series debuts 2008 American television series endings 2000s American television series English-language television programming 1927 establishments in New York American television networks CBS Corporation subsidiaries CBS Television Network Companies established in 1927 Former Viacom subsidiaries Fuji News Network New York Yankees owners Peabody Award winners 1956 American television series debuts 1950s American television series 1960s American television series 1970s American television series 1980s American television series 1990s American television series 1994 American television series endings 1998 American television series debuts 2000s American television series 2010s American television series CBS network shows CBS Sports Network shows CBS Sports National Football League television series Television series revived after cancellation Rooms Building engineering Structural engineering Semi-subterranean structures Food storage Foundations (buildings and structures) Musical texture Harmony Melody Polyphonic form Formal sections in music analysis King Crimson songs 1982 singles Songs written by Robert Fripp Songs written by Adrian Belew Songs written by Bill Bruford Songs written by Tony Levin New wave songs Ball games Basketball terminology Team sports Association football terminology Water polo Articles containing video clips Michigan Wolverines men's basketball College basketball in the United States Big Ten Conference Men's Basketball Tournament Basketball in Chicago, Illinois Basketball in Indianapolis, Indiana Recurring sporting events established in 1998 Carboxylate esters Packaging materials Plastics Polyesters Synthetic resins Synthetic fibers Thermoplastics Dielectrics Airship technology Thermosetting plastics 1954 births Living people American basketball coaches Basketball players from Indiana Butler Bulldogs men's basketball coaches College men's basketball head coaches in the United States Indiana Hoosiers men's basketball coaches Liberty Flames basketball coaches Missouri Tigers men's basketball coaches Purdue Boilermakers men's basketball coaches South Florida Bulls men's basketball coaches Taylor Trojans men's basketball players Educational years Educational stages School types Early childhood education Early childhood education in the United States Children Childhood Bradford City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1903 Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners 1903 establishments in England Sport in Bradford Football clubs in England The Football League clubs Northampton Town F.C. Football clubs in Northamptonshire Association football clubs established in 1897 Southern Football League clubs 1897 establishments in England 1971 births Living people People from Baildon English footballers Bristol Rovers F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Mansfield Town F.C. players Heart of Midlothian F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Football League players Colchester United F.C. managers Coventry City F.C. managers Watford F.C. managers English football managers Premier League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. The Football League managers Northampton Town F.C. managers Sportspeople from Yorkshire Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) County towns in England Local government districts of the East Midlands Local government in Northamptonshire Market towns in Northamptonshire New towns in England Non-metropolitan districts of Northamptonshire Northampton Towns in Northamptonshire Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom Living people 1967 births English football managers Charlton Athletic F.C. managers English footballers Reading F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Bury F.C. players Colchester United F.C. managers Hull City A.F.C. managers The Football League managers Bradford City A.F.C. managers Bradford Cities in Yorkshire and the Humber History of the textile industry Market towns in West Yorkshire Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns in West Yorkshire 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from London English footballers England youth international footballers Association football midfielders West Ham United F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players The Football League players Bradford City A.F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Premier League players Black English sportspeople Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology Football clubs in England Bradford Park Avenue A.F.C. Former Football League clubs Northern Premier League clubs Association football clubs established in 1907 Football clubs in West Yorkshire Defunct rugby league teams in England Southern Football League clubs 1907 establishments in England Defunct English rugby union teams National League (English football) Sport in Bradford North West Counties Football League clubs Phoenix clubs (association football) Founder members of the Northern Rugby Football Union Central Midlands Football League  Football leagues in England Football league systems in Europe Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles Mars Astronomical objects known since antiquity Terrestrial planets Articles containing video clips Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners  Rabbits and hares Herbivorous animals Meat Mythological rabbits and hares Articles containing video clips Extant Ypresian first appearances Exercise physiology Symptoms Mental processes 1990 singles 1993 singles Lonnie Gordon songs Song recordings produced by Stock Aitken Waterman Songs written by Pete Waterman Songs written by Matt Aitken Songs written by Mike Stock (musician) 1990 songs Pete Waterman Entertainment singles Supreme Records singles 1985 disasters in the United Kingdom 1985 in England 1985 fires 1984–85 in English football 20th century in West Yorkshire Building and structure fires in the United Kingdom History of football in England Stadium disasters Fires in England History of Bradford Disasters in Yorkshire Bradford City A.F.C. matches Lincoln City F.C. matches Filmed accidental deaths Accidental deaths in England Fire disasters involving barricaded escape routes Manningham, Bradford Bradford District Cities in Yorkshire and the Humber Leeds City Region Metropolitan boroughs Local government districts of Yorkshire and the Humber American punk rock groups Horror punk Musical groups established in 1980 Hardcore punk groups from New Jersey 1990 births Living people Association football forwards Bermudian footballers Bermuda international footballers Dandy Town Hornets players Bermuda Hogges players Eccleshill United F.C. players Carlisle United F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Premier Development League players The Football League players Bermudian expatriate footballers Bermudian expatriates in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in England Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills 1988 births Living people People from Albury, New South Wales Australian soccer players Australian expatriate soccer players Australia international soccer players Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Derby County F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Chesterfield F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players A.F.C. Telford United players York City F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players League of Ireland players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Australian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Australian expatriates in Ireland 1980 births Living people People from Kendal English footballers Association football wingers Morecambe F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Notts County F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Bradford English footballers Association football forwards Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Eccleshill United F.C. players Guiseley A.F.C. players The Football League players Steam locomotive technologies 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Derby English footballers England youth international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Derby County F.C. players Notts County F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Sheffield Footballers from Sheffield English footballers British people of Irish descent Northern Ireland youth international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Scottish footballers Association football goalkeepers Harrogate Railway Athletic F.C. players Harrogate Town F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Burton Albion F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Alumni of Leeds Beckett University Capitalism Classical liberalism Economic liberalism Ideologies of capitalism Individualism Minarchism Political economy Political movements Political theories Right-wing politics 1977 births Living people Sportspeople from Wolverhampton English footballers The Football League players Association football forwards Walsall F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players Notts County F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Colchester United F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Bury F.C. players Black British sportspeople 1985 births Living people People from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in Australia Central Coast Mariners FC players Coventry City F.C. players Cork City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Hibernian F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players A-League players Irish expatriates in England Irish expatriates in Scotland Irish expatriates in Australia Brunei DPMM FC players S.League players 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Stockton-on-Tees People educated at Northfield School English footballers England under-21 international footballers Premier League players The Football League players Derby County F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players England youth international footballers Ross County F.C. players Association football positions Parts of speech Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom