 Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands 1979 births Living people People from Montana, Bulgaria Association football midfielders Bulgarian footballers Bulgaria international footballers Bulgarian expatriate footballers Bulgarian expatriates in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England PFC Montana players PFC CSKA Sofia players Celtic F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Bulgarian A Football Group players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players FIFA Century Club People with cancer Leukemia Lymphatic vessel diseases RTT Articles containing video clips Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports 1959 births 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Aberdeen F.C. players Association football central defenders Aston Villa F.C. managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Belgium Expatriate football managers in Egypt Hibernian F.C. managers K.R.C. Genk managers Lewis United F.C. players Living people Motherwell F.C. managers Motherwell F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. managers People from Barrhead Premier League managers Rangers F.C. managers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland national football team managers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish expatriate football managers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers The Football League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders Zamalek SC managers BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology West Midlands (county) Metropolitan counties West Midlands (region) NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Bulgaria national football team European national association football teams Football in Bulgaria National sports teams of Bulgaria Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports Arsenal F.C. Football venues in London Sport in Islington Buildings and structures in Islington Premier League venues The Emirates Group Visitor attractions in Islington Sports venues completed in 2006 Virology Viruses The Clash 1976 establishments in England 1986 disestablishments in England English anti-fascists Political music English buskers English punk rock groups Grammy Award winners Musical groups disestablished in 1986 Musical groups established in 1976 Musical groups from London Musical quartets Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees Chelsea, London Districts of Kensington and Chelsea Districts of London on the River Thames 1962 births Living people American bankers American billionaires American chairmen of corporations American investors American Jews American people of Russian-Jewish descent Aston Villa F.C. directors and chairmen Cleveland Browns owners MBNA people National Football League team presidents Columbia University alumni Columbia Law School alumni People from Brooklyn People from Cleveland, Ohio People from Amagansett, New York Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions 1913 births 1997 deaths People from Montville, Connecticut People from North Platte, Nebraska People from Milwaukee, Wisconsin University of Nebraska alumni School of the Art Institute of Chicago alumni Painters from Connecticut Artists from Nebraska Painters from Nebraska Painters from Wisconsin Fresco painters 20th-century American painters American muralists Smithsonian Institution people People of the New Deal arts projects Fear Emotions Love Emotions Ethical principles Personal life 1952 books French plays Works by Jean-Paul Sartre 1971 births Armagh Gaelic footballers Association football midfielders Association footballers from Northern Ireland Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Celtic F.C. players Clan na Gael CLG Gaelic footballers Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Football managers from Northern Ireland Gaelic footballers who switched code Glenavon F.C. players NIFL Premiership players Leicester City F.C. players Living people Manchester City F.C. players Northern Ireland B international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Nottingham Forest F.C. players People educated at St Michael's Grammar School, Lurgan People from Lurgan Premier League players Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League managers The Football League players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers The Football League managers 2013 films 2010s drama films Films about racism Finnish films Finnish drama films Finnish-language films Films directed by Dome Karukoski Skinhead films Celtic L.F.C. Women's football clubs in Scotland 2007 establishments in Scotland Football clubs in Glasgow Sport in South Lanarkshire 1959 births Living people People from Glasgow Celtic F.C. non-playing staff British businesspeople People from Thorntonhall 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1964 births Living people Cancer survivors English footballers England international footballers England B international footballers Rochdale A.F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Sportspeople from Manchester Hematologic malignant neoplasms 1907 establishments in the United Kingdom Association football trade unions English football organisations Trade unions established in 1907 Trade unions in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Manchester 1944 births Living people People from Ashton-under-Lyne English footballers Leaders of British trade unions Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Vancouver Whitecaps (1974–84) players Bury F.C. players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at Ashton-under-Lyne Grammar School Alumni of Manchester Metropolitan University 1976 births Living people People from Lifford Sportspeople from County Donegal Association football goalkeepers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland FIFA Century Club Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Celtic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people People from Tooting Footballers from Greater London English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Jamaican descent English Christians Association football forwards Godmanchester Rovers F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black English sportspeople Members of the Conexus Mobile Alliance KT Group 1992 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players OGC Nice Football clubs in France Association football clubs established in 1904 Sport in Nice 1904 establishments in France 1904 1984 births Living people People from Evergreen Park, Illinois Association football goalkeepers American soccer players United States men's under-23 international soccer players American Christians American people of Polish descent American expatriate soccer players Olympic soccer players of the United States United States men's international soccer players Expatriate footballers in England American expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom South Carolina Gamecocks men's soccer players Chicago Fire U-23 players Chivas USA players Aston Villa F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning players 2007 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2007 Copa América players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Soccer players from Illinois Chivas USA draft picks Premier Development League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Premier League players The Football League players Major League Soccer first round draft picks Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras Association football clubs established in 1914 Diaspora sports clubs Sports clubs 1981 births Living people Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players CD Numancia players CA Osasuna players UD Almería players Scottish Premier League players Rangers F.C. players Premier League players Aston Villa F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Scotland Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group 1983 births Living people English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers Nottingham Forest F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Sportspeople from Nottingham Black English sportspeople England youth international footballers British association football commentators 1964 British television programme debuts BBC Sport BBC Television programmes British sports television series The Football League on television Premier League on television Football media in the United Kingdom 1960s British television series 1970s British television series 1980s British television series 1990s British television series 2000s British television series 2010s British television series 1960 births Living people Association football forwards BBC sports presenters and reporters British association football commentators England B international footballers England international footballers English footballers Everton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Leicester City F.C. players Nagoya Grampus players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in Spain English expatriate footballers FIFA 100 Golf writers and broadcasters 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players The Football League players First Division/Premier League top scorers English Football Hall of Fame inductees Expatriate footballers in Japan J.League players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at City of Leicester Boys' Grammar School Sportspeople from Leicester 1968 births Living people Black English sportspeople English footballers English people of Barbadian descent Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Moor Green F.C. players Port Vale F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Religious education Bolton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester West Pennine Moors 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Kinshasa Democratic Republic of the Congo footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Democratic Republic of the Congo emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People associated with the University of Bolton Black British sportspeople Alumni of Staffordshire University German musical groups Tennis terminology Grand Slam (tennis) Tennis tournaments Ball games Summer Olympic sports Racquet sports Sports originating in England Tennis Annual sporting events in the United States US Open (tennis) Recurring sporting events established in 1881 Sports venues in Queens, New York Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments National championships in the United States US Open Series Hard court tennis tournaments in the United States 1881 establishments in the United States Melbourne Australian capital cities Coastal cities in Australia Former national capitals Metropolitan areas of Australia Populated places established in 1835 Populated places established in the 19th century Port cities in Australia 1835 establishments in Australia Regions of Victoria (Australia) Batting (baseball) Baseball terminology Sports terminology Trademarks Reuters Companies established in 1851 Media companies based in London Multilingual news services News agencies based in the United Kingdom Financial news agencies 1851 establishments in the United Kingdom Webby Award winners Novak Djokovic 1987 births Living people Australian Open (tennis) champions Eastern Orthodox Christians from Serbia Expatriate sportspeople in Monaco Grand Crosses of the Order of St. Sava Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Members of the Serbian Orthodox Church Olympic bronze medalists for Serbia Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic tennis players of Serbia People from Monte Carlo Serbia and Montenegro male tennis players Serbian expatriate sportspeople Serbian expatriates in Germany Serbian expatriates in Monaco Serbian male tennis players Sports world record holders Sportspeople from Belgrade Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics UNICEF people US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon champions World No. 1 tennis players Australian Open (tennis) 1905 establishments in Australia Annual sporting events in Australia Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments Hard court tennis tournaments Recurring sporting events established in 1905 Seven Sport Sport in Melbourne Tennis tournaments in Australia Largest cities of Europe templates Serbia templates Serbia Balkans Countries in Europe Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Republics Serbian-speaking countries and territories Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 2006 Southeastern Europe Buildings and structures completed in 1988 Indoor arenas in Australia Sports venues in Melbourne Tennis venues in Australia Music venues in Melbourne Retractable-roof stadiums 2006 Commonwealth Games venues Multi-purpose stadiums in Australia Sports venues completed in 1988 Basketball venues in Australia Boxing venues in Australia Melbourne United South East Melbourne Magic Landmarks in Melbourne Tennis venues in Australia Sports venues in Melbourne Australian Championships (tennis) champions Australian expatriate sportspeople in the United States Australian male tennis players Australian Open (tennis) champions French Championships (tennis) champions French Championships junior (tennis) champions Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's doubles Sportspeople from Newport Beach, California People from Wide Bay-Burnett International Tennis Hall of Fame inductees Sport Australia Hall of Fame inductees Tennis people from Queensland United States National champions (tennis) Wimbledon champions Wimbledon champions (pre-Open Era) Recipients of the Australian Sports Medal Recipients of the Centenary Medal 1936 births Living people 1970 births American male tennis players American people of Armenian descent American people of Iranian-Assyrian descent American people of Iranian descent American philanthropists Australian Open (tennis) champions Doping cases in tennis French Open champions Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles International Tennis Hall of Fame inductees Living people Nevada Democrats Iranian sportspeople Assyrian sportspeople Olympic gold medalists for the United States in tennis Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic tennis players of the United States Sportspeople from the Las Vegas Valley Tennis people from Nevada Tennis players at the 1996 Summer Olympics US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon champions World No. 1 tennis players Iranian Assyrian people Iranian Armenian people American autobiographers Writers from Nevada Medalists at the 1996 Summer Olympics American sportspeople in doping cases 20th-century American businesspeople 21st-century American businesspeople American investors American real estate businesspeople 1877 births 1968 deaths Australasian Championships (tennis) champions Australian Knights Bachelor Australian male tennis players Sports players and officials awarded knighthoods Tennis people from Melbourne St Kilda Football Club players International Tennis Hall of Fame inductees United States National champions (tennis) Wimbledon champions (pre-Open Era) Australian rules footballers from Victoria (Australia) Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's doubles Challenge Cup Rugby league competitions in the United Kingdom European rugby league competitions 2009 songs Wolfmother songs Blues rock songs Songs written by Andrew Stockdale Song recordings produced by Alan Moulder 2010 singles Modular Recordings singles Australia Member states of the United Nations G20 nations English-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies United Kingdom British Islands Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories G20 nations G7 nations G8 nations Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe Western Europe Australian Championships (tennis) champions British expatriate sportspeople in the United States British male tennis players British brands English table tennis players English male tennis players Washington and Lee University faculty French Championships (tennis) champions International Tennis Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Ealing County Grammar School for Boys Sportspeople from Stockport United States National champions (tennis) Wimbledon champions (pre-Open Era) World No. 1 tennis players 1909 births 1995 deaths Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Grand Slam (tennis) champions in mixed doubles Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's doubles Professional tennis players before the Open Era The Championships, Wimbledon Recurring sporting events established in 1877 1877 establishments in the United Kingdom Wimbledon, London Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments July events Grass court tennis tournaments Tennis tournaments in England Tennis in London Sport in Merton Annual sporting events in the United Kingdom Annual events in London Rafael Nadal 1986 births Australian Open (tennis) champions Balearic tennis players French Open champions Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Laureus World Sports Awards winners Living people Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Spain Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic tennis players of Spain Spanish agnostics Spanish football chairmen and investors Spanish male models Spanish male tennis players Sportspeople from Manacor Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon champions World No. 1 tennis players Sports world record holders Serb people Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina Ethnic groups in Croatia Ethnic groups in Europe Ethnic groups in Hungary Ethnic groups in Montenegro Ethnic groups in Romania Ethnic groups in Serbia Ethnic groups in Slovenia Ethnic groups in the Republic of Macedonia Serbian people Serbian society Slavic ethnic groups South Slavs Ethnoreligious groups in Europe Airlines of Singapore Low-cost airlines Singapore Airlines Airlines established in 2011 Government-owned airlines Singaporean brands Companies based in Singapore Symbols White symbols 1965 in law 89th United States Congress Great Society programs Public education in the United States United States federal education legislation Law articles needing an infobox 1965 in education 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Bratislava Australian female tennis players Australian people of Slovak descent Australian expatriates in the United States Naturalised tennis players of Australia Sportswomen from New South Wales Slovak emigrants to Australia Slovak female tennis players Hopman Cup competitors Tennis people from Sydney Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic tennis players of Australia Australian Open (tennis) champions Grand Slam (tennis) champions in mixed doubles 1987 births Living people Australian male tennis players Sportspeople from Durban South African emigrants to Australia Tennis players from Perth, Western Australia Tennis people from Western Australia Tennis players at the 2010 Commonwealth Games Grand Slam (tennis) champions in mixed doubles Naturalised tennis players of Australia Tennis Forms of tennis Tennis terminology Czech Republic Countries in Europe Czech-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1993 Central Europe 1985 births Living people Czech female tennis players Sportspeople from Prague French Open champions Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic tennis players of the Czech Republic Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic silver medalists for the Czech Republic Grand Slam (tennis) champions in women's doubles Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Grand Slam (tennis) champions in mixed doubles US Open (tennis) champions 1976 births Living people People from Valtice Czech male tennis players French Open champions Grand Slam (tennis) champions in mixed doubles