 Calgary Flames minor league affiliates ECHL teams Ice hockey teams in Alaska Sports in Anchorage, Alaska Sports clubs established in 1989 Companies that have filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy West Coast Hockey League teams Minnesota Wild minor league affiliates 1914 establishments in Alaska Alaska boroughs Anchorage, Alaska Anchorage metropolitan area Cities in Alaska Consolidated city-counties in the United States Populated coastal places in Alaska Populated places established in 1914 Port cities and towns of the West Coast of the United States Terminology used in multiple sports ECHL Ice hockey leagues in the United States Minor league hockey Ice hockey leagues in Canada 1961 births Living people People from Wimbledon, London English footballers Association football midfielders The Football League players Whyteleafe F.C. players Corinthian-Casuals F.C. players Dulwich Hamlet F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Barnet F.C. players English football managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Reading F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. managers Charlton Athletic F.C. managers Southampton F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers UEFA Pro Licence holders British association football commentators Epsom & Ewell F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. managers Strikes (martial arts) Articles containing video clips Hull City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in England Sport in Kingston upon Hull Football clubs in the East Riding of Yorkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1904 establishments in England Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1989 births Living people People from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Cork City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Blackrock hurlers St. Michael's Gaelic footballers College Corinthians A.F.C. players Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events