 U.C. Sampdoria 1946 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1946 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Liguria Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Sport in Genoa Ferrara Cities and towns in Emilia-Romagna World Heritage Sites in Italy Italian Jewish communities Burial sites of the House of Este Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy ACF Fiorentina Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Tuscany Association football clubs established in 1926 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners 1926 establishments in Italy Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin 1967 births Living people Sportspeople from Naples Association football central defenders Italian footballers Italy international footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1988 Summer Olympics Juventus F.C. players S.S.C. Napoli players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players Italian football managers Juventus F.C. managers U.C. Sampdoria managers Serie A managers Calcio Catania Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Sicily Association football clubs established in 1946 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs 1946 establishments in Italy 1960 births Living people Foggia Calcio players A.S. Andria BAT players S.S. Lazio managers Atalanta B.C. managers U.S. Lecce managers Delfino Pescara 1936 managers Foggia Calcio managers Genoa C.F.C. managers Serie A managers Italian footballers Italian football managers People from Rimini U.S. Città di Palermo managers U.S. Salernitana 1919 managers ACF Fiorentina managers U.C. Sampdoria managers Serie B players A.S.D. Vis Pesaro 1898 players Bologna F.C. 1909 managers 1987 births Living people People from Teaneck, New Jersey Soccer players from New Jersey Italian footballers Association football forwards Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Serie A players Parma F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players La Liga players Villarreal CF players Levante UD footballers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players American expatriate soccer players American people of Italian descent Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Sportspeople from Bergen County, New Jersey People of Abruzzian descent 2013 UEFA European Under-21 Championship UEFA European Under-21 Championship 2012–13 in European football 2012–13 in Israeli football International association football competitions hosted by Israel Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Copa del Rey seasons 2003–04 in Spanish football cups S.S.C. Napoli Association football clubs established in 1926 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Campania Football clubs in Italy Italian football First Division clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Naples 1926 establishments in Italy UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Italy national football team European national under-21 association football teams Youth football in Italy 1958 births Living people People from Perugia Italian footballers Italian football managers A.C. Perugia Calcio managers Genoa C.F.C. managers Udinese Calcio managers U.S. Arezzo managers Brescia Calcio managers A.S. Livorno Calcio managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers U.S. Lecce managers A.C. Siena managers Delfino Pescara 1936 managers Serie A managers Sportspeople from Umbria A.C. Siena Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Tuscany Association football clubs established in 1904 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs 1904 establishments in Italy 1964 births Living people People from Ascoli Piceno Italian footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1988 Summer Olympics Association football midfielders Italian football managers Serie A players Serie B players U.S. Città di Palermo players ACF Fiorentina players Ascoli Calcio 1898 players Hellas Verona F.C. players Ravenna Calcio players U.S. Alessandria Calcio 1912 players F.B.C. Unione Venezia players F.B.C. Unione Venezia managers A.C. Cesena managers Vicenza Calcio managers Piacenza Calcio 1919 managers A.C. Chievo Verona managers Brescia Calcio managers U.C. Sampdoria managers UEFA Pro Licence holders A.C. Siena managers Serie A managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers Football leagues in Italy Serie B Professional sports leagues in Italy Second level football leagues in Europe 1929 establishments in Italy Sports leagues established in 1929 Sumo Sports governing bodies in Japan Sumo Match fixing Organized crime activity Sports law Gambling legislation Mobile phones 1973 introductions Embedded systems Mobile telecommunications Mobile telecommunication services New media Telephony Videotelephony Radio technology 1871 introductions Circulating currencies Currency symbols Japanese business terms Japanese yen Tokyo Capitals in Asia Kantō region Populated coastal places in Japan 1457 establishments Populated places established in the 1450s Port settlements in Japan History of television Television terminology Television news Live broadcasting Commercial-free television networks Companies based in Tokyo Radio in Japan NHK Japanese-language television stations Japanese television networks Publicly funded broadcasters 1926 establishments in Japan Organizations established in 1926 Television channels and stations established in 1953 Peabody Award winners International Emmy Awards Current Affairs & News winners Politics of Japan Prime Ministers of Japan 1946 births Living people People from Yamaguchi Prefecture Tokyo Institute of Technology alumni Democratic Party of Japan politicians Prime Ministers of Japan Japanese patent attorneys Ministers of Health and Welfare of Japan Ministers of Finance of Japan Members of the House of Representatives (Japan) Sumo Articles containing video clips Combat sports Sports originating in Japan Baseball 1846 introductions Ball and bat games Former Summer Olympic sports Sports originating in the United States Team sports Articles containing video clips