 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Kinshasa Democratic Republic of the Congo footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Democratic Republic of the Congo emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People associated with the University of Bolton Black British sportspeople Alumni of Staffordshire University Bolton Wanderers F.C. 1877 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1877 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bolton Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Football League Trophy winners Premier League clubs Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Bolton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester West Pennine Moors Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Aging-associated diseases Causes of death Ischemic heart diseases Medical emergencies Articles containing video clips RTT Acute pain Hospital buildings completed in 1855 NHS hospitals in London Bethnal Green European national under-21 association football teams England national youth football team England national under-21 football team American inventions Cardiac electrophysiology Emergency medical procedures Medical devices Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Birmingham, West Midlands Cities in the West Midlands (region) Local government districts of the West Midlands (region) Metropolitan boroughs NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Populated places established in the 6th century Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues Sport in Haringey Football venues in London Tottenham Hotspur F.C. Premier League venues Sports venues completed in 1898 Football League venues Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Intensive care medicine Hospital departments Geography of Greenwich Time zones Time in the United Kingdom Concepts in metaphysics Information Information, knowledge, and uncertainty Information science Mass media Privacy Law Human rights Social issues Identity management Digital rights Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Articles containing video clips 1985 births Living people American expatriate soccer players American expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom American people of Scottish descent American soccer players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Clemson Tigers men's soccer players Clemson University alumni Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Houston Dynamo players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players Sportspeople from Aberdeen Olympic soccer players of the United States People from Sugar Land, Texas Premier League players Scottish emigrants to the United States Scottish footballers Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Soccer players from Texas Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League players 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup players CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning players United States men's under-20 international soccer players United States men's under-23 international soccer players United States men's international soccer players Counter-Strike 1982 births Living people People educated at St Bonaventure's Catholic Comprehensive School Association football forwards English Christians English Roman Catholics English footballers Black English sportspeople English expatriate footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Dominica descent English people of Saint Lucian descent Senrab F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Toronto FC players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Expatriate soccer players in Canada 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Footballers from Newham (London borough) Heart of Midlothian F.C. Football clubs in Edinburgh Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1874 Scottish Premier League teams 1874 establishments in Scotland Gorgie Scottish Football League teams Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Wigan Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1981 births Living people People from Muscat, Oman Omani footballers Omani expatriate footballers Oman international footballers Omani Muslims Association football goalkeepers Al-Nasr S.C.S.C. players Lyn Fotball players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Reading F.C. players Tippeligaen players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Norway 2004 AFC Asian Cup players 2007 AFC Asian Cup players 2015 AFC Asian Cup players Kniksen award winners FIFA Century Club Footballers at the 2002 Asian Games Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club 1990 births Living people Footballers from Sheffield English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Sheffield United F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople People educated at High Storrs School British people of Barbadian descent Novels by Paul Theroux 1976 novels American thriller novels Political thriller novels Novels about terrorism Novels set in London Deptford 1983 births Living people Footballers from Rotterdam Dutch footballers Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Association football forwards SBV Excelsior players Feyenoord players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Fenerbahçe footballers Eredivisie players Premier League players Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Dutch expatriates in England Dutch expatriates in Turkey Expatriate footballers in Turkey FIFA Century Club ESPN Bristol, Connecticut ESPN media outlets Sports television networks in the United States Television channels and stations established in 1979 Webby Award winners Peabody Award winners 1979 establishments in Connecticut Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Living people 1971 births Sportspeople from Rotherham British police officers English football referees UEFA Champions League referees 2010 FIFA World Cup referees FIFA World Cup Final match officials Members of the Order of the British Empire FA Cup Final referees 2014 FIFA World Cup referees 1966 births Living people Sportspeople from Glasgow Dundee United F.C. non-playing staff Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Dumbarton F.C. players Clydebank F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. (1878) players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Ross County F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Falkirk F.C. managers St Johnstone F.C. managers Burnley F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Houston Dynamo coaches Premier League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Republic of Ireland football managers Scottish Roman Catholics Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish people of Irish descent 1947 births Living people A.F.C. Bournemouth managers A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football midfielders Brentford F.C. players English autobiographers English footballers English football managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players People from Poplar, London Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Seattle Sounders (1974–83) players Southampton F.C. managers Sportspeople from London The Football League managers The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. players Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports 1977 births Sportspeople from Sheffield Living people English people of Welsh descent English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Sheffield United F.C. players Chesterfield F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Footballers from Sheffield BBC Television programmes British sports television series BBC Sport 2001 British television programme debuts 2000s British television series 2010s British television series Premier League on television English-language television programming 1977 births BBC newsreaders and journalists BBC North West newsreaders and journalists BBC sports presenters and reporters British sports journalists Christian creationists English Christians English television presenters Living people People from Crawley 1987 births Living people People from Abidjan Swiss footballers Switzerland youth international footballers Switzerland under-21 international footballers Switzerland international footballers Swiss expatriate footballers Association football defenders Association football utility players Étoile Carouge FC players Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Hannover 96 players Hamburger SV players Premier League players Bundesliga players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Ivorian emigrants to Switzerland Swiss expatriates in the United Kingdom Swiss expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Centaur Publications titles Centaur Publications characters Comics characters introduced in 1939 1939 comics debuts Malibu Comics titles Protectors characters Golden Age superheroes Characters created by Bill Everett BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions 1971 births Living people People from Ilkley BBC Radio 5 Live presenters BBC people British sports broadcasters British association football commentators People educated at Ilkley Grammar School 1983 births Living people People from Heemskerk Dutch footballers Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers AFC Ajax players Hamburger SV players Real Madrid C.F. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Betis players Eredivisie players Bundesliga players La Liga players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Dutch expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Dutch expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in Spain Dutch expatriates in Spain Dutch people of Spanish descent Dutch Romani people FIFA Century Club 1992 births Living people People from Stevenage Footballers from Hitchin English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Association football wingers Luton Town F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Football clubs in England Middlesbrough F.C. Sport in Middlesbrough Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1876 Football clubs in North Yorkshire Football League Cup winners Football League Championship clubs 1876 establishments in England Northern Football League 1984 births Living people People from Leytonstone English footballers Black English sportspeople English people of Trinidad and Tobago descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Trinidad and Tobago footballers Trinidad and Tobago international footballers Association football defenders Arsenal F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Dagenham & Redbridge F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2014 Caribbean Cup players Association football terminology Australian rules football terminology American football terminology Association football academies 2000 singles Kylie Minogue songs Parlophone singles Songs written by Richard Stannard (songwriter) Songs written by Julian Gallagher Songs written by Kylie Minogue Song recordings produced by Richard Stannard (songwriter) Songs written by John Themis 2000 songs 1907 establishments in the United Kingdom Association football trade unions English football organisations Trade unions established in 1907 Trade unions in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Manchester 1944 births Living people People from Ashton-under-Lyne English footballers Leaders of British trade unions Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Vancouver Whitecaps (1974–84) players Bury F.C. players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at Ashton-under-Lyne Grammar School Alumni of Manchester Metropolitan University 1960 albums Concept albums Max Roach albums History of African-American civil rights Candid Records albums Hard bop albums Albums produced by Nat Hentoff The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena 1943 births Living people People from St Helens, Merseyside Commanders of the Order of the British Empire English businesspeople English Jews Manchester City F.C. directors and chairmen Chairmen of the Football Association English accountants 1962 births Living people People from Hammersmith English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English football managers Wealdstone F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players Player-coaches Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Premier League managers 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Pro Licence holders Members of the Order of the British Empire English Football Hall of Fame inductees People from Harrow, London People from Kenton People from Kingsbury Sportspeople from London Olympic managers of Great Britain England national under-21 football team managers 1959 births Living people Alumni of the University of Nottingham British chief executives People from Bristol Premier League Association football executives England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories  Tort law Law of negligence Legal doctrines and principles New Delhi New Delhi district Capitals in Asia Districts in India Planned capitals Populated places established in 1911 1911 establishments in India Commonwealth Games Multi-sport events Commonwealth sports competitions British Empire Commonwealth of Nations Politics and sports Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Building materials Steel Roofing materials 1889 births 1964 deaths Jawaharlal Nehru 1st Lok Sabha members 2nd Lok Sabha members 3rd Lok Sabha members Alumni of the Inns of Court School of Law Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge Indian agnostics Democratic socialists Indian independence activists Indian National Army trials Indian socialists Indian writers Kashmiri people Nehru–Gandhi family People educated at Harrow School People from Allahabad Presidents of the Indian National Congress Prime Ministers of India Members of Constituent Assembly of India Nehru administration Recipients of the Bharat Ratna Prisoners and detainees of British India Contemporary Indian philosophers Recipients of the Order of the Companions of O. R. Tambo Indian lawyers Lok Sabha members from Uttar Pradesh Buildings and structures in New Delhi Sports venues in Delhi Cricket grounds in Delhi Football venues in India Athletics (track and field) venues in India Music venues in India Stadiums of the Commonwealth Games Stadiums of the Asian Games 2010 Commonwealth Games venues Sports venues completed in 1982 1982 Asian Games Monuments and memorials to Jawaharlal Nehru Indian Super League stadiums 1982 establishments in India Engineering Engineering occupations Ethics Philosophy of science Chandigarh Indian Union Territory capitals Planned cities in India Populated places established in 1948 Modernist architecture in India Le Corbusier buildings in India Units of amount Integers Hindi words and phrases Urdu words and phrases Indian English idioms 1918 births 2008 deaths 20th-century Hindu religious leaders 21st-century Hindu religious leaders Ascetics New Age spiritual leaders Transcendental Meditation Transcendental Meditation practitioners Allahabad University alumni People from Jabalpur Indian Hindu religious leaders Indian Hindu spiritual teachers Indian yogis Indian yoga teachers The Beatles Spiritual practice Yogis Causeways Coastal construction Bridges Artificial landforms Sports Government of Delhi Chief Ministers of Delhi 1938 births Living people Chief Ministers of Delhi Governors of Kerala University of Delhi alumni Indian National Congress politicians People from Kapurthala Indian women in politics Lok Sabha members from Uttar Pradesh 8th Lok Sabha members Indian women Chief Ministers Punjabi people Delhi MLAs 2008–13 Chief ministers from Indian National Congress Women state governors of India Women in Delhi politics Women in Kerala politics Technical universities and colleges All India Institute of Medical Sciences Schools of medicine in India Research institutes in Delhi 2005 novels Discworld books 2000s fantasy novels Doubleday (publisher) books 1979 births People from Nankana Sahib District Living people Pakistani cricketers Sheikhupura Cricket Association cricketers Sialkot cricketers Sui Northern Gas Pipelines Limited cricketers Water and Power Development Authority cricketers Sialkot Stallions cricketers Punjab (Pakistan) cricketers Pakistan Test cricketers Belts (clothing) Fashion accessories 1960s fashion 1980s fashion Punk fashion Dogra Ethnic groups in Pakistan Ethnic groups in India Himalayan peoples Indo-Aryan peoples Indian family names Social groups of India Social groups of Pakistan Social groups of Jammu and Kashmir Crime prevention Law enforcement Legal professions National security Public safety Security Surveillance