 LeBron James 1984 births Living people African-American basketball players Basketball players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Basketball players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Basketball players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Basketball players from Ohio Cleveland Cavaliers draft picks Cleveland Cavaliers players Gatorade National Basketball Player of the Year Liverpool F.C. chairmen and investors McDonald's High School All-Americans Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Miami Heat players National Basketball Association All-Stars National Basketball Association high school draftees Olympic basketball players of the United States Olympic bronze medalists for the United States Olympic gold medalists for the United States Olympic medalists in basketball Parade High School All-Americans (boys' basketball) Power forwards (basketball) Small forwards Sportspeople from Akron, Ohio United States men's national basketball team players Fenway Park 1912 establishments in Massachusetts American Football League (1926) venues American Football League (1936) venues American Football League (1940) venues American Football League venues American football venues in Massachusetts Baseball venues in Massachusetts Boston Braves stadiums Boston College Eagles football venues Boston Patriots (AFL) stadiums Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Massachusetts Fenway–Kenmore Jewel Box parks Landmarks in Fenway–Kenmore Major League Baseball venues National Register of Historic Places in Boston, Massachusetts North American Soccer League (1968–84) stadiums Outdoor ice hockey venues in the United States Soccer venues in Massachusetts Sports venues completed in 1912 Sports venues in Boston, Massachusetts Washington Redskins stadiums Basketball 1891 introductions Canadian inventions Sports originating in the United States Team sports Summer Olympic sports Ball games Articles containing video clips 1949 introductions Hedge funds Alternative investment management companies Financial terminology Institutional investors 1949 births American billionaires American commodities traders American currency traders American derivatives traders American financial analysts American financiers American investors American money managers American soccer chairmen and investors Boston Red Sox owners Businesspeople from Arkansas Businesspeople from California Businesspeople from Illinois Liverpool F.C. chairmen and investors Living people Miami Marlins owners Major League Baseball owners NASCAR team owners People from Quincy, Illinois People from Victorville, California Stock and commodity market managers University of California, Riverside alumni 21st-century American newspaper publishers (people) Hollywood California culture Communities on U.S. Route 66 Film production districts Former municipalities in California Neighborhoods in Los Angeles, California Populated places established in 1853 Central Los Angeles Northwest Los Angeles 1950 births Living people American soccer chairmen and investors Boston Red Sox owners Businesspeople from New Jersey Jewish American sportspeople American Jews Businesspeople from New York City Harvard Lampoon people Harvard University alumni Liverpool F.C. chairmen and investors San Diego Padres owners Television Hall of Fame inductees Television producers from New York Hotchkiss School alumni Boston Red Sox owners Companies established in 2001 Liverpool F.C. 2001 establishments in England Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Shipbuilding companies of Germany Companies established in 1872 Defence companies of Germany Flensburg 1872 establishments in Germany Farrar, Straus and Giroux books Book publishing companies based in New York Publishing companies based in New York City Publishing companies established in 1946 1946 establishments in New York Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Boston Red Sox Major League Baseball teams Grapefruit League Sports clubs established in 1901 Baseball teams in Boston, Massachusetts Professional baseball teams in Massachusetts Laureus World Sports Awards winners 1901 establishments in Massachusetts Marketing Sports business Sports marketing Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England 1989 births Living people People from Stanmore English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Southampton F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players English children's writers Reading F.C. Association football clubs established in 1871 Sport in Reading, Berkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs 1871 establishments in England Football clubs in Berkshire Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports 1986 births Living people People from Chambéry French footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers French Roman Catholics Association football forwards Grenoble Foot 38 players FC Istres players Tours FC players Montpellier HSC players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology  1949 births Living people Sportspeople from Strasbourg FC Mulhouse players Association football sweepers RC Strasbourg players ASPV Strasbourg players Ligue 1 players French footballers French football managers French Roman Catholics AS Nancy managers AS Monaco FC managers Ligue 1 managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Arsenal F.C. managers Honorary Officers of the Order of the British Empire Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Nagoya Grampus managers Expatriate football managers in Japan English Football Hall of Fame inductees University of Strasbourg alumni UEFA Pro Licence holders French expatriate football managers French expatriates in Japan French expatriates in England 1981 births Living people Sportspeople from Saint Petersburg Russian footballers Russia international footballers Russian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Russian expatriates in England Association football midfielders FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players Arsenal F.C. players FC Kuban Krasnodar players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Russia under-21 international footballers 1991 births Living people French people of Senegalese descent People from Laval, Mayenne French footballers French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players FC Lorient players SC Freiburg players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany French expatriates in England French expatriates in Germany The Football League players 1982 births Living people People from Enfield Town English footballers Antigua and Barbuda footballers Antigua and Barbuda international footballers Association football midfielders Wimbledon F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Antigua and Barbuda descent Sportspeople from London Reading F.C. players Black British sportspeople 1978 births People from Park Royal Living people English people of Grenadian descent Association football forwards Grenadian footballers Grenada international footballers Hayes F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Members of the Order of the British Empire Sportspeople from London English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports  Comics characters introduced in 1984 Fictional businesspeople Fictional characters with superhuman strength Fictional demons and devils Fictional dictators Fictional dragons Fictional immigrants to the United States Fictional Japanese people Fictional mass murderers Fictional Ninjutsu practitioners Fictional sharks Fictional warlords Superhero film characters Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles characters Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1987 TV series) characters Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (2003 TV series) characters Television supervillains Video game bosses Fictional assassinated people Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1975 births Living people People from Consett English football referees English people of Canadian descent National League (English football) referees The Football League referees Premier League referees UEFA Champions League referees Olympic football referees Football referees at the 2012 Summer Olympics 1964 American television series debuts 1972 American television series endings 1960s American comedy television series 1970s American comedy television series 1960s American television series 1970s American television series American Broadcasting Company network shows American television sitcoms American comedy television series Bewitched Black-and-white television programs English-language television programming Dell Comics titles American fantasy television series Fictional characters who can teleport Magic in television Romantic comedy television series Television series by Sony Pictures Television Television shows set in New York Television shows set in Connecticut Witchcraft in television Television programs adapted into films 1987 American television series debuts 1999 American television series endings 1980s American television series 1990s American television series 2012 American television series debuts 2010s American television series American news television series CBS News CBS network shows English-language television programming Television series by CBS Television Studios Television series revived after cancellation Breakfast television Articles with inconsistent citation formats Emotions Seven deadly sins Alternative dance musical groups Musical groups established in 1979 1979 establishments in England Musical groups disestablished in 1987 1987 disestablishments in England Musical groups reestablished in 2006 Synthpop new wave musical groups English new wave musical groups New wave duos Musical groups from London London Records artists Sire Records artists 1984 births Living people French footballers French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers French people of Moroccan descent French Muslims Moroccan footballers Moroccan expatriate footballers Morocco international footballers Association football forwards FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Arsenal F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players Victor Hugo Concepts in aesthetics Aesthetic beauty UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Roads in London Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Transport in Brent 1985 births Living people French footballers French people of Polish descent French-Polish footballers Association football defenders EA Guingamp players FC Lorient players Tours FC players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Arsenal F.C. players French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England Premier League players People from Tulle France international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1987 births Living people People from Abidjan Swiss footballers Switzerland youth international footballers Switzerland under-21 international footballers Switzerland international footballers Swiss expatriate footballers Association football defenders Association football utility players Étoile Carouge FC players Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Hannover 96 players Hamburger SV players Premier League players Bundesliga players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Ivorian emigrants to Switzerland Swiss expatriates in the United Kingdom Swiss expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany 1966 births 1998 FIFA World Cup players Arsenal F.C. players Association football central defenders England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English Football Hall of Fame inductees English football managers English footballers Gabala FC managers Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Romford Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1988 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. managers English expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Azerbaijan Arsenal F.C. non-playing staff Arsenal F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players British association football commentators England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English footballers English people of Irish descent Everton F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Sportspeople from Oxford Premier League players Reading F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 2000 players Wembley F.C. players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 1966 births Living people 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Accra Ghanaian footballers English footballers England youth international footballers Ghana international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players FC Ufa players Ghanaian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Russia Russian Football Premier League players English people of Ghanaian descent Akan people 1995 births Living people German people of Ivorian descent German footballers German expatriate footballers Sportspeople from Stuttgart Arsenal F.C. players Association football wingers Expatriate footballers in England Germany youth international footballers Premier League players German expatriates in England Germany under-21 international footballers West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Football clubs in England Sport in Swindon Swindon Town F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1879 Football League Cup winners Southern Football League clubs 1879 establishments in England Football clubs in Wiltshire 1983 births Living people Footballers from Rotterdam Dutch footballers Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Association football forwards SBV Excelsior players Feyenoord players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Fenerbahçe footballers Eredivisie players Premier League players Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Dutch expatriates in England Dutch expatriates in Turkey Expatriate footballers in Turkey FIFA Century Club 1961 births Living people People from Slough People educated at Herschel Grammar School English footballers England youth international footballers English expatriate footballers English people of Irish descent Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Fulham F.C. players IFK Norrköping players Oxford United F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Djurgårdens IF Fotboll players Cardiff City F.C. players Exeter City F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players South China AA footballers Slough Town F.C. players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong English football managers Slough Town F.C. managers Woking F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers National League (English football) managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Reading F.C. non-playing staff 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from County Waterford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Association football forwards Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Waterford United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players The Football League players 1989 births Living people People from Acton, London Sportspeople from London English footballers England youth international footballers Welsh footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers English people of Welsh descent Black British sportspeople Association football wingers Arsenal F.C. players Reading F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Association football terminology Australian rules football terminology Rugby league terminology Rugby union terminology 1992 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Association football goalkeepers Arsenal F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England The Football League players Premier League players Argentine expatriates in England People from Mar del Plata Rotherham United F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Oxford English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople English footballers Jamaican footballers Jamaica international footballers Association football wingers Oxford City F.C. players Slough Town F.C. players Bromley F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Reading F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Southern Football League players Isthmian League players 2015 Copa América players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1985 births Living people People from Nowra Australian people of Italian descent Australian soccer players Australia international soccer players Association football goalkeepers Association football goalkeepers who have scored New South Wales Institute of Sport alumni Australian Institute of Sport soccer players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Maidenhead United F.C. players Northwood F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Southend United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Southern Football League players Olympic soccer players of Australia Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2010 FIFA World Cup players Australian expatriate soccer players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England Australian expatriates in Italy Australian expatriates in England English football referees Living people 1971 births Sportspeople from Bristol People from Leicester The Football League referees Premier League referees Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Morocco Countries in Africa North African countries Arabic-speaking countries and territories French-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Arab League Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Muslim-majority countries States and territories established in 1956 Articles containing Arabic-language text Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating English football referees 1985 births Living people People from Ashington 1981 births Living people People from Romford Association football fullbacks English footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Leyton Orient F.C. players Reading F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Fulham F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players FC Pune City players Colchester United F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Indian Super League players Expatriate footballers in India 1992 births Living people People from Harlow English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Finnish footballers Finland youth international footballers Finland under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Charlton Athletic F.C. players Welling United F.C. players Eastbourne Borough F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players English people of Finnish descent Near-Earth object tracking Discoveries by institution Jet Propulsion Laboratory Palomar Observatory 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from Moscow Russian footballers Russia international footballers Russian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Russian expatriates in Germany Russian expatriates in England FC Spartak Moscow players FC Khimki players FC Shinnik Yaroslavl players FC Baltika Kaliningrad players FC Tom Tomsk players FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players VfB Stuttgart players Fulham F.C. players Reading F.C. players FC Dynamo Moscow players Russian Football Premier League players Bundesliga players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology