 1990 births 2013 Tour de France stage winners Colombian Giro d'Italia stage winners Colombian male cyclists Colombian Tour de France stage winners Giro d'Italia cyclists Giro d'Italia winners Living people People from Tunja Tour de France cyclists Vuelta a España cyclists Barcelona 10s BC establishments in Spain Historic Jewish communities Mediterranean port cities and towns in Spain Municipalities in Barcelonès Phoenician colonies in Spain Populated places in Barcelonès Recipients of the Royal Gold Medal Roman sites in Spain University towns in Spain American brands Navigation system companies Electronics companies Electronics companies of the United States Electronics companies established in 1989 Companies based in Kansas Companies based in the Kansas City metropolitan area Embedded systems Avionics companies Garmin Global Positioning System Fishing manufacturers and suppliers Marine electronics Watch brands 1989 establishments in Kansas Volta a Catalunya UCI ProTour races Recurring sporting events established in 1911 UCI World Tour races Cycle races in Catalonia Cycle races in Spain 1911 establishments in Spain Pyrenees Mountain ranges of Europe Landforms of Ariège Mountain ranges of Aragon Mountain ranges of Catalonia Mountain ranges of the Basque Country Landforms of Pyrénées-Atlantiques Landforms of Pyrénées-Orientales Landforms of Haute-Garonne Landforms of Hautes-Pyrénées Landforms of Andorra Green Spain Physiographic provinces Mountain ranges of Midi-Pyrénées Mountain ranges of Aquitaine Glossaries of sports Road bicycle racing terminology Cycling Pre–World Championship Grand Prix circuits Formula One circuits Grand Prix motorcycle circuits Motorsport venues in Catalonia Motorsport venues in Spain Spanish Grand Prix Sports venues in Barcelona Defunct motorsport venues in Spain Defunct sports venues in Catalonia Neighbourhoods of Barcelona Visitor attractions in Barcelona Sants-Montjuïc 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe 1986 births British male cyclists Irish male cyclists Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Irish Vuelta a España stage winners Tour de France cyclists Cyclists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic cyclists of Ireland Irish Tour de France stage winners Giro d'Italia cyclists Vuelta a España cyclists 2013 Tour de France stage winners  Ski areas and resorts in Catalonia UCI ProTour races Tour de Pologne Recurring sporting events established in 1928 UCI World Tour races Annual sporting events in Poland 1928 establishments in Poland Catalan cyclists Spanish male cyclists 1979 births Living people Sportspeople from Barcelona Spanish Vuelta a España stage winners Spanish Tour de France stage winners Spanish Giro d'Italia stage winners Tour de France cyclists Giro d'Italia cyclists Vuelta a España cyclists 2010 Tour de France stage winners Cycle manufacturers of Taiwan Companies listed on the Taiwan Stock Exchange Mountain bike manufacturers Taiwanese brands Giro d'Italia by year 2011 in Italian sport 2011 UCI World Tour 2011 Giro d'Italia  UCI WorldTeams Cycling teams based in Spain Sports clubs established in 1980 Movistar Team Telefónica 1986 births Living people People from Sint-Niklaas Belgian male cyclists Belgian Giro d'Italia stage winners Tour de Suisse stage winners Giro d'Italia cyclists Vuelta a España cyclists Tour de France cyclists Sportspeople from East Flanders 2012 Tour de France Tour de France by year 2012 UCI World Tour 2012 in French sport Sport in Liège 1980 births British Tour de France stage winners Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Commonwealth Games silver medallists for England Cyclists at the 1998 Commonwealth Games Cyclists at the 2002 Commonwealth Games Cyclists at the 2000 Summer Olympics Cyclists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Cyclists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Cyclists at the 2012 Summer Olympics English male cyclists English Olympic medallists English people of Australian descent British Giro d'Italia stage winners Living people Olympic cyclists of Great Britain Olympic gold medallists for Great Britain Olympic silver medallists for Great Britain Olympic bronze medallists for Great Britain Olympic medalists in cycling Medalists at the 2000 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Sportspeople from Ghent People from Eccleston, Lancashire People from Maida Vale Tour de France winners UCI Road World Champions (elite men) BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners Knights Bachelor People educated at St Augustine's Church of England High School Sports players and officials awarded knighthoods British cycling road race champions English knights Cyclists at the 2014 Commonwealth Games Commonwealth Games competitors for England 2012 Tour de France stage winners Tour de France cyclists Vuelta a España cyclists Giro d'Italia cyclists UCI Track Cycling World Champions (men) Giro d'Italia Cycle races in Italy Recurring sporting events established in 1909 UCI ProTour races UCI World Tour races 1909 establishments in Italy Grand Tour (cycling) Annual sporting events in Italy 1982 births Living people People from Verviers Belgian male cyclists Olympic cyclists of Belgium Cyclists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Cyclists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Belgian Tour de France stage winners Belgian Giro d'Italia stage winners Belgian Vuelta a España stage winners UCI Road World Champions (elite men) Vuelta a España cyclists Tour de France cyclists 2011 Tour de France stage winners Giro d'Italia cyclists Sportspeople from Liège (province) Cycling teams based in the United States UCI WorldTeams Sports clubs established in 2007 BMC Racing Team Basque sportspeople Sportspeople from Bilbao Spanish male cyclists 1981 births Living people Spanish Vuelta a España stage winners Tour de France cyclists Vuelta a España cyclists Giro d'Italia cyclists Cycling teams based in the United Kingdom Sports clubs established in 2009 UCI WorldTeams 2009 establishments in the United Kingdom Team Sky UCI WorldTeams Cycling teams based in Belgium Sports clubs established in 1985 Lotto–Soudal Belgian male cyclists 1991 births Living people People from Sint-Truiden Giro d'Italia cyclists Tour de France cyclists Sportspeople from Limburg (Belgium) 1997 films 1990s comedy films American criminal comedy films Buddy films Touchstone Pictures films Films set in Arizona Films shot in New Jersey Films directed by Steve Oedekerk American action comedy films American films Telefónica Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Companies of Spain Telecommunications companies of Spain Companies listed on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange Companies based in Madrid Companies listed on the São Paulo Stock Exchange Spanish brands Multinational companies headquartered in Spain Conglomerate companies of Spain Companies established in 1924 1924 establishments in Spain Companies listed on the Madrid Stock Exchange IBEX-35 Companies in the Euro Stoxx 50 The Cars songs 1980 singles Songs written by Ric Ocasek Song recordings produced by Roy Thomas Baker Elektra Records singles 1980 songs Road bicycle racing terminology 1980 births Living people People from Vénissieux French male cyclists French Tour de France stage winners Tour de France cyclists Vuelta a España cyclists UCI WorldTeams Cycling teams based in France Sports clubs established in 1992 Ag2r-La Mondiale 79 BC 70s BC establishments Girona Municipalities in Gironès Historic Jewish communities Populated places in Gironès 1889 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1889 Brentford F.C. Brentford, London Football clubs in England Football clubs in London The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Sport in Hounslow Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1960 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid UEFA Cup winning managers Spanish football managers Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla managers Liverpool F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Valencia CF managers CA Osasuna managers CF Extremadura managers CD Tenerife managers Real Valladolid managers La Liga managers Segunda División managers Premier League managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy UEFA Pro Licence holders Polytechnic University of Madrid alumni Linares CF players S.S.C. Napoli managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Spanish expatriate football managers Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club 1948 Summer Olympic venues Brentford F.C. Brentford, London Buildings and structures in Hounslow Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London Olympic football venues Sports venues completed in 1904 Defunct rugby league venues in England London Broncos Visitor attractions in Hounslow Football League venues 1992 births Living people People from Santa Maria Capua Vetere Italian footballers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Association football forwards S.S.C. Napoli players Manchester City F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Watford F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players A.S. Avellino 1912 players U.S. Sassuolo Calcio players Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players Serie B players Italian expatriate footballers Italian expatriates in England 1991 births Living people People from Milton Keynes English footballers England youth international footballers Association football midfielders Watford F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Kilmarnock F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players 1985 births Living people People from Bishop Auckland English footballers Association football goalkeepers Leeds United F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Darlington F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players England youth international footballers 1988 births Living people People from the Province of Burgos Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Castilian-Leonese footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Real Madrid C.F. players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Valencia CF players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England 1991 births Brazil international footballers Brazil under-20 international footballers Brazil youth international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian footballers Brazilian Roman Catholics Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Chelsea F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic medalists in football Olympic silver medalists for Brazil People from Americana, São Paulo Premier League players São Paulo FC players Sport Club Internacional players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players  Spain national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Spain UEFA European Championship-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Association football terminology  FA Cup Tournament systems Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from County Tipperary Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football forwards Cork City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Southampton F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Tipperary hurlers Gortnahoe-Glengoole hurlers UEFA Euro 2012 players FA Cup seasons 2012–13 domestic association football cups 2012–13 FA Cup 2012–13 in English football  Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham 1980 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football central defenders Chelsea F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Living people Nottingham Forest F.C. players People acquitted of crimes People from Barking Premier League players Senrab F.C. players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1991 births Living people English footballers Association football midfielders Everton F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Footballers from Liverpool 1978 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers FIFA Century Club Manchester City F.C. players People educated at Brentwood School (Essex) People from Romford Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players West Ham United F.C. players Conservative Party (UK) people Members of the Order of the British Empire New York City FC players English expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players 1989 births Living people People from Gradiška, Bosnia and Herzegovina Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina German people of Bosnia and Herzegovina descent German people of Serbian descent German footballers Germany international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers German expatriate footballers Eintracht Frankfurt players Borussia Mönchengladbach II players Borussia Mönchengladbach players SV Werder Bremen players Chelsea F.C. players Sevilla FC players ACF Fiorentina players R.S.C. Anderlecht players Trabzonspor footballers Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Premier League players La Liga players Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in Turkey Association football midfielders Bosnia and Herzegovina emigrants to Germany 2010 FIFA World Cup players German expatriates in England German expatriates in Spain German expatriates in Italy German expatriates in Belgium German expatriates in Turkey 1990 births Living people People from Sandown English footballers Association football goalkeepers Farnborough F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Basingstoke Town F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Bradford Footballers from West Yorkshire English footballers Jamaican footballers England semi-pro international footballers Jamaica international footballers Association football forwards Bradford City A.F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Harrogate Town F.C. players Scarborough F.C. players Halifax Town A.F.C. players York City F.C. players Hibernian F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Northern Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Scottish Premier League players Black English sportspeople 1991 births Living people People from Milton Keynes Sportspeople from Norwich English footballers Association football midfielders Norwich City F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players The Football League players Black English sportspeople People educated at Norwich School (independent school) Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1985 births Living people Sportspeople from Paris French people of Senegalese descent French footballers French Muslims Senegalese footballers Senegal international footballers Senegalese Muslims Association football forwards FC Rouen players R.E. Mouscron players TSG 1899 Hoffenheim players West Ham United F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Shanghai Shenhua F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Premier League players Süper Lig players Chinese Super League players Senegalese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate footballers in China Senegalese expatriates in Germany Senegalese expatriates in France Senegalese expatriates in Belgium Senegalese expatriates in Turkey 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players Senegalese expatriates in England Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips 1991 births Living people English footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders The Football League players National League (English football) players Dagenham & Redbridge F.C. players Redbridge F.C. players Bishop's Stortford F.C. players Thurrock F.C. players Braintree Town F.C. players Grays Athletic F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1970 births Living people English football referees Sportspeople from Sunderland, Tyne and Wear People from Horsforth Sportspeople from Leeds FA Cup Final referees