 Luton Town F.C. Football clubs in England Association football clubs established in 1885 Football clubs in Bedfordshire Football clubs in Luton The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs 1885 establishments in England National League (English football) 1986 births Living people People from Ashford, Surrey People from Basingstoke English footballers Association football forwards Aldershot Town F.C. players Reading F.C. players Forest Green Rovers F.C. players Hayes F.C. players Crawley Town F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Woking F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Articles with hAudio microformats Norwich City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1902 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Norwich Premier League clubs 1902 establishments in England Football clubs in Norfolk Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Association football terminology Luton Hat making Local government districts of the East of England Local government in Bedfordshire Towns in Bedfordshire Unitary authority districts of England Fenerbahçe S.K. Fenerbahçe S.K. (football) Association football clubs established in 1907 Sport in Istanbul Kadıköy 1907 establishments in the Ottoman Empire Unrelegated association football clubs Non-League football FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England 1979 establishments in England National League (English football) Football leagues in England Sports leagues established in 1979 Fifth level football leagues in Europe Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology FA Cup seasons 2012–13 domestic association football cups 2012–13 FA Cup 2012–13 in English football 2010–11 FA Cup FA Cup seasons 2010–11 in English football 2010–11 domestic association football cups  Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. The Football League founder members Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Association football clubs established in 1877 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners United Soccer Association imported teams Sport in Wolverhampton 1877 establishments in England Norwich Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in the East of England County towns in England Local government districts of the East of England Non-metropolitan districts of Norfolk 1987 births Canadian soccer players Canadian people of Jamaican descent Jamaican emigrants to Canada Naturalized citizens of Canada Association football forwards Canada men's international soccer players 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Rushden & Diamonds F.C. players Gillingham F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Eintracht Braunschweig players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Canadian expatriate soccer players Canadian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Canadian expatriate sportspeople in Germany Canada men's youth international soccer players Black Canadian sportspeople Soccer people from Ontario Sportspeople from Kingston, Jamaica Sportspeople from Mississauga Living people Laws of association football Association football terminology Sutton United F.C. Association football clubs established in 1898 Football clubs in England Isthmian League Sport in Sutton (London borough) National League (English football) Football clubs in London Athenian League 1898 establishments in England Sutton, London National League (English football) Football leagues in England Sports leagues established in 1979 1979 establishments in England Football clubs in England Coventry City F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1883 FA Cup winners Football League Championship clubs 1883 establishments in England Southern Football League clubs Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Sport in Coventry Districts of Sutton (London borough) Areas of London Metropolitan centres of London Sutton, London 1970 births Living people People from Hatfield, Hertfordshire English footballers Brentford F.C. players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Exeter City F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Colchester United F.C. players Aldershot Town F.C. players Weymouth F.C. players Tiverton Town F.C. players English football managers Weymouth F.C. managers Torquay United F.C. managers Bristol Rovers F.C. managers Luton Town F.C. managers Cheltenham Town F.C. managers The Football League managers National League (English football) managers Buffyverse Slayers (Buffyverse) Fictional demon hunters Fictional vampire hunters Fictional titles and ranks Fictional women soldiers and warriors Fictional characters with superhuman strength 1937 films British films British criminal comedy films English-language films Films directed by Tim Whelan Pinewood Studios films 1930s comedy films 1930s crime films British black-and-white films 1993 births Association football forwards English footballers English people of Irish descent England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Footballers from Greater London Leicester City F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Living people Millwall F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players People from Chingford Premier League players The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players 1985 births Living people People from Luton Black British sportspeople English footballers Association football defenders Luton Town F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Aylesbury United F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players People educated at Icknield High School Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1981 births Living people People from Carlisle, Cumbria English footballers English expatriate footballers Association football forwards Carlisle United F.C. players Workington A.F.C. players Halifax Town A.F.C. players Barrow A.F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Norwich City F.C. captains Aston Villa F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Northern Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Singapore Hougang United FC players S.League players 1958 births Living people People from Stratford, London English people of Irish descent English people of Ghanaian descent Black British sportspeople Irish people of Ghanaian descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Brentford F.C. players UEFA Pro Licence holders UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Premier League managers The Football League players English football managers The Football League managers Republic of Ireland football managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from London Birmingham City F.C. managers Norwich City F.C. managers People educated at St Bonaventure's Catholic Comprehensive School Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. managers Association football defenders 1985 births Living people People from Tonypandy Welsh footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales semi-pro international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Cardiff City F.C. players Ton Pentre F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Forest Green Rovers F.C. players York City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Conspiracy theories Research installations of the United States Air Force Buildings and structures in Lincoln County, Nevada Military facilities in Nevada Secret military programs Secret places Installations of the Central Intelligence Agency 1942 establishments in Nevada Terminology used in multiple sports Cambridge United F.C. National League (English football) Sport in Cambridge Association football clubs established in 1912 1912 establishments in England Eastern Counties Football League Southern Football League clubs Football clubs in Cambridgeshire The Football League clubs Football clubs in Devon The Football League clubs Torquay United F.C. Association football clubs established in 1899 Southern Football League clubs Torquay 1899 establishments in England 1991 births Living people People from Diss English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football goalkeepers Norwich City F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 1985 births Living people Sportspeople from Budapest Hungarian footballers Hungarian expatriate footballers Hungary youth international footballers Hungary under-21 international footballers Association football defenders MTK Budapest FC players Chesterfield F.C. players York City F.C. players Lincoln City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Hereford United F.C. players Nemzeti Bajnokság I players The Football League players National League (English football) players Expatriate footballers in England Hungarian expatriates in England Sports terminology Tournament systems Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Leicester Association football defenders English footballers Leicester City F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Redditch United F.C. players King's Lynn F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Kidderminster Harriers F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Handball Ball games Indoor sports Team sports Summer Olympic sports Sports originating in Denmark Sports originating in Germany Articles containing video clips Terminology used in multiple sports The Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs Peterborough United F.C. Association football clubs established in 1934 1934 establishments in England Football clubs in Cambridgeshire Snowmobiles Tracked vehicles Racing vehicles Inuit transport Canadian inventions Articles containing video clips X Games Recurring sporting events established in 1995 Wide World of Sports (U.S. TV series) Multi-sport events in the United States Skateboarding competitions BMX competitions Esports competitions Skiing competitions in the United States ABC Sports ESPN ESPN2 Freestyle Motocross Snowmobile racing Inline skating Rallying Annual sporting events in the United States 1987 births 2013 deaths X-Games athletes Sports deaths in Colorado People from Denton County, Texas Sportspeople from Texas Accidental deaths in Colorado Filmed deaths in sports Freestyle skiing Winter Olympic sports ATVs Aspen, Colorado Cities in Colorado County seats in Colorado Cities in Pitkin County, Colorado Roaring Fork Valley Ski areas and resorts in Colorado Grand Junction, Colorado Cities in Mesa County, Colorado Colorado Western Slope Cities in Colorado County seats in Colorado ESPN Bristol, Connecticut ESPN media outlets Sports television networks in the United States Television channels and stations established in 1979 Webby Award winners Peabody Award winners 1979 establishments in Connecticut Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex Cities in Texas Cities in Denton County, Texas Populated places established in 1886 1886 establishments in Texas 1997 establishments in Japan Media companies established in 2000 Television channels and stations established in 1997 Japanese television networks Anime television Television in Tokyo Denver, Colorado Cities in Colorado Colorado counties Denver metropolitan area County seats in Colorado Consolidated city-counties in the United States Populated places established in 1858 1858 establishments in Kansas Territory Colorado Former Spanish colonies States and territories established in 1876 States of the United States Western United States The Young and the Restless characters Fictional characters introduced in 2011 Fictional waiting staff Gymnastics manoeuvres Skiing equipment Athletic training Neurotrauma Psychiatric diagnosis Surgery Brain Organs (anatomy) Flat bones Pelvis 9/11 conspiracy theories American nu metal musical groups American punk rock groups Musical groups established in 1994 Musical groups from Orange County, California Rapcore groups Rap metal musical groups Rap rock groups Rock music groups from California Suburban Noize Records artists Minnesota States and territories established in 1858 States of the United States Dakota toponyms Midwestern United States Dallas, Texas Cities in Collin County, Texas Cities in Dallas County, Texas Cities in Denton County, Texas Cities in Kaufman County, Texas Cities in Rockwall County, Texas Cities in Texas County seats in Texas Cities in Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex Populated places established in 1841 Michigan States and territories established in 1837 States of the United States Midwestern United States Former French colonies New France Winter X Games 2010 in multi-sport events 2010 in American sports Sports in Colorado Pitkin County, Colorado 2010 in Colorado Winter multi-sport events in the United States International sports competitions hosted by the United States Gambling terminology Sports terminology Luck Associated Press 1846 establishments in New York American football media College football media Cooperatives in the United States Journalism organizations News agencies based in the United States Non-profit organizations based in New York City Photo archives Publications established in 1846 Rockefeller Center Companies established in 1846