 Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1960 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid UEFA Cup winning managers Spanish football managers Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla managers Liverpool F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Valencia CF managers CA Osasuna managers CF Extremadura managers CD Tenerife managers Real Valladolid managers La Liga managers Segunda División managers Premier League managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy UEFA Pro Licence holders Polytechnic University of Madrid alumni Linares CF players S.S.C. Napoli managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Spanish expatriate football managers Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy 1991 births Living people A.F.C. Tubize players Belgian expatriates in France Belgian expatriates in England Belgian footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgium youth international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Chelsea F.C. players Ligue 1 players Lille OSC players People from La Louvière Premier League players Walloon sportspeople 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football wingers 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División B players Atlético Madrid B players Atlético Madrid footballers Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Plzeň Association football goalkeepers Czech footballers Czech Republic youth international footballers Czech Republic under-21 international footballers Czech Republic international footballers FK Chmel Blšany players AC Sparta Prague players Czech expatriate footballers Czech expatriates in France Czech expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Stade Rennais F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Czech First League players FIFA Century Club Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Tournament systems Sports terminology Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain 1978 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers FIFA Century Club Manchester City F.C. players People educated at Brentwood School (Essex) People from Romford Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players West Ham United F.C. players Conservative Party (UK) people Members of the Order of the British Empire New York City FC players English expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players 1987 births Living people Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Joinville Esporte Clube players Cruzeiro Esporte Clube players S.L. Benfica footballers Chelsea F.C. players Jiangsu Suning F.C. players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Primeira Liga players Premier League players Chinese Super League players Brazilian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in China Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in China Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics 1988 births Living people People from the Province of Burgos Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Castilian-Leonese footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Real Madrid C.F. players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Valencia CF players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Football clubs in England Sheffield United F.C. Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Sheffield Association football clubs established in 1889 Football clubs in South Yorkshire FA Cup winners Sports clubs established in 1889 Football League Championship clubs 1889 establishments in England FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Guadalajara, Jalisco Footballers from Jalisco Mexican Roman Catholics Mexican footballers Mexico international footballers Liga MX players C.D. Guadalajara footballers Premier League players La Liga players Bundesliga players Manchester United F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Bayer 04 Leverkusen players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Germany Mexican expatriate footballers Mexican expatriates in the United Kingdom Mexican expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Mexican expatriates in Spain Mexican expatriates in Germany Mexico youth international footballers Articles containing video clips Crisis Management 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Lagos Nigerian footballers Nigeria international footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football wingers Crystal Palace F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players English people of Nigerian descent Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Africa Cup of Nations-winning players People educated at Whitgift School FA Cup FA Cup Finals FA Cup Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match 1981 births Living people People from Wallsend Sportspeople from Newcastle upon Tyne English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Association football utility players Wallsend Boys Club players West Ham United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills 1980 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football central defenders Chelsea F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Living people Nottingham Forest F.C. players People acquitted of crimes People from Barking Premier League players Senrab F.C. players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1987 births Living people People from São Paulo (state) Brazilian Christians Brazilian footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Esporte Clube Vitória players Primeira Liga players S.L. Benfica footballers Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Ligue 1 players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Brazil international footballers 2011 Copa América players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2015 Copa América players Brazil youth international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in France FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Brazil under-20 international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players Ancient Egyptian Jews Angelic visionaries Moses 15th-century BC biblical rulers Biblical murderers Book of Exodus Adoptees Ancient Egyptian princes Christian saints from the Old Testament Prophets of Islam People in the canonical gospels People in the General Epistles Torah people Wonderworkers Founders of religions 1980 births Living people People from Tolosa Spanish footballers Basque footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Real Sociedad B footballers Real Sociedad footballers CD Numancia players CD Tenerife players Real Unión footballers Premier League players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers American action thriller films American films 1990s action thriller films 1997 films English-language films Films directed by Philippe Mora 1991 births Brazil international footballers Brazil under-20 international footballers Brazil youth international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian footballers Brazilian Roman Catholics Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Chelsea F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic medalists in football Olympic silver medalists for Brazil People from Americana, São Paulo Premier League players São Paulo FC players Sport Club Internacional players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 1945 births People from Khasavyurt Living people Expatriate football managers in Japan Sanfrecce Hiroshima managers FC Anzhi Makhachkala managers Russian football managers Soviet football managers Russian Football Premier League managers FC Krylia Sovetov Samara managers FC Saturn Ramenskoye managers FC Volga Nizhny Novgorod managers FC Amkar Perm managers Russian people of Dagestani descent 1875 births 1961 deaths American military personnel of World War I Columbia Records artists American cornetists Czech emigrants to the United States Edison Records artists Pioneer recording artists Victor Records artists Zonophone Records artists Burials at Bohemian National Cemetery (Chicago)