 Golf Precision sports Ball and bat games Sports originating in Scotland Leisure activities Summer Olympic sports Scottish games American male golfers Ohio State Buckeyes men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for the United States Winners of men's major golf championships Men's Career Grand Slam champion golfers Winners of senior major golf championships World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Golf course architects Golf writers and broadcasters Golfers from Ohio Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients American philanthropists People with poliomyelitis American people of German descent Sportspeople from Columbus, Ohio People from Upper Arlington, Ohio People from Palm Beach County, Florida 1940 births Living people Golf terminology Men's major golf championships Male golfers South African golfers Sunshine Tour golfers European Tour golfers PGA Tour golfers Sportspeople from Pretoria People from George, Western Cape 1988 births Living people Middle-distance running Sport in Oxford 1954 in athletics (track and field) History of Oxford The Players Championship Annual sporting events in the United States Recurring sporting events established in 1974 1974 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) 1930 births 1966 in spaceflight 1969 in spaceflight 20th-century American businesspeople American astronauts American autobiographers American aviators American businesspeople American people of Irish descent American test pilots Apollo 11 Apollo program astronauts Collier Trophy recipients Congressional Gold Medal recipients Harmon Trophy winners Harvard Business School alumni Living people Military brats National Aviation Hall of Fame inductees People from Rome Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Recipients of the Cullum Geographical Medal Recipients of the Distinguished Flying Cross (United States) Recipients of the Langley Medal Recipients of the NASA Distinguished Service Medal Smithsonian Institution people St. Albans School (Washington, D.C.) alumni U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School alumni United States Air Force astronauts United States Air Force generals United States Air Force officers United States Assistant Secretaries of State United States Astronaut Hall of Fame inductees United States Military Academy alumni Southport Towns in Merseyside Seaside resorts in England Towns and villages in Sefton Populated coastal places in Merseyside Beaches of Merseyside 1895 establishments in New Jersey Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in New Jersey Buildings and structures in Union County, New Jersey Golf clubs and courses in New Jersey Golf clubs and courses designed by A. W. Tillinghast National Historic Landmarks in New Jersey National Register of Historic Places in Union County, New Jersey Springfield Township, Union County, New Jersey U.S. Open (golf) Golf in New Jersey Springfield Township, Union County, New Jersey 1980 in golf 1980 in American sports Sport in Sefton Golf clubs and courses in Merseyside Organisations based in the United Kingdom with royal patronage The Open Championship venues Ryder Cup venues Curtis Cup venues Walker Cup venues Southport Sports clubs established in 1889 Tiger Woods 1975 births Living people African-American Buddhists African-American golfers American male golfers American people of Chinese descent American people of Dutch descent American people of Dutch-Indonesian descent American people of Native American descent American people of Thai descent American philanthropists American sportspeople of Asian descent Golf writers and broadcasters Golfers from California Laureus World Sports Awards winners Men's Career Grand Slam champion golfers Native American sportspeople People from Cypress, California People from Jupiter Island, Florida People from Windermere, Florida PGA Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for the United States Sportspeople from Anaheim, California Sportspeople from Orange County, California Stanford Cardinal men's golfers Winners of men's major golf championships American male golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Golfers from Kentucky Sportspeople from Louisville, Kentucky People from Shelby County, Kentucky 1960 births Living people American male golfers Oklahoma State Cowboys golfers PGA Tour golfers Golfers from Florida People from Largo, Florida Sportspeople from Hillsborough County, Florida 1966 births Living people Japanese golfers Japan Golf Tour golfers PGA Tour golfers Sportspeople from Miyagi Prefecture 1981 births Living people Caddies Golf people U.S. Open (golf) Golf in Pennsylvania 1973 in golf 1973 in American sports American male golfers BYU Cougars men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for the United States Winners of men's major golf championships World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Golf course architects Golf writers and broadcasters Golfers from California American Latter Day Saints Sportspeople from San Francisco, California People from Napa, California 1947 births Living people 2014 singles 2014 songs CNBLUE songs Japanese-language songs Warner Music Japan singles American male golfers PGA Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for the United States Golfers from South Carolina Golfers from Florida Coastal Carolina University alumni Sportspeople from Columbia, South Carolina People from Jupiter, Florida People from Myrtle Beach, South Carolina 1984 births Living people Swedish male golfers European Tour golfers PGA Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for Europe Swedish expatriates in the United Arab Emirates Sportspeople from Gothenburg People from Dubai Sportspeople from Orlando, Florida 1976 births Living people S.S.C. Napoli Association football clubs established in 1926 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Campania Football clubs in Italy Italian football First Division clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Naples 1926 establishments in Italy UEFA member associations Football governing bodies in Italy Sports governing bodies in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy Sports organisations established in 1898 Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy 1981 births Living people Sportspeople from Naples Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Serie A players Serie B players S.S.C. Napoli players Parma F.C. players Hellas Verona F.C. players U.S. Sassuolo Calcio players Association football central defenders 1977 births Living people Italian footballers F.C. Casertana players Ternana Calcio players U.S. Catanzaro 1929 players S.S.C. Napoli players Serie A players Serie B players Beijing Articles containing video clips Articles including recorded pronunciations Burial sites of the House of Holstein-Gottorp-Romanov Capitals in Asia Independent cities Metropolitan areas of China National Famous Historical and Cultural Cities in China National Garden Cities in China North China Plain World Digital Library related Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin Match fixing Organized crime activity Sports law  Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1976 births Living people People from Bovolone Italian footballers A.C. Chievo Verona players Hellas Verona F.C. players U.C. Sampdoria players A.C. Siena players S.S.C. Napoli players Serie A players Serie B players U.C. Sampdoria 1946 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1946 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Liguria Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Sport in Genoa Criminal procedure Ethnic groups in Europe Italian people Romance peoples Football leagues in Italy Serie B Professional sports leagues in Italy Second level football leagues in Europe 1929 establishments in Italy Sports leagues established in 1929 A.C. Siena Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Tuscany Association football clubs established in 1904 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs 1904 establishments in Italy Atalanta B.C. Sport in Bergamo Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Association football clubs established in 1907 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Coppa Italia winners 1907 establishments in Italy Torino F.C. Association football clubs established in 1906 Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners 1906 establishments in Italy 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from Naples Italian footballers Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in the United Arab Emirates Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Association football central defenders Serie A players La Liga players S.S.C. Napoli players Parma F.C. players Inter Milan players Juventus F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Al Ahli Club (Dubai) players Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning captains FIFA World Cup-winning players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players European Footballer of the Year winners FIFA World Player of the Year winners FIFA Century Club World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners Italian football managers Italian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Expatriate football managers in China Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao F.C. managers UAE Arabian Gulf League players Expatriate football managers in Saudi Arabia Al-Nassr FC managers Italian expatriates in China Italian expatriates in the United Arab Emirates Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners 2006 FIFA World Cup 2006 in association football 2005–06 in German football FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by Germany 1961 births Living people People from the Province of Livorno Association football midfielders Italian footballers Serie A players A.C. Reggiana 1919 players Modena F.C. players Delfino Pescara 1936 players Cagliari Calcio players ACF Fiorentina players Empoli F.C. players Italian football managers Serie A managers A.C. Pistoiese managers Reggina Calcio managers A.S. Livorno Calcio managers U.C. Sampdoria managers S.S.C. Napoli managers Inter Milan managers