 Parachuting Military sports Air sports Articles containing video clips Parachuting Airborne military equipment Sports equipment  Training Los Angeles, California Cities in Los Angeles County, California County seats in California Incorporated cities and towns in California Los Angeles metropolitan area Populated coastal places in California Port cities and towns of the West Coast of the United States Communities on U.S. Route 66 Butterfield Overland Mail in California Stockton - Los Angeles Road Populated places established in 1781 1781 establishments in New Spain 1850 establishments in California Parachuting Gravitation Articles containing video clips Movie ranches Film location shooting Film production Scenic design Cinema of Southern California Cinema of the United States Ranches Ranches in the United States San Fernando Valley Hollywood history and culture History of Simi Valley, California History of Los Angeles County, California History of Ventura County, California Valleys of Ventura County, California Geography of Simi Valley, California 2003 debut albums Obie Trice albums Shady Records albums Albums produced by Dr. Dre Albums produced by Eminem Albums produced by Emile Haynie Albums produced by Fredwreck Albums produced by Timbaland Albums produced by Denaun Porter Albums produced by Mike Elizondo Trawlers Nautical terms Fox Broadcasting Company American television networks Fox Entertainment Group 21st Century Fox subsidiaries Companies based in Los Angeles, California Entertainment companies based in California Metromedia Television channels and stations established in 1986 1986 establishments in California Television specials Television terminology Cadbury Adams brands Chewing gum 2006 introductions Mondelēz brands Justice League titles Comics by Peter Milligan 2011 comics debuts 1933 establishments in California Actors' trade unions AFL–CIO Labor relations in California Screen Actors Guild Trade unions established in 1933 Parachuting Biology and pharmacology of chemical elements Breathing gases Chalcogens Chemical elements Chemical substances for emergency medicine Diatomic nonmetals Oxidizing agents Oxygen 2007 singles Vanessa Hudgens songs Music videos directed by Chris Applebaum Music videos directed by Darren Grant Songs written by Savan Kotecha Songs written by Arnthor Birgisson Hollywood Records singles 2006 songs Associated Press 1846 establishments in New York American football media College football media Cooperatives in the United States Journalism organizations News agencies based in the United States Non-profit organizations based in New York City Photo archives Publications established in 1846 Rockefeller Center Companies established in 1846 1969 births Living people Austrian military personnel Austrian skydivers People from Salzburg Space diving Austrian racing drivers Stunt performers Flight altitude record holders Fluid dynamics Aerodynamics Acoustics Sound Sound measurements Physical quantities Chemical properties Velocity Stunt performers Acting Entertainment occupations Filmmaking occupations Television terminology Theatrical occupations Risk Parachuting Census-designated places in Washington (state) Census-designated places in Pierce County, Washington Tacoma, Washington Cities in the Seattle metropolitan area Cities in Washington (state) Cities in Pierce County, Washington County seats in Washington (state) Port settlements in Washington (state) Populated places established in 1864 Populated places on Puget Sound Ukrainian communities in the United States Parachuting in the United States Sports governing bodies in the United States Fredericksburg, Virginia Business Entrepreneurship Military tactics Armed forces diving Military units and formations established in 1961 Special Operations Forces of the United States United States Navy SEALs United States Naval Special Warfare Command Naval special forces units Political terminology Political science terms Military-industrial complex Elite theory Oligarchs Social status Combat Military operations by type Association football clubs established in 1875 Football clubs in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. Sport in Blackburn The Football League founder members Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1875 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire 1986 births Living people People from Torsby Municipality Swedish footballers IFK Göteborg players FC Groningen players Hamburger SV players Panathinaikos F.C. players Allsvenskan players Bundesliga players Eredivisie players Superleague Greece players Swedish expatriate footballers Swedish expatriate sportspeople in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Germany Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Greece Sweden youth international footballers Sweden under-21 international footballers Sweden international footballers 1969 births Living people People from Eidsvoll 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1998 FIFA World Cup players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players FIFA Century Club Kniksen award winners Lillestrøm SK players Manchester United F.C. players Norway international footballers Norway youth international footballers Norway under-21 international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Norwegian footballers Norwegian football managers Tippeligaen players Premier League players Rangers F.C. players Scottish Premier League players UEFA Euro 2000 players Vålerenga Fotball players KFUM-Kameratene Oslo players Norwegian expatriate footballers Lyn Fotball managers Lillestrøm SK managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Legia Warsaw managers Expatriate football managers in England Norwegian expatriate football managers Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Blackburn Rovers F.C. Premier League venues Football venues in England Buildings and structures in Blackburn Sports venues completed in 1882 Football League venues 1967 births Living people People from Cumbernauld Scottish footballers Association football wingers Celtic F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Alloa Athletic F.C. players Associação Académica de Coimbra – O.A.F. players Bath City F.C. players Newbury Town F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Football League players Scottish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Portugal Scottish expatriates in Portugal Scottish football managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Premier League managers Fulham F.C. non-playing staff Coventry City F.C. non-playing staff Expatriate football managers in Brunei Brunei national football team managers S.League head coaches Norway Countries in Europe Nordic countries Scandinavia Northern Europe Liberal democracies States and territories established in 872 States and territories established in 1905 Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Germanic countries and territories  Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Association football terminology Sports terminology 1907–08 in English football Lyn Fotball Football clubs in Norway Association football clubs established in 1896 1896 establishments in Norway Football clubs in Oslo Football clubs in Norway Association football clubs established in 1917 1917 establishments in Norway Sport in Akershus Lillestrøm SK New Year celebrations January observances Public holidays in Australia Public holidays in Canada Public holidays in New Zealand Holiday-related topics Public holidays in the United Kingdom Public holidays in the United States Winter holidays Summer holidays Annual events Public holidays in the Republic of Ireland Public holidays in Ukraine Christmas traditions Christmas-linked holidays Public holidays in Australia Public holidays in Canada Public holidays in New Zealand Public holidays in the United Kingdom December observances Football clubs in England Middlesbrough F.C. Sport in Middlesbrough Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1876 Football clubs in North Yorkshire Football League Cup winners Football League Championship clubs 1876 establishments in England Northern Football League 1979 births Living people People from Beverley English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Association football goalkeepers who have scored York City F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players People educated at Beverley Grammar School Sportspeople from Yorkshire 1963 births Living people Sportspeople from Bellshill People from Ross and Cromarty Scottish footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers Aberdeen F.C. players FC Metz players Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Ligue 1 players Scottish Football League players Motherwell F.C. managers Coventry City F.C. managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Scottish football managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Scottish Premier League managers Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from Highland (council area) Scotland under-21 international footballers Wigan Athletic F.C. non-playing staff Rotherham United F.C. non-playing staff Rotherham United F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff 1963 births Living people Sportspeople from York English footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football goalkeepers Halifax Town A.F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Everton F.C. players Notts County F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players York City F.C. players Mansfield Town F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. non-playing staff Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Bolton Wanderers F.C. non-playing staff Association football terminology Peshwa dynasty 1720 births 1761 deaths Food companies of India Companies based in Pune Companies established in 1971 Indian companies established in 1971 The Times of India Digital newspapers published in Asia English-language newspapers published in India Investigative news sources National newspapers published in India Newspapers published in Bangalore Newspapers published in Chennai Newspapers published in Coimbatore Newspapers published in Delhi Newspapers published in India Newspapers published in Kolkata Newspapers published in Mumbai Publications established in 1838 Publications of The Times Group 1838 establishments in India English football organisations Association football trade unions Honor Ethics Social status Warrior code Virtue Association football terminology Association football transfers Towns in Lancashire West Pennine Moors Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom Blackburn