 1987 births Living people People from Salto, Uruguay Uruguayan footballers Association football forwards 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2011 controversies Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 controversies 2014 FIFA World Cup players Copa América-winning players Club Nacional de Football players FC Groningen players AFC Ajax players Liverpool F.C. players FC Barcelona players Uruguayan Primera División players Eredivisie players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain First Division/Premier League top scorers Olympic footballers of Uruguay Uruguay youth international footballers Uruguay international footballers Uruguayan expatriate footballers Uruguayan expatriates in the Netherlands Uruguayan expatriates in England Uruguayan expatriates in Spain Uruguay under-20 international footballers Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Violence in sports 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Laws of association football Assault Crimes Violence Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England 1981 births Living people People from Barwell English footballers Association football goalkeepers Coventry City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Premier League players The Football League players