 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Ireland Celtic nations Divided regions International islands Northern Europe Western Europe 1986 births Living people People from Thorntonhall Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish footballers Scottish people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in Russia Irish expatriates in Russia Queen's Park F.C. players Celtic F.C. players FC Spartak Moscow players Everton F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Russian Football Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe People from Birkenhead 1983 births Living people Association football forwards Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Wrexham F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology European national association football teams Faroe Islands national football team National sports teams of the Faroe Islands Near-Earth object tracking Discoveries by institution Jet Propulsion Laboratory Palomar Observatory 1986 births Living people Association football players from County Dublin Republic of Ireland association footballers Irish expatriates in the United Kingdom Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Association football forwards University College Dublin A.F.C. players Derry City F.C. players Kilmarnock F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players The Football League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Cherry Orchard F.C. players 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team 1982 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Shelbourne F.C. players Livingston F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Premier League players Belvedere F.C. players 1988 births Association football defenders Blackpool F.C. players Everton F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Gaelic football backs Gaelic footballers who switched code Killybegs Gaelic footballers League of Ireland players Living people Premier League players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Sligo Rovers F.C. players Sportspeople from County Donegal The Football League players Rugby World Cup stadiums Ballsbridge Buildings and structures demolished in 2007 Ireland national football team (1882–1950) Republic of Ireland national football team home stadiums Ireland national rugby union team Leinster Rugby Defunct association football venues in the Republic of Ireland Lansdowne Football Club Wanderers F.C. (rugby union) Sports venues in Dublin (city) Sports venues completed in 1872 Association football venues in County Dublin Republic of Ireland postal system Irish culture Places in Dublin (city) 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Derry Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Institute F.C. players Derry City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players NIFL Premiership players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Republic of Ireland international footballers from Northern Ireland League of Ireland XI players UEFA Euro 2012 players Buildings and structures in Dublin (city) Association football venues in the Republic of Ireland Rugby union stadiums in Ireland Ballsbridge National stadiums Republic of Ireland national football team home stadiums Ireland national rugby union team Sports venues in Dublin (city) Aviva UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Association football venues in County Dublin Bertie Ahern Unbuilt stadiums Proposed buildings and structures in the Republic of Ireland UEFA Euro 2012 Republic of Ireland at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Croatian football 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification 2010 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup qualification LA Galaxy Soccer clubs in the Greater Los Angeles Area Soccer clubs in California Association football clubs established in 1995 1995 establishments in California Sports terminology Association football terminology Cricket terminology Cricket awards and rankings Australian rules football terminology Rugby league terminology Rugby union terminology Association football terminology Ireland national rugby union team Rugby union in Ireland European national rugby union teams National sports teams of Ireland People of the Year Awards winners Multinational sports teams English-language idioms Humour Satire 1961 births Living people People from Glostrup Municipality Danish footballers Denmark international footballers Denmark under-21 international footballers Danish football managers Danish Superliga players Køge BK players Brøndby IF players FC Basel players Trabzonspor footballers Süper Lig players Danish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Switzerland Expatriate footballers in Turkey UEFA Euro 1988 players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players Randers FC managers Odense Boldklub managers Expatriate football managers in the Faroe Islands Faroe Islands national football team managers 2003 establishments in Washington (state) American punk rock groups American post-hardcore musical groups Kerrang! Awards winners Musical groups established in 2003 Musical groups from Seattle, Washington Musical quartets Victory Records artists Musical groups reestablished in 2015 Articles with hAudio microformats Norwich City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1902 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Norwich Premier League clubs 1902 establishments in England Football clubs in Norfolk Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Stoke City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1863 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Football clubs in Staffordshire Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners The Football League founder members Sport in Stoke-on-Trent United Soccer Association imported teams Southern Football League clubs 1863 establishments in England 1980 births Living people Faroese footballers Faroe Islands international footballers Skála ÍF players Types of roads Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills 1986 births Living people People from Tórshavn Faroese footballers Faroe Islands international footballers Association football goalkeepers Havnar Bóltfelag players Boldklubben Frem players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Wrexham F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Professional Football League players National League (English football) players Faroese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Faroe Islands under-21 international footballers Fimleikafélag Hafnarfjarðar players Association football tactics and skills 1971 births Living people Expatriate footballers in Germany Danish footballers Denmark international footballers Danish expatriate footballers FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players FC Sion players Odense Boldklub players F.C. Copenhagen players Brøndby IF players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Watford F.C. players Herfølge Boldklub players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in England Danish football managers Danish Superliga players Bundesliga players People from Esbjerg Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Association football forwards 1985 births Living people Faroese footballers Faroe Islands international footballers VB Vágur players Keflavík ÍF players Notodden FK players Norwegian First Division players Faroese expatriates in Iceland Expatriate footballers in Iceland Expatriate footballers in Norway People from Vágur GÍ Gøta players Myristica Flora of Maluku Medicinal plants Spices Psychedelics, dissociatives and deliriants Monoamine oxidase inhibitors National symbols of Grenada Non-timber forest products Indian spices 1987 births Living people People from Lurgan A.F.C. Bournemouth players Luton Town F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Association footballers from Northern Ireland Republic of Ireland international footballers from Northern Ireland Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers The Football League players Premier League players 1981 births Living people Danish footballers Faroese footballers Faroe Islands international footballers Lyngby Boldklub players Silkeborg IF players Danish Superliga players FC Svendborg players People from Svendborg Association football forwards 1984 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Peterborough United F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Orlando City SC players Colorado Rapids players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Human head and neck Moscow Moscow Governorate 1147 establishments in Russia Capitals in Europe Linguistic morphology Suffixes Shelbourne F.C. Association football clubs established in 1895 Association football clubs in Dublin (city) Former League of Ireland Premier Division clubs Former Irish Football League clubs 1895 establishments in Ireland League of Ireland First Division clubs Former Leinster Senior League clubs Former Athletic Union League (Dublin) clubs 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Navigational equipment Horology Time balls 1982 births Living people Faroese footballers Faroe Islands international footballers Boldklubben Frem players Randers FC players Lyngby Boldklub players Víkingur Gøta players Ross County F.C. players Faroese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Scotland GÍ Gøta players Association football defenders Former national association football teams in Europe Ireland national football team (1882–1950) National sports teams of Ireland History of association football in Ireland 1882 establishments in Ireland Laws of association football Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 2008 in rugby union End-of-year rugby union internationals 2007–08 in English rugby union 2007–08 in Welsh rugby union 2008 in Australian rugby union 2008 in New Zealand rugby union 2008 in South African rugby union FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Publications established in 1855 National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Telegraph Media Group 1855 establishments in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England 1963 births Living people Sportspeople from Bellshill People from Ross and Cromarty Scottish footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers Aberdeen F.C. players FC Metz players Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Ligue 1 players Scottish Football League players Motherwell F.C. managers Coventry City F.C. managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Scottish football managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Scottish Premier League managers Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from Highland (council area) Scotland under-21 international footballers Wigan Athletic F.C. non-playing staff Rotherham United F.C. non-playing staff Rotherham United F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Concepts in metaphysics Information Information, knowledge, and uncertainty Information science Laws of association football Association football terminology 1863 introductions Aberdeen F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1903 Sport in Aberdeen United Soccer Association imported teams Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish Premier League teams Former Highland Football League teams 1903 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Bribery Association football clubs established in 1886 Football clubs in Scotland Motherwell F.C. Sport in North Lanarkshire Scottish Premier League teams 1886 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Coventry Populated places established in the 11th century Local government in the West Midlands (county) Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Metropolitan boroughs Cities in the West Midlands (region) Local government districts of the West Midlands (region) 1043 establishments Association football terminology Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Birmingham, West Midlands Cities in the West Midlands (region) Local government districts of the West Midlands (region) Metropolitan boroughs NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Populated places established in the 6th century Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Towns in Lancashire West Pennine Moors Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom Blackburn Rotherham Towns in South Yorkshire Folly castles in England Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Aberdeen Council areas of Scotland Fishing communities in Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Royal burghs Grampian France Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Western Europe FC Metz Football clubs in France Sport in Metz Football clubs from former German territories Association football clubs established in 1932 1932 establishments in France Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Association football clubs established in 1887 Barnsley F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in South Yorkshire Sport in Barnsley FA Cup winners 1887 establishments in England Midland Football League (1889) 1984 births Sportspeople from Leicester Living people English footballers Association football forwards Leicester City F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Darlington F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Grimsby Town F.C. players Kidderminster Harriers F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Forest Green Rovers F.C. players Tamworth F.C. players Harrogate Town F.C. players Corby Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players National League (English football) players Southern Football League players English football managers Corby Town F.C. managers 1954 births Living people Alumni of the University of Bolton Blackpool F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players British association football commentators British expatriate sportspeople in the United States Coventry City F.C. players English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Ireland English expatriates in the United States English football managers English footballers Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football central defenders League of Ireland managers League of Ireland players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Limerick F.C. managers Limerick F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Notts County F.C. managers People from Dudley Premier League managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League managers The Football League players Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93) players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Local government in London Honourable Artillery Company Police forces of London 1839 establishments in England Organizations established in 1839