 FIFA Association football governing bodies International sports federations IOC-recognised international federations International sports bodies based in Switzerland Organisations based in Zürich Sports organisations established in 1904 Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Switzerland Countries in Europe Central Europe Western Europe Federal republics French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Italian-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom 1955 births 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players AS Nancy players AS Saint-Étienne players Association football midfielders Dual internationalists (football) English Football Hall of Fame inductees European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Italy FIFA 100 Footballers at the 1976 Summer Olympics France international footballers France national football team managers France under-21 international footballers French expatriate footballers French footballers French football managers French people of Italian descent French sports executives and administrators Juventus F.C. players Kuwait international footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Living people Officiers of the Légion d'honneur Officiers of the Ordre national du Mérite Olympic footballers of France Olympic cauldron lighters People from Meurthe-et-Moselle People of Piedmontese descent Presidents of UEFA Recipients of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin Serie A players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA Euro 1984 players UEFA Euro 1992 managers World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners Sports governing bodies Association football video games EA Sports games Esports games FIFA (video game series) Video games with isometric graphics FIFA Video game franchises introduced in 1993 Women's association football Criminal law Prosecution BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom Zürich Cantonal capitals of Switzerland Municipalities of the canton of Zürich Cities in Switzerland Populated places on Lake Zurich University towns in Switzerland 2nd-century establishments in Europe Populated places established in the 2nd century 1218 establishments in the Holy Roman Empire 1351 disestablishments in the Holy Roman Empire 1351 establishments in the Old Swiss Confederacy 1440 disestablishments in the Old Swiss Confederacy 1450 establishments in the Old Swiss Confederacy Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena 1947 births Alumni of the University of York BBC executives English male journalists Living people Chancellors of the University of York Brentford F.C. directors and chairmen Manchester United F.C. directors and chairmen Labour Party (UK) people People from Hayes, Hillingdon International Emmy Directorate Award Sportspeople from Yorkshire Russia national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Russia 1992 establishments in Russia Qatar Arabian Peninsula Arabic-speaking countries and territories Emirates Islamic states Member states of OPEC Member states of the Arab League Member states of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the United Nations Middle Eastern countries Muslim-majority countries Peninsulas of Asia States and territories established in 1971 Western Asia Western Asian countries FIFA 2015 in association football 2015 in Switzerland 2015 scandals 2018 FIFA World Cup 2022 FIFA World Cup 21st-century criminals Association football controversies Corporate scandals Corruption in Switzerland FIFA World Cup controversies Scandals in Switzerland North American national association football teams United States men's national soccer team United States Soccer Federation Crimes Organized crime Organized crime activity Organized crime terminology Racketeering Mail and wire fraud United States federal public corruption crime Money laundering Commercial crimes Financial regulation Organized crime activity Tax evasion Government occupations Local government Legal professions Prosecution Criminal law Prosecutors Law enforcement 1960 births Living people French football chairmen and investors FIFA officials Bribery South Africa national soccer team 2010 FIFA World Cup 2010 in association football 2009–10 in South African soccer FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by South Africa Fox Broadcasting Company American television networks Fox Entertainment Group 21st Century Fox subsidiaries Companies based in Los Angeles, California Entertainment companies based in California Metromedia Television channels and stations established in 1986 1986 establishments in California FIFA Congresses FIFA International conferences Mexico City Mexico City metropolitan area Cities in Mexico Populated places in Mexico Capitals in North America Capital districts and territories Central Mexico South-Central Mexico Subdivisions of Mexico Populated places established in 1521 1521 establishments in New Spain 1520s establishments in Mexico 1521 in Mexico Articles containing video clips Elections 1975 births Living people Tuqan family House of Hashim Jordanian princes Graduates of the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst Princeton University alumni, 1990-1999 Jordanian generals Jordanian people of Palestinian descent FIFA officials Recipients of the Order of al-Hussein bin Ali Recipients of the Supreme Order of the Renaissance Grand Cordons of the Order of the Star of Jordan Knights Commander of the Royal Victorian Order Commanders Grand Cross of the Order of the Polar Star Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Recipients of the Order of the Rising Sun Grand Crosses of the Royal Norwegian Order of Merit Grand Crosses of the Order of the Dannebrog Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries 1967 births Living people People from Var (department) Aston Villa F.C. players Everton F.C. players Association football wingers France international footballers Expatriate footballers in England French footballers French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England French people of Italian descent Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Newcastle United F.C. players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Premier League players RCF Paris players Sporting Toulon Var players Stade Brestois 29 players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players 1851 establishments in New York Companies based in Manhattan Daily newspapers published in the United States Investigative news sources National newspapers published in the United States Newspapers published in New York City Peabody Award winners Publications established in 1851 Pulitzer Prize-winning newspapers The New York Times Websites utilizing paywalls The Troubles (Northern Ireland) The Troubles (Northern Ireland) by locality 1960s in Irish politics 1970s in Irish politics 1980s in Irish politics 1990s in Irish politics Dirty wars Guerrilla wars History of Belfast History of Northern Ireland Internments Politics of Northern Ireland Wars involving Ireland Wars involving the United Kingdom Articles containing video clips European national association football teams National sports teams of Portugal Portugal national football team 1972 births Living people Portuguese footballers Association football wingers Portugal international footballers FC Barcelona players Real Madrid C.F. players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Primeira Liga players La Liga players Serie A players Inter Milan players Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy Portuguese expatriates in Italy European Footballer of the Year winners FIFA World Player of the Year winners FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Portuguese expatriate footballers World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners Golden Globes (Portugal) winners Officers of the Order of Prince Henry A1 Grand Prix team owners People from Lisbon Democracy Elections 1869 introductions American football Ball games Football codes Sports originating in the United States Gridiron football 2018 FIFA World Cup 2018 in association football 2018 in Russian sport FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by Russia Scheduled association football competitions 1963 births American economists British economists British emigrants to the United States Duke University faculty Living people Alumni of the University of Manchester Alumni of the University of Oxford Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni Place of birth missing (living people) MIT Sloan School of Management faculty 2018 FIFA World Cup bids England at the FIFA World Cup Philosophy of history Ontology Philosophy of science Political philosophy Concepts in epistemology Concepts in ethics Truth Concepts in metaphysics Reality Virtue Articles containing video clips 1952 births Living people House of Thani Graduates of the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst Emirs of Qatar Government ministers of Qatar Muslim monarchs People from Doha Leaders who took power by coup Prime Ministers of Qatar Qatari Muslims Monarchs who abdicated Collars of the Order of Isabella the Catholic Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath Grand Cordons of the National Order of the Cedar Grand Cordons of the Order of Merit (Lebanon) Grand Cordons of the Order of the Liberator Grand Cordons of the Order of the Nile Grand Croix of the Légion d'honneur Grand Crosses of the National Order of the Lion Grand Crosses with Silver Breast Star of the Order of Merit of Duarte, Sánchez and Mella Grand Order of King Tomislav recipients Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Recipients of the Order of Skanderbeg (1990–) Recipients of the National Order of Merit (Malta) Recipients of the Nishan-e-Pakistan Recipients of the Order of Abdulaziz al Saud Recipients of the Order of al-Hussein bin Ali Recipients of the Order of Francisco de Miranda Recipients of the Order of Prince Henry Recipients of the Order of José Marti Recipients of the Order of Muhammad Special Classes of the Order of Oman Qatari billionaires Football in Qatar 1960 establishments in Qatar Asian Football Confederation member associations Sports governing bodies in Qatar Sports organisations established in 1960 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 2022 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup tournaments 2022 in association football 2022 in Qatar International association football competitions hosted by Qatar Scheduled association football competitions 2022 in Asian football Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England 1989 births Living people People from Stanmore English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Southampton F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players English children's writers Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Reading F.C. Association football clubs established in 1871 Sport in Reading, Berkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs 1871 establishments in England Football clubs in Berkshire Terminology used in multiple sports 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Oxford English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople English footballers Jamaican footballers Jamaica international footballers Association football wingers Oxford City F.C. players Slough Town F.C. players Bromley F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Reading F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Southern Football League players Isthmian League players 2015 Copa América players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Ball games Summer Olympic sports Racquet sports Sports originating in England Tennis  Football venues in England Sports venues in Reading, Berkshire Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Reading F.C. London Irish Sports venues completed in 1998 Football League venues Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology 1986 births Living people People from Chambéry French footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers French Roman Catholics Association football forwards Grenoble Foot 38 players FC Istres players Tours FC players Montpellier HSC players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England 1991 births Living people French people of Senegalese descent People from Laval, Mayenne French footballers French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players FC Lorient players SC Freiburg players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany French expatriates in England French expatriates in Germany The Football League players 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from Moscow Russian footballers Russia international footballers Russian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Russian expatriates in Germany Russian expatriates in England FC Spartak Moscow players FC Khimki players FC Shinnik Yaroslavl players FC Baltika Kaliningrad players FC Tom Tomsk players FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players VfB Stuttgart players Fulham F.C. players Reading F.C. players FC Dynamo Moscow players Russian Football Premier League players Bundesliga players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1949 births Living people Sportspeople from Strasbourg FC Mulhouse players Association football sweepers RC Strasbourg players ASPV Strasbourg players Ligue 1 players French footballers French football managers French Roman Catholics AS Nancy managers AS Monaco FC managers Ligue 1 managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Arsenal F.C. managers Honorary Officers of the Order of the British Empire Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Nagoya Grampus managers Expatriate football managers in Japan English Football Hall of Fame inductees University of Strasbourg alumni UEFA Pro Licence holders French expatriate football managers French expatriates in Japan French expatriates in England London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports 1961 births Living people People from Slough People educated at Herschel Grammar School English footballers England youth international footballers English expatriate footballers English people of Irish descent Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Fulham F.C. players IFK Norrköping players Oxford United F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Djurgårdens IF Fotboll players Cardiff City F.C. players Exeter City F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players South China AA footballers Slough Town F.C. players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong English football managers Slough Town F.C. managers Woking F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers National League (English football) managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Reading F.C. non-playing staff 1989 births Living people People from Acton, London Sportspeople from London English footballers England youth international footballers Welsh footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers English people of Welsh descent Black British sportspeople Association football wingers Arsenal F.C. players Reading F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 1992 births Living people People from Harlow English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Finnish footballers Finland youth international footballers Finland under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Charlton Athletic F.C. players Welling United F.C. players Eastbourne Borough F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players English people of Finnish descent Sports terminology 1984 births Living people French footballers French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers French people of Moroccan descent French Muslims Moroccan footballers Moroccan expatriate footballers Morocco international footballers Association football forwards FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Arsenal F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 1978 births People from Park Royal Living people English people of Grenadian descent Association football forwards Grenadian footballers Grenada international footballers Hayes F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Members of the Order of the British Empire Sportspeople from London 1985 births Living people French footballers French people of Polish descent French-Polish footballers Association football defenders EA Guingamp players FC Lorient players Tours FC players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Arsenal F.C. players French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England Premier League players People from Tulle France international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1982 births Living people People from Enfield Town English footballers Antigua and Barbuda footballers Antigua and Barbuda international footballers Association football midfielders Wimbledon F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Antigua and Barbuda descent Sportspeople from London Reading F.C. players Black British sportspeople 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from County Waterford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Association football forwards Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Waterford United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players The Football League players 1987 births Living people People from Abidjan Swiss footballers Switzerland youth international footballers Switzerland under-21 international footballers Switzerland international footballers Swiss expatriate footballers Association football defenders Association football utility players Étoile Carouge FC players Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Hannover 96 players Hamburger SV players Premier League players Bundesliga players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Ivorian emigrants to Switzerland Swiss expatriates in the United Kingdom Swiss expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany 1966 births 1998 FIFA World Cup players Arsenal F.C. players Association football central defenders England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English Football Hall of Fame inductees English football managers English footballers Gabala FC managers Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Romford Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1988 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. managers English expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Azerbaijan Arsenal F.C. non-playing staff Arsenal F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players British association football commentators England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English footballers English people of Irish descent Everton F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Sportspeople from Oxford Premier League players Reading F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 2000 players Wembley F.C. players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 1966 births Living people 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Accra Ghanaian footballers English footballers England youth international footballers Ghana international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players FC Ufa players Ghanaian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Russia Russian Football Premier League players English people of Ghanaian descent Akan people 1995 births Living people German people of Ivorian descent German footballers German expatriate footballers Sportspeople from Stuttgart Arsenal F.C. players Association football wingers Expatriate footballers in England Germany youth international footballers Premier League players German expatriates in England Germany under-21 international footballers West Bromwich Albion F.C. players 1981 births Living people Sportspeople from Saint Petersburg Russian footballers Russia international footballers Russian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Russian expatriates in England Association football midfielders FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players Arsenal F.C. players FC Kuban Krasnodar players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Russia under-21 international footballers 1992 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Association football goalkeepers Arsenal F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England The Football League players Premier League players Argentine expatriates in England People from Mar del Plata Rotherham United F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Newport, Wales Welsh footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Cardiff City F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Reading F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 1981 births Living people People from Romford Association football fullbacks English footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Leyton Orient F.C. players Reading F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Fulham F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players FC Pune City players Colchester United F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Indian Super League players Expatriate footballers in India 1984 births Living people Footballers from Liverpool English footballers Association football wingers Liverpool F.C. players Rhyl F.C. players Bangor City F.C. players Accrington Stanley F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players England semi-pro international footballers The Football League players National League (English football) players Players in the Welsh Premier League Place of birth missing (living people) Bala Town F.C. players Chesterfield F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Plymouth English footballers English people of Irish descent Association football defenders Plymouth Argyle F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 1978 births People from Inverurie Living people Association football midfielders Scottish footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Rangers F.C. players Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. players Forfar Athletic F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Vancouver Whitecaps FC players Sheffield United F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in Canada Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players The Football League players Major League Soccer players Designated Players (MLS) Scottish Professional Football League players Association football terminology Australian rules football terminology Rugby league terminology Rugby union terminology 1976 births Living people People from Owerri Nigerian footballers Association football forwards AFC Ajax players Inter Milan players Arsenal F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Eredivisie players Serie A players Iwuanyanwu Nationale players Premier League players The Football League players Nigeria international footballers 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2000 African Cup of Nations players 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players Olympic footballers of Nigeria Olympic gold medalists for Nigeria African Footballer of the Year winners Nigerian expatriate footballers Nigerian expatriates in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Nigerian expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Italy Nigerian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Igbo sportspeople Nigerian Christians 2010 FIFA World Cup players UNICEF people Olympic medalists in football Officers of the Order of the Niger 1985 births Living people People from Nowra Australian people of Italian descent Australian soccer players Australia international soccer players Association football goalkeepers Association football goalkeepers who have scored New South Wales Institute of Sport alumni Australian Institute of Sport soccer players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Maidenhead United F.C. players Northwood F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Southend United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Southern Football League players Olympic soccer players of Australia Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2010 FIFA World Cup players Australian expatriate soccer players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England Australian expatriates in Italy Australian expatriates in England Association football terminology 1981 births Living people People from Edmonton, London Sportspeople from London Black English sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent English footballers Jamaican footballers Jamaica international footballers Association football midfielders Wimbledon F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Watford F.C. players Reading F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2014 Caribbean Cup players 2015 Copa América players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Seoul Subway Line 4 Seoul Metropolitan Subway lines Railway lines opened in 1985  Publications established in 1855 National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Telegraph Media Group 1855 establishments in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London