 Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League 1961 births Living people People from Wimbledon, London English footballers Association football midfielders The Football League players Whyteleafe F.C. players Corinthian-Casuals F.C. players Dulwich Hamlet F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Barnet F.C. players English football managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Reading F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. managers Charlton Athletic F.C. managers Southampton F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers UEFA Pro Licence holders British association football commentators Epsom & Ewell F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. managers Strikes (martial arts) Articles containing video clips Hull City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in England Sport in Kingston upon Hull Football clubs in the East Riding of Yorkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1904 establishments in England 1989 births Living people People from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Cork City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Blackrock hurlers St. Michael's Gaelic footballers College Corinthians A.F.C. players Football clubs in the Democratic Republic of the Congo Football clubs in Lubumbashi Association football clubs established in 1939 TP Mazembe 1939 establishments in the Belgian Congo Sports clubs in DR Congo Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata Inter Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1908 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1908 establishments in Italy Unrelegated association football clubs China Central Asian countries Chinese-speaking countries and territories Communist states East Asian countries G20 nations Member states of the United Nations Republics One-party states States and territories established in 1949 BRICS nations E7 nations Lubumbashi Populated places in Katanga Province Populated places established in 1910 Capitals of former nations FIFA Club World Cup FIFA club competitions World championships Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports Democratic Republic of the Congo Countries in Africa Bantu countries and territories French-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the African Union Least developed countries Republics Swahili-speaking countries and territories Member states of the United Nations Central African countries States and territories established in 1997 Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Democratic Republic of the Congo national football team African national association football teams National sports teams of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 East Asian countries G20 nations G8 nations G7 nations Island countries Japan Liberal democracies Member states of the United Nations Northeast Asian countries States and territories established in the 7th century BC 660 BC Abu Dhabi Capitals in Asia Metropolitan areas of the United Arab Emirates Populated coastal places in the United Arab Emirates Populated places in Abu Dhabi (emirate) Port cities in the Arabian Peninsula  Katanga Province Mobile phones 1973 introductions Embedded systems Mobile telecommunications Mobile telecommunication services New media Telephony Videotelephony Radio technology Chinese diaspora Agence France-Presse 1835 establishments in France Companies established in 1835 Media companies of France News agencies based in France Companies based in Paris Media in Paris News agencies Sport Club Internacional Football clubs in Brazil Football clubs in Rio Grande do Sul Football clubs in Porto Alegre Association football clubs established in 1909 Unrelegated association football clubs Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams Tournament systems 1983 births Living people People from Strumica Macedonian footballers Macedonian expatriate footballers Macedonia international footballers Inter Milan players Spezia Calcio players A.C. Ancona players S.S. Lazio players S.S.C. Napoli players Genoa C.F.C. players Serie A players Macedonian expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Italy Association football forwards FK Belasica players Galatasaray S.K. footballers Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in Turkey Macedonian expatriates in Turkey 1981 births Living people Cameroonian footballers Association football forwards Cameroon international footballers 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2001 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics 2000 African Cup of Nations players 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players Cameroonian expatriate footballers Cameroonian expatriates in Spain Cameroonian expatriates in Italy Cameroonian expatriates in Russia Cameroonian expatriates in the United Kingdom Cameroonian expatriates in Turkey Kadji Sports Academy players La Liga players FC Barcelona players RCD Espanyol footballers RCD Mallorca players Real Madrid C.F. players CD Leganés players Olympic footballers of Cameroon Olympic gold medalists for Cameroon African Footballer of the Year winners People from Douala Inter Milan players Serie A players FC Anzhi Makhachkala players Russian Football Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Everton F.C. players U.C. Sampdoria players Antalyaspor footballers Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Naturalised citizens of Spain FIFA Century Club Pichichi Trophy winners Olympic medalists in football Süper Lig players 1964 births Living people Governors of Katanga Province Democratic Republic of the Congo people of Greek-Jewish descent Democratic Republic of the Congo politicians Katanga Province FIFA Association football governing bodies International sports federations IOC-recognised international federations International sports bodies based in Switzerland Organisations based in Zürich Sports organisations established in 1904