 1996 births Living people Australian male swimmers Male freestyle swimmers Sportspeople from Melbourne Commonwealth Games competitors for Australia Commonwealth Games gold medallists for Australia Commonwealth Games silver medallists for Australia Swimmers at the 2014 Commonwealth Games World Aquatics Championships medalists in swimming China Central Asian countries Chinese-speaking countries and territories Communist states East Asian countries G20 nations Member states of the United Nations Republics One-party states States and territories established in 1949 BRICS nations E7 nations Olympic Games Athletic culture based on Greek antiquity Recurring sporting events established in 1896 Multi-sport events Time Concepts in metaphysics Concepts in physics Physical quantities SI base quantities Spacetime Collaborative projects Social media Mass media Revolutionary tactics 2016 Summer Olympics 2016 in Brazilian sport 2016 in multi-sport events Future-Class Brazil articles Scheduled multi-sport events International sports competitions hosted by Rio de Janeiro (city) Olympic Games in Brazil Summer Olympic Games 21st century in Rio de Janeiro International sports competitions hosted by Brazil Multi-sport events in Brazil Internet trolling Culture jamming Cyberbullying Human behavior Internet forum terminology Internet slang Internet terminology 1991 births Living people Chinese male swimmers Male freestyle swimmers Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for China Olympic silver medalists for China Olympic bronze medalists for China Olympic medalists in swimming Olympic swimmers of China Asian Games medalists in swimming Swimmers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Swimmers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Swimmers at the 2010 Asian Games Swimmers at the 2014 Asian Games Swimmers from Zhejiang World Aquatics Championships medalists in swimming Sportspeople from Hangzhou Doping cases in swimming Chinese sportspeople in doping cases World record holders in swimming 2004 in Ohio 2004 in professional wrestling Professional wrestling in Ohio Sports in Columbus, Ohio WWE Bad Blood Asian cuisine Chinese cuisine Historical foods Swimming Human power Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP Sports venues completed in 1991 2004 Summer Olympic venues Olympic diving venues Olympic swimming venues Olympic synchronized swimming venues Olympic water polo venues Athens Olympic Sports Complex Panathinaikos A.O. 1991 establishments in Greece Hashtags Collective intelligence Computer jargon Information retrieval techniques Knowledge representation Metadata Reference Web 2.0 Social media 2010s slang Latin words and phrases 2010 software Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Facebook acquisitions Internet properties established in 2010 IOS software Photo software Photo sharing Social networking services Facebook applications Windows Phone software Video software BlackBerry software Mobile software Symbian software WatchOS software Spamming Cybercrime E-commerce Ethically disputed business practices History of computing Internet ethics Internet terminology Marketing Japanese writing system terms Japanese writing system Internet slang Online chat Articles with unsupported PUA characters Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin Paris Saint-Germain F.C. Association football clubs established in 1970 Football clubs in France G-14 clubs 16th arrondissement of Paris Ligue 1 clubs Football clubs in Paris 1970 establishments in France Unrelegated association football clubs Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Association football terminology Valencia CF La Liga clubs Football clubs in Valencia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Association football clubs established in 1919 1919 establishments in Spain Sports terminology Tournament systems 1987 births Living people Association football midfielders Bayer 04 Leverkusen players FC Bayern Munich footballers Chilean expatriate footballers Chilean expatriates in Germany Chilean footballers Chile international footballers Campeonato Nacional (Chile) players Colo-Colo players Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Italy Bundesliga players Juventus F.C. players Serie A players Sportspeople from Santiago 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Copa América-winning players 1959 births 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players A.S. Roma players A.C. Milan players A.C. Milan managers A.C. Reggiana 1919 managers Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in France Expatriate football managers in Spain Juventus F.C. managers Living people Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in England Italian expatriates in France Italian expatriates in Spain Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers La Liga managers Ligue 1 managers People from the Province of Reggio Emilia Paris Saint-Germain F.C. managers Parma F.C. managers Parma F.C. players Premier League managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Recipients of the Order of the Star of Italian Solidarity Serie A managers Serie A players UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 1988 players UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England Association football terminology Tournament systems Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italian Roman Catholics Parma F.C. players Juventus F.C. players FIFA 100 Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players Association football goalkeepers Serie A players Serie B players FIFA World Cup-winning players People from Carrara 1978 births Living people FIFA Century Club 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1983 births Living people People from Castellammare di Stabia Sportspeople from Campania Italian footballers Italy international footballers Torino F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players Udinese Calcio players Ascoli Calcio 1898 players U.C. Sampdoria players S.S.C. Napoli players A.S.D. Chieti players Association football forwards Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Serie A players Serie B players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Juventus F.C. players 1988 births Living people People from Harlow People from Loughton Sportspeople from Essex English footballers Association football forwards Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Grays Athletic F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Hereford United F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players Scottish league football top scorers Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods 1985 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Association football forwards Estudiantes de Buenos Aires footballers Genoa C.F.C. players San Lorenzo footballers S.S.C. Napoli players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Hebei China Fortune F.C. players People from Rosario Department Argentina international footballers Serie A players Ligue 1 players Chinese Super League players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in China 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate footballers Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in France Argentine Roman Catholics Argentine people of Italian descent 1987 births Living people People from Nuoro Sportspeople from Sardinia Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian footballers Italian expatriate footballers Italian expatriate sportspeople in France F.B.C. Unione Venezia players U.S. Città di Palermo players U.S. Cremonese players A.C. Ancona players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Association football goalkeepers Serie A players Serie B players Ligue 1 players Expatriate footballers in France UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2014–15 UEFA Champions League 2014–15 in UEFA football UEFA Champions League seasons 1984 births Living people Italian footballers Italy international footballers A.C. Milan players A.C. Prato players A.C. Lumezzane players A.C. Rimini 1912 players Cagliari Calcio players Juventus F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players Genoa C.F.C. players S.S. Lazio players Serie A players Serie B players Association football forwards People from the Province of Lodi Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1979 births Association football midfielders Brescia Calcio players Inter Milan players Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Living people A.C. Milan players Juventus F.C. players New York City FC players Reggina Calcio players Olympic footballers of Italy Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Olympic medalists in football People from the Province of Brescia Serie A players Serie B players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Officers of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Italian expatriates in the United States Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology Baseball terminology Tournament systems Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips David Beckham 1975 births 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.C. Milan players Association football midfielders BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners Brimsdown Rovers F.C. players British expatriate sportspeople in the United States British people of Jewish descent Designated Players (MLS) England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English bloggers English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Italy English expatriates in Spain English expatriates in the United States English Football Hall of Fame inductees English footballers English male models English people of Jewish descent Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club LA Galaxy players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Living people Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players Manchester United F.C. players Officers of the Order of the British Empire Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players People from Leytonstone Premier League players Preston North End F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Serie A players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players Victoria Beckham 1985 births Living people Sportspeople from Valencia Spanish footballers Valencian footballers Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players CA Osasuna players Getafe CF footballers Valencia CF players Villarreal CF players Premier League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England UEFA Cup seasons 1987–88 in European football Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom FA Cup Finals 1949–50 in English football Arsenal F.C. matches Liverpool F.C. matches Turin Roman colonies Roman towns and cities in Italy Cities and towns in Piedmont Province of Turin Former national capitals Capitals of former nations Former capitals of Italy 1983 births Living people People from Mansfield English footballers Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Association football wingers Stoke City F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Celtic F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players English people of Scottish descent Scottish Professional Football League players Scottish league football top scorers 2007–08 UEFA Cup UEFA Cup seasons 2007–08 in European football Football leagues in Italy Serie B Professional sports leagues in Italy Second level football leagues in Europe 1929 establishments in Italy Sports leagues established in 1929 2005–06 in Italian football 2006–07 in Italian football History of football in Italy Association football controversies 2006 scandals Europe Continents UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying 2014–15 in UEFA football 2015–16 in UEFA football UEFA European Championship qualifying UEFA Euro 2016 1984 births Living people People from the canton of Lucerne Swiss footballers FC Luzern players Grasshopper Club Zürich players Lille OSC players S.S. Lazio players Juventus F.C. players Switzerland international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players Swiss Super League players Ligue 1 players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in France Swiss expatriate footballers Swiss expatriates in Italy 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1986 births Living people Empoli F.C. players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Juventus F.C. players Olympic footballers of Italy Serie A players Serie B players Sportspeople from Turin 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1984 births A.S. Livorno Calcio players ACF Fiorentina players Association football fullbacks Association football central defenders Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Juventus F.C. players Living people Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Olympic footballers of Italy People from Pisa Serie A players Serie B players University of Turin alumni Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Olympic medalists in football 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1983 births Living people Montenegrin footballers Montenegrin expatriate footballers Montenegro international footballers Serbia and Montenegro international footballers People from Nikšić U.S. Lecce players A.S. Roma players Juventus F.C. players FK Sutjeska Nikšić players Al Jazira Club players Association football forwards Serie A players Serie B players UAE Arabian Gulf League players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in the United Arab Emirates Serbia and Montenegro expatriate footballers Serbia and Montenegro expatriates in Italy Montenegrin expatriates in Italy Serbs of Montenegro Drobnjaci 1987 births Living people Welsh footballers Association football midfielders Cardiff City F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players Footballers from Cardiff The Football League players Premier League players Wales international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales youth international footballers 1981 births Living people People from Fiesole Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2006 FIFA World Cup players Serie A players A.C. Chievo Verona players U.S. Città di Palermo players FIFA World Cup-winning players A.C. Pistoiese players Ascoli Calcio 1898 players VfL Wolfsburg players Juventus F.C. players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Italian expatriate footballers Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in Germany Italian expatriate sportspeople in Germany Serie B players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1988 births Living people People from Hexham English footballers Association football goalkeepers Wallsend Boys Club players Newcastle United F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Southampton F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players People educated at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle Scottish Professional Football League players England international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1988 births Living people People from Kaduna Nigerian footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Nigeria Olympic silver medalists for Nigeria Kaduna United players Bayelsa United F.C. players F.C. Ashdod players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Israeli Premier League players Olympic medalists in football Nigerian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Israel Expatriate footballers in Scotland 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Scottish Professional Football League players Nigerian expatriates in Israel Nigerian expatriates in Scotland Africa Cup of Nations-winning players 1986 births Aberdeen F.C. players Association football defenders Celtic F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players The Football League players Living people People educated at St Ninian's High School, Kirkintilloch Sportspeople from Kirkintilloch Scotland international footballers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players Scotland under-21 international footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow Southend United F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Association football terminology Football positions 1987 births Living people French footballers French people of Angolan descent French people of Republic of the Congo descent France under-21 international footballers France international footballers Association football midfielders Troyes AC players AS Saint-Étienne players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Ligue 1 players INF Clairefontaine players Ligue 2 players France youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps 1987 births Living people French footballers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers French people of Portuguese descent RC Strasbourg players FC Lorient players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Sevilla FC players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in Spain Association football forwards People from Senlis French expatriates in Spain Argentina Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1816 1987 births Living people People from Torrent, Valencia Spanish footballers Valencian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Valencia CF Mestalla footballers Valencia CF players Recreativo de Huelva players Getafe CF footballers A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy Team sports 2005–06 UEFA Cup 2005–06 in European football UEFA Cup seasons Swedish footballers Footballers from Skåne County Association football forwards Malmö FF players AFC Ajax players Juventus F.C. players Inter Milan players FC Barcelona players A.C. Milan players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Allsvenskan players Eredivisie players Serie A players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Sweden international footballers Sweden youth international footballers Sweden under-21 international footballers 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Swedish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Italy Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Spain Swedish expatriate sportspeople in France Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in France Swedish people of Croatian descent Swedish people of Bosniak descent Swedish people of Bosnia and Herzegovina descent Swedish Roman Catholics Sportspeople from Malmö Swedish taekwondo practitioners 1981 births Living people 1985 births Living people People from Bastia French people of Moroccan descent French footballers Association football central defenders Ligue 1 players Lille OSC players La Liga players Valencia CF players A.C. Milan players Sevilla FC players France international footballers French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 1992 births Living people People from Pescara Italian footballers Italian expatriate footballers Delfino Pescara 1936 players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Serie B players Ligue 1 players Expatriate footballers in France Italian expatriates in France Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1982 births Living people People from São Bernardo do Campo Brazilian people of Italian descent People of Venetian descent Brazilian emigrants to Italy Citizens of Italy through descent Brazilian footballers Italian footballers Association football midfielders Clube Atlético Juventus players La Liga players Segunda División B players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players Atlético Madrid footballers Serie A players Genoa C.F.C. players Inter Milan players Ligue 1 players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Brazil youth international footballers Brazil international footballers Italy international footballers Dual internationalists (football) 2003 CONCACAF Gold Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Brazilian expatriate footballers Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in France Sports injuries 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams 1987 births Living people Association football midfielders Brazilian footballers Brazil youth international footballers Brazil international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Brazilian expatriates in the United Kingdom Grêmio Foot-Ball Porto Alegrense players Liverpool F.C. players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Premier League players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil Brazilian people of Italian descent Naturalised citizens of Italy 2011 Copa América players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Near-Earth object tracking Discoveries by institution Jet Propulsion Laboratory Palomar Observatory 2010 films 2010s comedy films American films American comedy films English-language films Films directed by Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini Cross-dressing in film Films based on American novels Films set in New York City Films shot in New York City American independent films Film scores by Klaus Badelt French independent films French films 1963 films 1960s drama films British films Elstree Studios films English-language films British black-and-white films 20th Century Fox films Films directed by Guy Hamilton Films based on American novels Film scores by John Barry (composer) Military courtroom films British drama films Valencia Comarques of the Valencian Community Former national capitals Mediterranean port cities and towns in Spain Municipalities in the Province of Valencia Populated coastal places in Spain Populated places established in the 2nd century BC Roman sites in Spain 138 BC 130s BC establishments Populated places in the Province of Valencia Route of the Borgias University towns in Spain Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 1990 births French footballers French people of Senegalese descent Sportspeople from Paris Living people Ligue 1 players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players France under-21 international footballers France international footballers Association football central defenders France youth international footballers Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players