 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports 1980 births Living people People from Stepney English footballers Association football fullbacks 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players A.S. Roma players LA Galaxy players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriates in Italy Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English people of Barbadian descent Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club Germany national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries National sports teams of Germany Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italian Roman Catholics Parma F.C. players Juventus F.C. players FIFA 100 Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players Association football goalkeepers Serie A players Serie B players FIFA World Cup-winning players People from Carrara 1978 births Living people FIFA Century Club 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players  1983 births Living people Italian footballers Association football forwards Italy international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Italian expatriate footballers Empoli F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players U.C. AlbinoLeffe players A.C. Prato players A.S. Livorno Calcio players West Ham United F.C. players Watford F.C. players Brescia Calcio players Bologna F.C. 1909 players Atalanta B.C. players Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Premier League players Chinese Super League players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in China Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom People from Prato 1957 births Living people People from the Province of Brescia Italian footballers Italian football managers Atalanta B.C. players Juventus F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Lega Pro players Atalanta B.C. managers Hellas Verona F.C. managers Parma F.C. managers A.S. Roma managers ACF Fiorentina managers Serie A managers U.S. Cremonese players Italy national football team managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Shrewsbury English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Heart of Midlothian F.C. Football clubs in Edinburgh Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1874 Scottish Premier League teams 1874 establishments in Scotland Gorgie Scottish Football League teams Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners 1985 births Living people People from Naples Italian footballers A.S. Avellino 1912 players Genoa C.F.C. players U.S. Catanzaro 1929 players F.C. Crotone players A.C.R. Messina players Piacenza Calcio 1919 players Juventus F.C. players U.S. Città di Palermo players A.C. Milan players West Ham United F.C. players Torino F.C. players Parma F.C. players Orlando City SC players Serie A players Serie B players Premier League players Association football midfielders Sportspeople from Naples Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations Perth Glory FC A-League teams Association football clubs established in 1995 National Soccer League (Australia) teams Soccer clubs in Perth, Western Australia 1995 establishments in Australia 1953 films 1950s comedy-drama films 1950s sports films British films British sports films Sports comedy films Association football films English-language films Films directed by Maurice Elvey British comedy-drama films Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Laws of association football Association football terminology 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders English autobiographers English footballers English expatriate footballers England international footballers English Roman Catholics England under-21 international footballers FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. players LA Galaxy players Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Whiston, Merseyside Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Designated Players (MLS) Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands 1985 births Living people People from Caravaggio, Lombardy Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Atalanta B.C. players ACF Fiorentina players A.C. Milan players Serie A players Serie B players Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Association football midfielders Italian people of German descent Italian atheists 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club 1979 births Association football midfielders Brescia Calcio players Inter Milan players Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Living people A.C. Milan players Juventus F.C. players New York City FC players Reggina Calcio players Olympic footballers of Italy Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Olympic medalists in football People from the Province of Brescia Serie A players Serie B players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Officers of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Italian expatriates in the United States 1985 births Living people People from Stevenage English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Association football utility players Watford F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Germany Central Europe Countries in Europe Federal republics G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1871 Western Europe Articles containing video clips Spanish golfers European Tour golfers PGA Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for Europe Laureus World Sports Awards winners People from Plana Alta 1980 births Living people American male golfers Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for the United States Golfers from Florida Golfers from Georgia (U.S. state) Sportspeople from Winter Park, Florida People from Glynn County, Georgia 1978 births Living people Golf terminology Men's major golf championships Male golfers Masters Tournament Golf clubs and courses designed by Alister MacKenzie Golf clubs and courses in Georgia (U.S. state) Sports venues in Augusta, Georgia 1933 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) Men's organizations Organizations established in 1933 American male golfers Texas Longhorns men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Winners of men's major golf championships Ryder Cup competitors for the United States Golfers from Texas American Roman Catholics Sportspeople from Dallas, Texas 1993 births Living people English golfers European Tour golfers PGA Tour golfers Winners of men's major golf championships Ryder Cup competitors for Europe English people of South African descent English expatriates in the United States Sportspeople from Johannesburg People from Fleet, Hampshire Sportspeople from London Sportspeople from Orlando, Florida 1980 births Living people Spanish golfers Cantabrian golfers European Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for Europe Winners of men's major golf championships World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Golf course architects People from Trasmiera Cancer deaths in Spain Deaths from brain tumor 1957 births 2011 deaths Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Golf Precision sports Ball and bat games Sports originating in Scotland Leisure activities Summer Olympic sports Scottish games Golf equipment Golf terminology Golf terminology Perfect scores in sports Competition Terminology used in multiple sports 2008 establishments in California 21st-century musicians Culture of Pasadena, California Heavy metal musical groups from California Musical groups established in 2008 Musical quintets Organizations based in Pasadena, California Droughts Basic meteorological concepts and phenomena Civil defense Climatology Hydrology Natural disasters Water and the environment Weather hazards Articles containing video clips Skin conditions resulting from physical factors 1984 songs 1984 singles 1990 singles 2002 singles EMI Records singles Music videos directed by Tim Pope Number-one singles in Switzerland Sandra (singer) songs Songs written by Mark Hollis (musician) Talk Talk songs 1946 films American films English-language films American epic films Film scores by Dimitri Tiomkin Films based on American novels Films directed by King Vidor Films directed by William Dieterle Films directed by Otto Brower Films directed by Sidney Franklin Films directed by William Cameron Menzies Selznick International Pictures films Films set in the 1860s Films set in the 1880s Films about capital punishment Films set in Texas 1940s Western (genre) films American Western (genre) films Films about interracial romance Films produced by David O. Selznick Georgia (U.S. state) Former British colonies Southern United States States and territories established in 1788 States of the Confederate States of America States of the United States States of the East Coast of the United States The Open Championship Golf tournaments in England Golf tournaments in Northern Ireland Golf tournaments in Scotland July sporting events 1860 establishments in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1860 National championships in the United Kingdom Swedish male golfers European Tour golfers PGA Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for Europe Swedish expatriates in the United Arab Emirates Sportspeople from Gothenburg People from Dubai Sportspeople from Orlando, Florida 1976 births Living people American male golfers Arizona State Sun Devils men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Winners of men's major golf championships Ryder Cup competitors for the United States World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Golfers from Arizona Sportspeople from San Diego, California American people of Swedish descent American people of Italian descent 1970 births Living people Horse racing Equestrian sports Sports betting Stroke Causes of death RTT South African golfers Sunshine Tour golfers European Tour golfers PGA Tour golfers Winners of men's major golf championships Afrikaner people Sportspeople from Johannesburg People from Vereeniging 1984 births Living people Belgian golfers Illinois Fighting Illini men's golfers European Tour golfers Sportspeople from Antwerp 1992 births Living people Belgium 1831 establishments in Belgium Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Federal monarchies French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1830 Western Europe American male golfers Stanford Cardinal men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Winners of men's major golf championships World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Golfers from Rhode Island Golfers from California James E. Sullivan Award recipients People from Newport, Rhode Island Sportspeople from San Francisco, California 1910 births 1968 deaths English-speaking countries and territories History of Ireland Home rule in the United Kingdom Island countries Northern Ireland NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United Kingdom States and territories established in 1921 United Kingdom 2013 films 2010s romantic comedy films American romantic comedy films Film scores by Marcelo Zarvos Films directed by Nicole Holofcener Films set in Los Angeles, California Films shot in Los Angeles, California Fox Searchlight Pictures films The Players Championship Annual sporting events in the United States Recurring sporting events established in 1974 1974 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) Municipalities in the Province of Castellón Mediterranean port cities and towns in Spain Plana Alta Populated places in the Province of Castellón Castellón de la Plana