 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Kinshasa Democratic Republic of the Congo footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Democratic Republic of the Congo emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People associated with the University of Bolton Black British sportspeople Alumni of Staffordshire University Bolton Wanderers F.C. 1877 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1877 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bolton Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Football League Trophy winners Premier League clubs Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Hospital buildings completed in 1855 NHS hospitals in London Bethnal Green American inventions Cardiac electrophysiology Emergency medical procedures Medical devices Cardiac dysrhythmia Medical emergencies Causes of death Heart Cardiac anatomy Articles containing video clips RTT 1959 introductions Cardiac electrophysiology Embedded systems Implants (medicine) Neuroprosthetics Prosthetics Cybernetics Biomedical engineering Medical devices NHS hospital trusts Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1966 births Living people Sportspeople from Glasgow Dundee United F.C. non-playing staff Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Dumbarton F.C. players Clydebank F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. (1878) players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Ross County F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Falkirk F.C. managers St Johnstone F.C. managers Burnley F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Houston Dynamo coaches Premier League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Republic of Ireland football managers Scottish Roman Catholics Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish people of Irish descent Family Privacy Law Human rights Social issues Identity management Digital rights FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Articles containing video clips Intensive care medicine Hospital departments Aging-associated diseases Causes of death Ischemic heart diseases Medical emergencies Articles containing video clips RTT Acute pain Cardiology Living people Year of birth missing (living people) American male journalists American Jews American newspaper editors 1979 births Living people English snooker players People from Colchester People from Chelmsford People from Essex Sportspeople from Essex Lung cancer survivors German Masters Recurring sporting events established in 1995 1995 establishments in Germany 1978 births Living people Hong Kong emigrants to Canada Hong Kong snooker players Place of birth missing (living people) Asian Games medalists in cue sports Cue sports players at the 2010 Asian Games Cue sports players at the 2006 Asian Games Cue sports players at the 2002 Asian Games Cue sports players at the 1998 Asian Games Berlin German state capitals Capitals in Europe City-states Members of the Hanseatic League Populated places established in the 13th century 1237 establishments Essex Non-metropolitan counties NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United Kingdom English royal forests Nucleobases Organofluorides Pyrimidinediones Pyrimidine antagonists Thymidylate synthase inhibitors World Health Organization essential medicines Hong Kong Cities in China Special administrative regions of China Chinese-speaking countries and territories English-speaking countries and territories Former colonies in Asia Former British colonies Independent cities Metropolitan areas of China Pearl River Delta Populated coastal places in Hong Kong Populated places established in 1842 Port cities and towns in China South China South China Sea States and territories established in 1997 Articles containing video clips City-states Droughts Basic meteorological concepts and phenomena Civil defense Climatology Hydrology Natural disasters Water and the environment Weather hazards Articles containing video clips