 Association football terminology Association football records and statistics AFC Asian Cup-winning countries Australia national soccer team Oceanian national association football teams Asian national association football teams Men's national sports teams of Australia Football Federation Australia Association football clubs established in 1922 Soccer in Australia  Scottish Cup Football cup competitions in Scotland National association football cups 1873 establishments in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1873 Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners  Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football terminology 1987 births Living people People from Bury St Edmunds English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football goalkeepers Norwich City F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Morecambe F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Fulham F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Godmanchester Rovers F.C. players Aberdeen Council areas of Scotland Fishing communities in Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Royal burghs Grampian 1997 births Living people People from Douglas, Isle of Man Manx sportspeople Scottish footballers Celtic F.C. players Scottish Professional Football League players Association football fullbacks Scotland youth international footballers Living people 1993 births People from Poole English footballers Association football forwards A.F.C. Bournemouth players Dorchester Town F.C. players Accrington Stanley F.C. players Woking F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Lightning Articles containing video clips Lightning Atmospheric electricity Weather hazards to aircraft Microscale meteorology Severe weather and convection Storm Weather hazards Rain Articles containing video clips Cricket administration Sports organisations established in 1909 International Cricket Council Cricket Organisations based in Dubai Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Bangalore 1537 in India High-technology business districts Metropolitan cities in India Cities and towns in Bangalore Urban district Cricket World Cup International Cricket Council events Quadrennial sporting events Recurring sporting events established in 1975 World championships Bookmakers Gambling terminology Organized crime activity 1818 births 1896 deaths Alumni of Christ's College, Cambridge Members of the New Zealand House of Representatives Members of the Canterbury Provincial Council Superintendents of New Zealand provincial councils Members of the Cabinet of New Zealand British politicians of then-British possessions New Zealand public servants New Zealand trade unionists New Zealand editors New Zealand people of Irish descent New Zealand MPs for Christchurch electorates Burials at Bolton Street Cemetery Members of the Canterbury Association Canterbury Pilgrims People from Bath, Somerset 