 Oldham Athletic A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England Sport in Oldham Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Greater Manchester 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Marseille French footballers Comorian footballers Comoros international footballers French people of Comorian descent CS Sedan Ardennes players Troyes AC players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players The Football League players 1987 births Living people People from Salto, Uruguay Uruguayan footballers Association football forwards 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2011 controversies Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 controversies 2014 FIFA World Cup players Copa América-winning players Club Nacional de Football players FC Groningen players AFC Ajax players Liverpool F.C. players FC Barcelona players Uruguayan Primera División players Eredivisie players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain First Division/Premier League top scorers Olympic footballers of Uruguay Uruguay youth international footballers Uruguay international footballers Uruguayan expatriate footballers Uruguayan expatriates in the Netherlands Uruguayan expatriates in England Uruguayan expatriates in Spain Uruguay under-20 international footballers Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Violence in sports 1991 births Living people English footballers England youth international footballers Association football defenders Manchester City F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Nigerian descent Black English sportspeople 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders English autobiographers English footballers English expatriate footballers England international footballers English Roman Catholics England under-21 international footballers FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. players LA Galaxy players Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Whiston, Merseyside Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Designated Players (MLS) Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1207 establishments Liverpool Cities in North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated coastal places in Merseyside Populated places established in the 13th century Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Port cities and towns in England Towns in Merseyside Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Local government districts of North West England NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams 1972 births Living people People from Livingston, West Lothian Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland international footballers British people of Bulgarian descent Association football forwards Arsenal F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish football managers Oldham Athletic A.F.C. managers Doncaster Rovers F.C. managers The Football League managers Oldham Oldham Borough 865 establishments Populated places established in the 9th century Towns in Greater Manchester 9th-century establishments in England 1994 births Living people Sportspeople from Kingston, Jamaica People from Wembley England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English footballers Association football wingers Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent Jamaican emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People acquitted of assault Living people 1990 births 2011 Copa América players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Copa América-winning players Association football central defenders Club Nacional de Football players Liverpool F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Olympic footballers of Uruguay Uruguayan Primera División players Premier League players Sportspeople from Montevideo Uruguay international footballers Uruguayan expatriate footballers Uruguayan expatriates in England Uruguayan footballers Uruguayan people of Scottish descent 1985 births Living people People from Higher End English footballers England youth international footballers Association football midfielders Derby County F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Liverpool English footballers England youth international footballers Association football midfielders Association football forwards Association football utility players Everton F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players People from Bootle Doping cases in association football English sportspeople in doping cases Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English footballers Association football forwards New Mills A.F.C. players Redditch United F.C. players Droylsden F.C. players Solihull Moors F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Macclesfield Town F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Alumni of the University of Manchester People educated at Pate's Grammar School Sportspeople from Gloucestershire Association football terminology Association football records and statistics  1982 births Living people Association football goalkeepers Australia international soccer players Australian expatriate soccer players Australian people of English descent Australian soccer players Derby County F.C. players Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics League of Ireland players Middlesbrough F.C. players Shelbourne F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players NEC Nijmegen players Olympic soccer players of Australia People educated at John Curtin College of the Arts People from Perth, Western Australia Premier League players The Football League players Eredivisie players 2007 AFC Asian Cup players 2011 AFC Asian Cup players  Defunct rugby league venues in England Buildings and structures in Oldham Oldham Athletic A.F.C. Sports venues in Greater Manchester Football venues in England 1904 establishments in England Sports venues completed in 1904 Football League venues Premier League venues Sport in Oldham  Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons 1989 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players English Christians Black British sportspeople Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Living people 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Bologna Italian footballers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards Bologna F.C. 1909 players Chelsea F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Parma F.C. players A.S. Roma players Liverpool F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Wales UEFA Euro 2012 players Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom 1985 births People from Poole Living people English footballers Association football forwards Cambridge City F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Alumni of Loughborough University 1984 births Living people People from Handlová Slovak footballers Association football defenders FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players Slovakia international footballers Slovak expatriate footballers FK AS Trenčín players Slovak Super Liga players Russian Football Premier League players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Slovak expatriates in Russia Expatriate footballers in Russia Slovak expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England 2010 FIFA World Cup players 1982 births People from Dublin (city) Association football players from Dublin (city) Living people Association football defenders Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Irish expatriates in the United Kingdom Sunderland A.F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players The Football League players Derry City F.C. players League of Ireland players Pound sterling Circulating currencies Currencies of British Overseas Territories Currencies of Europe Currencies of North America Currencies of Oceania Currencies of South America Currencies of the United Kingdom Numismatics 1990 births Living people Soccer players from Sydney Australian people of Greek descent Australian soccer players Greek footballers Australian expatriate soccer players Association football goalkeepers Liverpool F.C. players Sydney FC players Accrington Stanley F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Aris Thessaloniki F.C. players Superleague Greece players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in England New South Wales Institute of Sport alumni Carlisle United F.C. players Western Sydney Wanderers FC players Near-Earth object tracking Discoveries by institution Jet Propulsion Laboratory Palomar Observatory Capitals of former nations Cities in South East England County towns in England Former national capitals Winchester 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from County Antrim Association footballers from Northern Ireland Ballymena United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Reading F.C. non-playing staff Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff Expatriate football managers from Northern Ireland The Football League managers Watford F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 1991 births Saracens F.C. players English rugby union players Living people People educated at St George's School, Harpenden Sportspeople from Wigan England international rugby union players England national rugby union team Rugby union in England European national rugby union teams Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of England 1871 establishments in England Rugby union trophies and awards Six Nations Championship National rugby union team tours England international rugby union players English rugby union players Rugby union scrum-halves Rugby union players from Leeds Harlequin F.C. players Leeds Carnegie players 1987 births Living people England international rugby sevens players France national rugby union team Rugby union in France European national rugby union teams National sports teams of France 1986 births Living people English rugby union players Worcester Warriors players Northampton Saints players England international rugby union players Rugby union hookers People from Rotorua 1992 births British people of Tongan descent Wasps RFC players English rugby union players England international rugby union players People educated at Harrow School People educated at The Castle School Living people Sportspeople from Gloucestershire France Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Western Europe 1989 births Living people English rugby union players Sportspeople from Norwich Leicester Tigers players Rugby union scrum-halves People educated at Gresham's School England international rugby union players British and Irish Lions rugby union players from England 1960 births Australian people of Japanese descent Australian rugby union coaches Australian rugby union players Japanese rugby union coaches Australia national rugby union team coaches Japan national rugby team coaches England national rugby union team coaches Living people 1986 births Living people England international rugby union players English rugby union players Harlequin F.C. players Rugby union flankers People educated at Millfield Rugby union positions Football positions 1991 births Articles created via the Article Wizard British people of Tongan descent England international rugby union players English rugby union players Living people New Zealand emigrants to the United Kingdom People from Wellington City People educated at Millfield Saracens F.C. players British and Irish Lions rugby union players from England British and Irish Lions rugby union players from New Zealand People educated at The Castle School Sportspeople from Gloucestershire Living people Fijian rugby league players Fiji national rugby league team players Rugby league props Rugby league second-rows I-Taukei Fijian people 1990 births English rugby union players England international rugby union players Harlequin F.C. players People from Eastbourne Living people 1990 births Living people French rugby union players Rugby union props RC Toulonnais players French people of Italian descent 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Montpellier French rugby union players French people of Vietnamese descent Sportspeople of Vietnamese descent French people of Italian descent Rugby union fly-halves Montpellier Hérault Rugby players France international rugby union players Six Nations Championship 2015–16 in English rugby union 2015–16 in French rugby union 2015–16 in Irish rugby union 2015–16 in Italian rugby union 2015–16 in Scottish rugby union 2015–16 in Welsh rugby union 2016 rugby union tournaments for national teams Paris 3rd-century BC establishments in Europe Populated places established in the 3rd century BC Capitals in Europe Cities in France Companions of the Liberation European culture French culture Prefectures in France Departments of Île-de-France 1987 births Living people English rugby union players Sportspeople from Leicester Leicester Tigers players Bedford Blues players Rugby union props England international rugby union players British and Irish Lions rugby union players from England 1988 births Living people French rugby union players Sportspeople from Bordeaux Racing 92 players Rugby union scrum-halves France international rugby union players 1994 births Bath Rugby players English rugby union players Living people London Irish players People educated at St George's College, Weybridge Rugby union fullbacks Rugby union wings England international rugby union players FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Six Nations Championship International rugby union competitions 1883 establishments in Europe European rugby union competitions European international sports competitions Wales Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union United Kingdom Great Britain 2010s documentary films 2014 films Scottish documentary films Independent films Documentary films about politics Films about Scottish independence Films about the Scottish independence referendum English-language films Films directed by Jack Foster Films shot in Scotland Rough Justice films BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom 1985 births England international rugby union players English rugby union players Harlequin F.C. players Living people Rugby union fullbacks Sportspeople from Southampton 1985 births England international rugby union players English rugby union players Expatriate rugby union players in France Living people Wasps RFC players People educated at Wellington College, Berkshire Rugby union flankers Stade Français rugby players English expatriate rugby union players Expatriate rugby union players in Japan Expatriate rugby union players in New Zealand British expatriates in New Zealand English expatriates in France British expatriates in Japan People educated at Papplewick School Ricoh Black Rams players Highlanders (rugby union) players Super Rugby players 1982 births Living people Belfast Harlequins rugby union players Ireland international rugby union players Irish rugby union players People educated at Portadown College Rugby union hookers Ulster Rugby players British and Irish Lions rugby union players from Ireland Australia Member states of the United Nations G20 nations English-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies 1986 births Living people French rugby union players Rugby union centres Natal Sharks players Sharks (rugby union) players CA Brive players Aviron Bayonnais players People from Krugersdorp Rugby union fullbacks 1992 births Racing 92 players Living people Fijian rugby union players Rugby union wings Rugby union centres Fijian expatriate rugby union players Expatriate rugby union players in France Fijian expatriates in France I-Taukei Fijian people Rugby union 1992 births Living people French rugby union players Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Sports officiating 1971 births Living people Welsh-language television presenters Bards of the Gorsedd Gay sportsmen LGBT sportspeople from Wales People from Llanelli Welsh rugby union referees Welsh television presenters Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1969 births Alumni of Leeds Beckett University England national rugby union team coaches English rugby union coaches English rugby union players Leeds Carnegie players Living people People educated at St. Bees School Wakefield RFC 1993 births Living people People from Newlyn English rugby union players England international rugby union players Rugby union fullbacks Rugby union wings Exeter Chiefs players Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Articles containing video clips Association football equipment Rugby league equipment Rugby union equipment Association football terminology Football Balls Inflatable manufactured goods Rugby league terminology Rugby union terminology Australian rules football terminology Living people 1993 births Exeter Chiefs players People from Truro England international rugby union players Ice hockey rules Ice hockey terminology Rugby league terminology Rugby union terminology 1989 births Living people French rugby union players France international rugby union players Rugby union flankers Biarritz Olympique players People from Tarbes 1989 births Living people French rugby union players 1991 births French rugby union players Living people 1991 births Living people French rugby union players People from Neuilly-sur-Seine Stade Français rugby players Rugby union fly-halves France international rugby union players 1986 births Living people French rugby union players Stade Toulousain players Rugby union wings Rugby union fullbacks France international rugby union players Sportspeople from Toulouse 1986 births Living people People from Épinal French rugby union players France international rugby union players Stade Toulousain players USA Perpignan players RC Toulonnais players French people of Algerian descent 1993 births Living people Sportsmen from Queensland English rugby union players Rugby union flankers Rugby union number eights Harlequin F.C. players Ealing Trailfinders Rugby Club players Esher RFC players People educated at Royal Grammar School, Guildford Sportspeople from Brisbane England international rugby union players