 Local news programming in the United States News 1947 births Living people A.F.C. Bournemouth managers A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football midfielders Brentford F.C. players English autobiographers English footballers English football managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players People from Poplar, London Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Seattle Sounders (1974–83) players Southampton F.C. managers Sportspeople from London The Football League managers The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London 1963 births Living people People from Ruabon Welsh footballers Welsh expatriate footballers Association football forwards Wales international footballers Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Germany Welsh expatriates in Germany FC Bayern Munich footballers Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Southampton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Welsh football managers Wales national football team managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Fulham F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Stoke City F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Bundesliga players English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Ysgol Rhiwabon Officers of the Order of the British Empire La Liga players Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Sports venues in London Football venues in London Defunct rugby union venues in England Sports venues completed in 1904 Shepherd's Bush Football League venues Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners 1948 births Living people Sportspeople from Sheffield Footballers from Sheffield English footballers Association football wingers Chesterfield F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Hartlepool United F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Aldershot F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players York City F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players The Football League players English football managers Gainsborough Trinity F.C. managers Burton Albion F.C. managers Scarborough F.C. managers Notts County F.C. managers Torquay United F.C. managers Huddersfield Town A.F.C. managers Plymouth Argyle F.C. managers Oldham Athletic A.F.C. managers Bury F.C. managers Sheffield United F.C. managers Crystal Palace F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers National League (English football) managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Queens Park Rangers F.C. Proposed stadiums in the United Kingdom Football venues in London Proposed football venues in England 1907–08 in English football Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Southampton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in South East England Local government districts of South East England Local government in Hampshire Populated coastal places in Hampshire Port cities and towns in England Ports and harbours of Hampshire Ports and harbours of the English Channel Staple ports Towns in Hampshire Unitary authority districts of England 1827 establishments in England Daily Mail and General Trust English-language newspapers Evening newspapers Free daily newspapers London Evening Standard London newspapers Publications established in 1827 Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England Ukraine national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Ukraine Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1966 births People from Paddington Living people English people of Saint Lucian descent Members of the Order of the British Empire Association football forwards English footballers England B international footballers England international footballers English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Turkey Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Newcastle United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Watford F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. non-playing staff Süper Lig players Black English sportspeople Southall F.C. players Sportspeople from London People educated at Phoenix High School, London Queens Park Rangers F.C. directors and chairmen Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers English football managers English autobiographers London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports Association football terminology 1963 births Living people People from Neath Sportspeople from Neath Footballers from Neath Welsh footballers Welsh expatriate footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Reading F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Premier League players Shimizu S-Pulse players J.League players Expatriate footballers in Japan Norwich City F.C. captains Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff Fulham F.C. non-playing staff Queens Park Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Stoke City F.C. non-playing staff The Football League players Manchester City F.C. non-playing staff Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers 1959 births Living people People from Bangor, Gwynedd Welsh people of Polish descent Welsh footballers Association football goalkeepers Wrexham F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Wales international footballers Arsenal F.C. non-playing staff Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff Queens Park Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Wales national football team non-playing staff Stoke City F.C. non-playing staff Manchester City F.C. non-playing staff Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers 2010 racehorse births Racehorses bred in Kentucky Racehorses trained in the United States Thoroughbred family 22-c Eclipse Award winners 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues Malaysian people of Indian descent Malaysian people of Portuguese descent People of Goan descent 1964 births Living people Malaysian people of Kristang descent Alumni of the London School of Economics People educated at Epsom College Formula One team owners Commanders of the Order of the British Empire English football chairmen and investors Queens Park Rangers F.C. directors and chairmen AirAsia Malaysian motorsport people Malaysian Christians Malaysian businesspeople Businesspeople of Indian descent Association football terminology Association football transfers Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs PlayStation 3 2000s toys 2006 introductions 2010s toys Backward-compatible video game consoles Blu-ray Disc Cell BE architecture Home video game consoles PlayStation (brand) Regionless game consoles Seventh-generation video game consoles Sony consoles Association football clubs established in 1879 Football clubs in England Fulham F.C. Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1879 establishments in England Fulham The Football League clubs Football leagues in England Football league systems in Europe 2010 software Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Facebook acquisitions Internet properties established in 2010 IOS software Photo software Photo sharing Social networking services Facebook applications Windows Phone software Video software BlackBerry software Mobile software Symbian software WatchOS software