 Association football clubs established in 1875 Football clubs in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. Sport in Blackburn The Football League founder members Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1875 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire 1986 births Living people People from Torsby Municipality Swedish footballers IFK Göteborg players FC Groningen players Hamburger SV players Panathinaikos F.C. players Allsvenskan players Bundesliga players Eredivisie players Superleague Greece players Swedish expatriate footballers Swedish expatriate sportspeople in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Germany Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Greece Sweden youth international footballers Sweden under-21 international footballers Sweden international footballers Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1969 births Living people People from Eidsvoll 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1998 FIFA World Cup players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players FIFA Century Club Kniksen award winners Lillestrøm SK players Manchester United F.C. players Norway international footballers Norway youth international footballers Norway under-21 international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Norwegian footballers Norwegian football managers Tippeligaen players Premier League players Rangers F.C. players Scottish Premier League players UEFA Euro 2000 players Vålerenga Fotball players KFUM-Kameratene Oslo players Norwegian expatriate footballers Lyn Fotball managers Lillestrøm SK managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Legia Warsaw managers Expatriate football managers in England Norwegian expatriate football managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. Premier League venues Football venues in England Buildings and structures in Blackburn Sports venues completed in 1882 Football League venues Norway Countries in Europe Nordic countries Scandinavia Northern Europe Liberal democracies States and territories established in 872 States and territories established in 1905 Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Germanic countries and territories  1963 births Living people People from Ruabon Welsh footballers Welsh expatriate footballers Association football forwards Wales international footballers Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Germany Welsh expatriates in Germany FC Bayern Munich footballers Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Southampton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Welsh football managers Wales national football team managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Fulham F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Stoke City F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Bundesliga players English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Ysgol Rhiwabon Officers of the Order of the British Empire La Liga players Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Christmas traditions Christmas-linked holidays Public holidays in Australia Public holidays in Canada Public holidays in New Zealand Public holidays in the United Kingdom December observances 1963 births Living people Sportspeople from Bellshill People from Ross and Cromarty Scottish footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers Aberdeen F.C. players FC Metz players Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Ligue 1 players Scottish Football League players Motherwell F.C. managers Coventry City F.C. managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Scottish football managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Scottish Premier League managers Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from Highland (council area) Scotland under-21 international footballers Wigan Athletic F.C. non-playing staff Rotherham United F.C. non-playing staff Rotherham United F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff 1963 births Living people Sportspeople from York English footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football goalkeepers Halifax Town A.F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Everton F.C. players Notts County F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players York City F.C. players Mansfield Town F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. non-playing staff Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Bolton Wanderers F.C. non-playing staff English football organisations Association football trade unions Honor Ethics Social status Warrior code Virtue Association football terminology Association football transfers Towns in Lancashire West Pennine Moors Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom Blackburn Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Food companies of India Companies based in Pune Companies established in 1971 Indian companies established in 1971 Current association football seasons La Liga seasons 2015–16 in European association football leagues 2015–16 in Spanish football leagues 2015–16 La Liga Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1966 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Association football forwards Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Premier League players Preston North End F.C. players Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Scottish footballers Scottish Football League players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players People from Clydebank Scotland under-21 international footballers Lyn Fotball Football clubs in Norway Association football clubs established in 1896 1896 establishments in Norway Football clubs in Oslo Football clubs in Norway Association football clubs established in 1917 1917 establishments in Norway Sport in Akershus Lillestrøm SK BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom 1903 births 1957 deaths Sportspeople from Bellshill Association football forwards Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Queen of the South F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. (1878) players Newcastle United F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Notts County F.C. players Grimsby Town F.C. players Gateshead F.C. players Association football players who committed suicide The Football League players York City F.C. wartime guest players Suicides by train Suicides in England English Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish Football League representative players 1951 births 1974 FIFA World Cup players 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. players Cumbernauld United F.C. players English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players Scottish league football top scorers The Amazing Race 2011 television seasons 1927 births American game show hosts American people of Irish descent American radio sports announcers American Roman Catholics American television sports announcers Brooklyn Dodgers announcers College basketball announcers in the United States College football announcers Ford C. Frick Award recipients Fordham Rams football Fordham University alumni Golf writers and broadcasters Living people Los Angeles Dodgers announcers Major League Baseball announcers National Football League announcers National Radio Hall of Fame inductees People from Washington Heights, Manhattan Sportspeople from the Bronx Tennis commentators United States Navy personnel San Francisco Giants Cactus League Major League Baseball teams Sports clubs established in 1883 Baseball teams in San Francisco, California Baseball 1846 introductions Ball and bat games Former Summer Olympic sports Sports originating in the United States Team sports Articles containing video clips Los Angeles Dodgers Baseball teams in Los Angeles, California Major League Baseball teams Cactus League O'Malley family Jackie Robinson Sports in Los Angeles, California Sports clubs established in 1883 1883 establishments in New York Sports clubs established in 1959 1959 establishments in California Companies that filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 2011 Electric vehicles Golf equipment 2000 establishments in California American football venues in California AT&T buildings Baseball venues in California California Golden Bears football venues Defunct NCAA bowl game venues Defunct United Football League (2009–12) venues Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design basic silver certified buildings Major League Baseball venues Multi-purpose stadiums in the United States Parks in San Francisco, California Rugby union stadiums in the United States Sacramento Mountain Lions stadiums San Francisco Giants stadiums Soccer venues in California South of Market, San Francisco Sports venues completed in 2000 Sports venues in San Francisco, California XFL venues Microphones Computing input devices History of television Sound recording San Francisco, California 1850 establishments in California California counties Cities in the San Francisco Bay Area Consolidated city-counties in the United States Counties in the San Francisco Bay Area County seats in California Hudson's Bay Company trading posts Incorporated cities and towns in California Populated coastal places in California Populated places established in 1776 Port cities and towns of the West Coast of the United States Spanish mission settlements in North America Jackets Neckties Neckwear History of clothing (Europe) History of clothing (Western fashion) Croatian inventions Articles containing video clips 1949 births Living people People from Malverne, New York American radio sports announcers American television sports announcers Bradley University alumni College football announcers Los Angeles Dodgers announcers Major League Baseball announcers National Football League announcers National Radio Hall of Fame inductees New York Jets broadcasters New York Yankees broadcasters Radio personalities from Cleveland, Ohio Radio personalities from Illinois Radio personalities from New York City Television anchors from Cleveland, Ohio United States Football League announcers Jewish American sportspeople American Jews Baseball rules Baserunning statistics Baseball terminology Scoring (sport) 1931 births Living people African-American baseball players American military personnel of the Korean War American sportsmen Baseball players from Alabama Birmingham Black Barons players Cangrejeros de Santurce (baseball) players Caribbean Baseball Hall of Fame inductees Caribbean Series players Gold Glove Award winners Greeters Major League Baseball All-Star Game MVPs Major League Baseball center fielders Major League Baseball players with retired numbers Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award winners Minneapolis Millers (baseball) players National Baseball Hall of Fame inductees National League All-Stars National League batting champions National League home run champions National League Most Valuable Player Award winners National League stolen base champions Negro league baseball players New York Giants (NL) players New York Mets coaches New York Mets players People from Bessemer, Alabama People from New Rochelle, New York San Francisco Giants players Trenton Giants players United States Army soldiers Subjects of iconic photographs Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Major League Baseball Baseball leagues in the United States Organizations established in 1876 Sports leagues established in 1876 1876 establishments in the United States Sports equipment Trademarks Intellectual property law Product management Major League Baseball center fielders All-American college baseball players Chicago Cubs players Los Angeles Dodgers players Oakland Athletics players Kansas City Athletics players American League All-Stars National League All-Stars Baseball players from Arkansas Arizona State Sun Devils baseball players Lewiston Broncs players Arizona Instructional League Athletics players Mobile A's players Major League Baseball announcers Los Angeles Dodgers announcers San Diego Padres broadcasters 1945 births Living people United States Marines People from Batesville, Arkansas Buddhist terminology Christian terminology Ecclesiastical titles Sainthood Types of saints Baseball terminology Batting statistics 1987 births American Christians Arizona League Giants players Baseball players from Georgia (U.S. state) Florida State Seminoles baseball players Fresno Grizzlies players Golden Spikes Award winners Living people Major League Baseball catchers National League All-Stars National League Most Valuable Player Award winners People from Leesburg, Georgia Salem-Keizer Volcanoes players San Francisco Giants players San Jose Giants players Scottsdale Scorpions players Silver Slugger Award winners Waikiki Beach Boys players 1989 births Living people Tampa Bay Rays players Princeton Devil Rays players Charlotte Stone Crabs players Montgomery Biscuits players Durham Bulls players All-Star Futures Game players Major League Baseball pitchers American League All-Stars People from Fort Walton Beach, Florida Baseball terminology Baseball plays Batting (baseball) Baseball positions Articles containing video clips Baseball pitching Baseball positions Articles containing video clips Baseball rules Baseball terminology Baseball strategy Baseball pitching 1988 births Living people People from Osaka Prefecture Japanese baseball players Nippon Professional Baseball pitchers 2013 World Baseball Classic players 2015 WBSC Premier 12 players Hiroshima Toyo Carp players English-language idioms Fairy tales Fictional chickens Jataka tales Literature featuring anthropomorphic characters Animal tales Fictional birds 2005 films 2005 computer-animated films 2000s 3D films 2000s comedy films American 3D films American animated films American children's films American comedy films American coming-of-age films American disaster films American films Computer-animated films Animated films about birds Films about fish Films about pigs Films featuring anthropomorphic characters American comedy science fiction films Films about animals 2000s American animated films Film scores by John Debney Walt Disney Animation Studios films Walt Disney Pictures films Baseball positions 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Omaha, Nebraska Baseball players from Nebraska Major League Baseball third basemen San Francisco Giants players Chicago White Sox players Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim players Wichita State Shockers baseball players Arizona League Giants players Salem-Keizer Volcanoes players San Jose Giants players Richmond Flying Squirrels players Scottsdale Scorpions players Fresno Grizzlies players Charlotte Knights players Baseball rules 1600s plays Adaptations of works by Giovanni Boccaccio English proverbs English Renaissance plays Plays adapted into films Plays by Thomas Middleton Plays set in France Shakespearean comedies Shakespearean phrases National League Championship Series 2003 Major League Baseball season Chicago Cubs postseason Florida Marlins postseason 2003 in Florida 2003 in Illinois 21st century in Chicago, Illinois Living people San Francisco Giants executives San Francisco Giants owners Harvard Business School alumni Westinghouse Broadcasting Jewish American sportspeople American Jews University of California, Berkeley alumni Year of birth missing (living people) Place of birth missing (living people) American chief executives of professional sports organizations Sportspeople from San Francisco, California National Baseball Hall of Fame Baseball museums and halls of fame Halls of fame in New York National halls of fame in the United States Sports museums in New York Museums in Otsego County, New York Sports organisations established in 1936 History of baseball in the United States Frank Sinatra 1915 births 1998 deaths 20th-century American male actors 20th-century American singers Academy Honorary Award recipients American crooners American film directors American film producers American jazz singers American male film actors American male radio actors American male singers American male songwriters American male voice actors American people of Italian descent American people of Sicilian descent American philanthropists American pop singers American Roman Catholics Analysands of Ralph Greenson Best Musical or Comedy Actor Golden Globe (film) winners Best Supporting Actor Academy Award winners Best Supporting Actor Golden Globe (film) winners Burials at Desert Memorial Park California Republicans California Democrats Capitol Records artists Cecil B. DeMille Award Golden Globe winners Columbia Records artists Congressional Gold Medal recipients Converts to Roman Catholicism from atheism or agnosticism Grammy Award winners Grammy Legend Award Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winners Grand Officers of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award winners Kennedy Center honorees Las Vegas entertainers Male actors from New Jersey Male actors of Italian descent Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer contract players Singers from New Jersey New Jersey Democrats New Jersey Republicans Peabody Award winners People from Hoboken, New Jersey Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Qwest Records artists Recipients of the Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art, 1st class Reprise Records artists Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award Swing singers Traditional pop music singers Childhood Children Developmental psychology Humans Baseball genres Sports originating in the United States Ball games Street games Team sports Ball and bat games Balls Tennis equipment Articles containing video clips Cleaning tools Domestic implements Paul McCartney songs 1978 singles Wings (band) songs Songs written by Paul McCartney Capitol Records singles Parlophone singles Song recordings produced by Paul McCartney Music published by MPL Music Publishing 1978 songs Science fiction genres Science fiction Speculative fiction 1993 books 1993 in video gaming Books about computer and internet entrepreneurs Books about video games  1961 singles 1980 singles 1981 singles 1960s ballads Bobby Vee songs Leo Sayer songs Billboard Adult Contemporary number-one singles Number-one singles in Australia Songs written by Sonny Curtis Songs written by Jerry Allison Pop ballads Soft rock songs 1960 songs Song recordings produced by Alan Tarney