 2012–13 NBA season New York Knicks National Basketball Association teams Basketball clubs established in 1946 1946 establishments in New York National Hockey League Ice hockey leagues in Canada Ice hockey leagues in the United States Organizations established in 1917 Professional sports leagues in Canada Professional sports leagues in the United States Recurring sporting events established in 1917 Sports leagues established in 1917 Labour law Collective rights 1967 establishments in Ontario Trade unions in Canada National Hockey League labor relations Trade unions in the United States Trade unions established in 1967 Sports trade unions Sports trade unions of the United States Chauvinism Discrimination Hatred Prejudices Sexism Sexuality and gender-related prejudices Social problems Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Laws of association football Association football terminology 1969 births Living people People from Edmonton, London English businesspeople Birmingham City F.C. directors and chairmen English autobiographers English journalists English columnists English television personalities English television presenters The Apprentice (UK TV series) English people of Irish descent English people of Italian descent People educated at Aldenham School West Ham United F.C. directors and chairmen Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Female life peers Conservative Party (UK) life peers Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 1957 births Living people British association football commentators Cycling announcers People from Coventry Sky Sports presenters and reporters Association football commentators 1955 births Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Aston Villa F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Everton F.C. players First Division/Premier League top scorers Living people Notts County F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish association football commentators Scottish Football League players Scottish footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Scottish league football top scorers  Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe English football referees 1962 births People from Poole Living people 1980s British television series 1990s British television series 2000s British television series 2010s British television series 1988 British television programme debuts ITV television programmes English-language television programming Television series by ITV Studios  Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. The Football League founder members Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Association football clubs established in 1877 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners United Soccer Association imported teams Sport in Wolverhampton 1877 establishments in England English football referees 1985 births People from Coventry Living people FIFA Women's World Cup referees Daily Mail Daily Mail and General Trust Edwardian era National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Publications established in 1896 1896 establishments in the United Kingdom 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports Association football terminology Sports terminology 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Social psychology Abuse Bullying Victimology Labour law Women's association football Association football 1821 establishments in England History of Manchester Investigative news sources Liberalism in the United Kingdom National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London Newspapers published in Manchester Publications established in 1821 The Guardian Pulitzer Prize-winning newspapers Europe Continents Discrimination Social inequality Social justice Social problems Abuse Anti-social behaviour Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP Articles with inconsistent citation formats Asian-American society Asian-American issues Asian-American culture Ethnic groups in the United States British association football commentators English footballers Aston Villa F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players English football managers Kettering Town F.C. managers Cambridge United F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Manchester United F.C. managers Atlético Madrid managers Aston Villa F.C. managers Coventry City F.C. managers Sheffield Wednesday F.C. managers Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Premier League managers The Guardian journalists The Football League players Sportspeople from Liverpool Celebrity Big Brother (UK) contestants 1939 births Living people Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Political pundits Political occupations 1955 establishments in the United Kingdom ITV Media companies of the United Kingdom Racism Discrimination Hatred Politics and race Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1968 births Living people Ga-Adangbe people A.C. Milan players Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Chelsea F.C. players FC Nantes players FIFA Century Club FIFA 100 Association football midfielders Association football central defenders France international footballers Adoptees adopted by relations Ghanaian emigrants to France French expatriates in England French expatriates in Italy French expatriates in Qatar French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Qatar French footballers French people of Ghanaian descent Ghanaian footballers Olympique de Marseille players Sportspeople from Accra Ligue 1 players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players Al-Gharafa Sports Club players UEFA Euro 2000 players 2001 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Qatar SC footballers Qatar Stars League players 1953 births Living people American football cornerbacks American football quarterbacks Alabama Crimson Tide football players Linfield Wildcats football coaches Northern Colorado Bears football coaches Oregon State Beavers football coaches Nebraska Cornhuskers football coaches San Diego Chargers head coaches USC Trojans football coaches Whitworth Pirates football coaches Winnipeg Blue Bombers coaches NFL Europe (WLAF) coaches Grey Cup champions Sportspeople from Corvallis, Oregon People from Wallace, Idaho Players of American football from Oregon Corvallis High School (Oregon) alumni 1951 births 1974 FIFA World Cup players 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. players Cumbernauld United F.C. players English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players Scottish league football top scorers