 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Black English sportspeople English people of Barbadian descent 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Marseille French Muslims French people of Algerian descent French footballers Association football midfielders Association football wingers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Olympique de Marseille players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players French expatriates in England Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Sweden national football team European national association football teams Football in Sweden National sports teams of Sweden 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders English autobiographers English footballers English expatriate footballers England international footballers English Roman Catholics England under-21 international footballers FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. players LA Galaxy players Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Whiston, Merseyside Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Designated Players (MLS) Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills 1986 births Living people People from Wortley, Leeds Association football midfielders Association football wingers Association football utility players Footballers from Leeds English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1981 births Living people People from Villepinte, Seine-Saint-Denis French people of Malian descent French footballers France international footballers Association football midfielders CS Louhans-Cuiseaux players Le Havre AC players FC Bayern Munich II players FC Bayern Munich footballers Liverpool F.C. players SC Bastia players RC Lens players Olympique Lyonnais players FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Olympique de Marseille players West Ham United F.C. players Stade Rennais F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players French expatriate footballers Expatriate sportspeople in Germany Expatriate sportspeople in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in Germany France under-21 international footballers France youth international footballers Sportspeople from Île-de-France England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Chess terminology Chess rules Donetsk Cities in Donetsk Oblast Special economic zones Populated places established in 1869 Mining cities and regions in Ukraine Articles containing video clips Cities of regional significance in Ukraine Cities and towns of Ukraine built in the Russian Empire 1869 establishments in Russia Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester  FC Shakhtar Donetsk Football venues in Ukraine UEFA Euro 2012 stadiums in Ukraine Sport in Donetsk Sports venues completed in 2009 Buildings and structures in Donetsk Visitor attractions in Donetsk Oblast SCM Holdings 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Shrewsbury English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England 1993 births Living people Arsenal F.C. players Association football wingers Black English sportspeople England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers English people of Jamaican descent People educated at St John's College (Portsmouth) Sportspeople from Portsmouth Premier League players Southampton F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Middlesbrough English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Middlesbrough F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players Kiev Capitals in Europe Cities with special status in Ukraine Hero Cities of the Soviet Union Holy cities Kiev Governorate Cossack Hetmanate Kiev Voivodeship Populated places established in the 5th century Rus' settlements Magdeburg rights Places of the Euromaidan 1946 births Living people Italian footballers Italy international footballers SPAL 1907 players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players A.S. Roma players A.C. Milan players 1974 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.S. Roma managers Juventus F.C. managers La Liga managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers England national football team managers Russia national football team managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Spain People from San Canzian d'Isonzo People from the Province of Gorizia Italian Roman Catholics Italian expatriate football managers Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club 1948 births People from Skegness Barnet F.C. managers England international footballers England under-23 international footballers English football managers English footballers UEFA Euro 1980 players 1982 FIFA World Cup players Premier League managers Association football goalkeepers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Scunthorpe United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers The Football League players English Football Hall of Fame inductees The Football League representative players 1985 births Living people People from Stevenage English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Association football utility players Watford F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 1985 births Living people People from Bastia French people of Moroccan descent French footballers Association football central defenders Ligue 1 players Lille OSC players La Liga players Valencia CF players A.C. Milan players Sevilla FC players France international footballers French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 1982 births Living people French footballers France international footballers France under-21 international footballers A.C. Milan players A.S. Roma players AJ Auxerre players Serie A players Ligue 1 players Expatriate footballers in Italy Sportspeople from Toulouse French expatriate footballers 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players France youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Association football central defenders 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Nice French footballers French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England French people of Catalan descent France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers Association football goalkeepers OGC Nice players Olympique Lyonnais players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football positions 1985 births Living people People from Nord (French department) French footballers French expatriate footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers Association football defenders Lille OSC players Newcastle United F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players French expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Laws of association football Association football terminology 1985 births Living people Association football midfielders Sportspeople from Paris Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in Spain French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England French expatriates in Russia French expatriates in Spain French footballers French Muslims French people of Malian descent Ligue 2 players Le Havre AC players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Russian Football Premier League players FC Anzhi Makhachkala players FC Lokomotiv Moscow players November 2015 Paris attacks France under-21 international footballers France international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 1980 births Living people People from Stepney English footballers Association football fullbacks 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players A.S. Roma players LA Galaxy players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriates in Italy Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English people of Barbadian descent Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club  Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics 1982 births Living people People educated at St Bonaventure's Catholic Comprehensive School Association football forwards English Christians English Roman Catholics English footballers Black English sportspeople English expatriate footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Dominica descent English people of Saint Lucian descent Senrab F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Toronto FC players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Expatriate soccer players in Canada 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Footballers from Newham (London borough) 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Sunderland, Tyne and Wear Footballers from Tyne and Wear English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Sunderland A.F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1980 births Living people English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Charlton Athletic F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Footballers from Lambeth 1990 births Living people People from Longsight Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players British people of Ghanaian descent Black British sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1986 births Living people People from Tourcoing French people of Vietnamese descent French Roman Catholics French footballers France international footballers Lille OSC players Newcastle United F.C. players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players France under-21 international footballers French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England France youth international footballers Sportspeople of Vietnamese descent Association football midfielders 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Crystal Palace F.C. players 1963 births Association football defenders Bristol City F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Drumchapel Amateur F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Hamilton Academical F.C. players La Liga managers Labour Party (UK) people Living people Manchester United F.C. managers Premier League managers Real Sociedad managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Scottish Christians Scottish expatriate football managers Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players UEFA Pro Licence holders 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Everton F.C. 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Football League venues Premier League venues Defunct baseball venues Sports venues in Liverpool Visitor attractions in Liverpool Sports venues completed in 1892 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England 1971 births Living people People from Chelmsford British accountants British bankers Alumni of the University of Bristol Manchester United F.C. directors and chairmen Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1978 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football central defenders Black English sportspeople Doping cases in association football English autobiographers English film producers English footballers England international footballers English people of Irish descent English people of Saint Lucian descent English sportspeople in doping cases English television personalities England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players People from Peckham Premier League players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Sportspeople from London The Football League players West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. Football club television channels in the United Kingdom Television channels in the United Kingdom 1998 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1998 Premier League on television Preston North End F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Sport in Preston 1880 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire 2006–07 in European football UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying UEFA European Championship qualifying Villarreal CF La Liga clubs Football clubs in the Valencian Community Football clubs in Spain Association football clubs established in 1923 1923 establishments in Spain FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Association football terminology Association football transfers 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology FA Community Shield National association football supercups Football competitions in England Recurring sporting events established in 1908 Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match La Liga seasons 2008–09 in Spanish football leagues Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Moscow Moscow Governorate 1147 establishments in Russia Capitals in Europe 1973 births Living people Association football midfielders Catalan footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate football managers in England People from Noguera (comarca) Spanish footballers Spanish football managers Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom CF Balaguer footballers Real Zaragoza players Motherwell F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Walsall F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. managers Everton F.C. managers La Liga players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Spanish expatriate football managers Expatriate footballers in Wales Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Scotland Spanish expatriates in Wales Expatriate football managers in Wales Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners 1964 births Living people People from Frederiksberg Danish footballers Association football midfielders Danish Superliga players Kjøbenhavns Boldklub players Brøndby IF players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players S.S. Lazio players La Liga players FC Barcelona players Real Madrid C.F. players J.League players Vissel Kobe players Eredivisie players AFC Ajax players Danish football managers Danish Superliga managers Brøndby IF managers La Liga managers Getafe CF managers RCD Mallorca managers Russian Football Premier League managers FC Spartak Moscow managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Lekhwiya SC managers Denmark under-21 international footballers Denmark international footballers UEFA Euro 1984 players 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1995 King Fahd Cup players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club UEFA Golden Players Danish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Japan Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate football managers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Russia Expatriate football managers in Wales Expatriate football managers in Qatar Danish knights Danish expatriate football managers