 Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club 1988 births Living people People from the Province of Burgos Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Castilian-Leonese footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Real Madrid C.F. players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Valencia CF players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1975 births Living people People from Consett English football referees English people of Canadian descent National League (English football) referees The Football League referees Premier League referees UEFA Champions League referees Olympic football referees Football referees at the 2012 Summer Olympics 1984 births Living people People from Sremska Mitrovica Association football defenders Association football utility players Serbian footballers Serbia and Montenegro international footballers Serbia international footballers Serbian expatriate footballers Serbian expatriates in Russia Serbian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in England FK Srem players OFK Beograd players FC Lokomotiv Moscow players Chelsea F.C. players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Serbia under-21 international footballers Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations 1991 births Brazil international footballers Brazil under-20 international footballers Brazil youth international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian footballers Brazilian Roman Catholics Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Chelsea F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic medalists in football Olympic silver medalists for Brazil People from Americana, São Paulo Premier League players São Paulo FC players Sport Club Internacional players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1991 births Living people A.F.C. Tubize players Belgian expatriates in France Belgian expatriates in England Belgian footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgium youth international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Chelsea F.C. players Ligue 1 players Lille OSC players People from La Louvière Premier League players Walloon sportspeople 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football wingers Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Laws of association football Association football terminology 1970 births Living people People from Schaffhausen Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers S.S. Lazio players Chelsea F.C. players Premier League players Italian football managers Milton Keynes Dons F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate footballers in England FC Schalke 04 managers Bundesliga managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FC Schaffhausen players FC Zürich players FC Aarau players Serie A players Swiss Super League players Swiss people of Italian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League winning managers Italian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Italian expatriates in Germany Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club American drama television series English-language television programming HBO network shows Robots in television American science fiction television series Serial drama television series Television programs based on films Television series by Bad Robot Productions Television series by Warner Bros. Television Works by Jonathan Nolan Upcoming television series Blu-ray Disc Consumer electronics Digital television Film and video technology High-definition television Cinematic techniques Articles containing video clips Slow motion 1987 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Norway Igbo sportspeople Lyn Fotball players Manchester United F.C. players Nigeria international footballers Nigerian expatriate footballers Nigerian expatriate sportspeople in Norway Nigerian expatriates in the United Kingdom Nigerian footballers Tippeligaen players People from Jos Pepsi Football Academy players Plateau United footballers Premier League players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Africa Cup of Nations-winning players 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Guadalajara, Jalisco Footballers from Jalisco Mexican Roman Catholics Mexican footballers Mexico international footballers Liga MX players C.D. Guadalajara footballers Premier League players La Liga players Bundesliga players Manchester United F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Bayer 04 Leverkusen players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Germany Mexican expatriate footballers Mexican expatriates in the United Kingdom Mexican expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Mexican expatriates in Spain Mexican expatriates in Germany Mexico youth international footballers Articles containing video clips Mr. Men series Little Miss series Fictional characters introduced in 1971 Everton F.C. 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Football League venues Premier League venues Defunct baseball venues Sports venues in Liverpool Visitor attractions in Liverpool Sports venues completed in 1892 1953 films 1950s comedy-drama films 1950s sports films British films British sports films Sports comedy films Association football films English-language films Films directed by Maurice Elvey British comedy-drama films Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps 1987 births Living people People from São Paulo (state) Brazilian Christians Brazilian footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Esporte Clube Vitória players Primeira Liga players S.L. Benfica footballers Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Ligue 1 players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Brazil international footballers 2011 Copa América players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2015 Copa América players Brazil youth international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in France FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Brazil under-20 international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1985 births Living people People from Stevenage English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Association football utility players Watford F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Belfast Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland youth international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Manchester United F.C. players Royal Antwerp F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Belgian Second Division players Expatriate footballers in Belgium People educated at Belfast High School 1989 births Living people People from Basingstoke English footballers Association football midfielders Bradford City A.F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Watford F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Everton F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics England international footballers 1983 births Living people Footballers from Rotterdam Dutch footballers Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Association football forwards SBV Excelsior players Feyenoord players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Fenerbahçe footballers Eredivisie players Premier League players Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Dutch expatriates in England Dutch expatriates in Turkey Expatriate footballers in Turkey FIFA Century Club 1980 births Living people People from Stepney English footballers Association football fullbacks 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players A.S. Roma players LA Galaxy players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriates in Italy Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English people of Barbadian descent Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club 1985 births Living people People from Nueva Loja Ecuadorian footballers Ecuador international footballers Ecuadorian expatriate footballers Ecuadorian people of African descent Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England Association football wingers El Nacional footballers Villarreal CF players Recreativo de Huelva players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players La Liga players Premier League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Ecuadorian expatriates in England 1985 births Living people People from Dronfield Sportspeople from Derbyshire English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Aston Villa F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players English people of Irish descent Audio engineering Digital signal processing Computer graphic artifacts Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División B players Atlético Madrid B players Atlético Madrid footballers Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology The Football League on television English football trophies and awards Football media in the United Kingdom Association football terminology Premier League on television Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams Association football terminology 1987 births Living people Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Joinville Esporte Clube players Cruzeiro Esporte Clube players S.L. Benfica footballers Chelsea F.C. players Jiangsu Suning F.C. players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Primeira Liga players Premier League players Chinese Super League players Brazilian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in China Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in China Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Plzeň Association football goalkeepers Czech footballers Czech Republic youth international footballers Czech Republic under-21 international footballers Czech Republic international footballers FK Chmel Blšany players AC Sparta Prague players Czech expatriate footballers Czech expatriates in France Czech expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Stade Rennais F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Czech First League players FIFA Century Club 1953 births 1996 deaths People educated at Abingdon School Chelsea F.C. chairmen and investors English football chairmen and investors English businesspeople Victims of helicopter accidents or incidents People from Haywards Heath Victims of aviation accidents or incidents in the United Kingdom Accidental deaths in England 20th-century English businesspeople Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England  2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues 2010 software Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Facebook acquisitions Internet properties established in 2010 IOS software Photo software Photo sharing Social networking services Facebook applications Windows Phone software Video software BlackBerry software Mobile software Symbian software WatchOS software Companies listed on the Euronext exchanges Association football clubs established in 1906 Multi-sport clubs in Portugal Football clubs in Portugal Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Lisbon Sporting Clube de Portugal Sports clubs established in 1906 1906 establishments in Portugal Unrelegated association football clubs Taça de Portugal winners Primeira Liga clubs Political pundits Political occupations Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Laws of association football Association football terminology Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 1957 births Living people British association football commentators Cycling announcers People from Coventry Sky Sports presenters and reporters Association football commentators 1955 births Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Aston Villa F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Everton F.C. players First Division/Premier League top scorers Living people Notts County F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish association football commentators Scottish Football League players Scottish footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Scottish league football top scorers Scotland national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Scotland 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology English football referees 1985 births People from Coventry Living people FIFA Women's World Cup referees Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. The Football League founder members Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Association football clubs established in 1877 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners United Soccer Association imported teams Sport in Wolverhampton 1877 establishments in England 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. Sport in Wolverhampton Football venues in England Sports venues in the West Midlands (county) Sports venues completed in 1889 Football League venues