 U.S. Città di Palermo Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Sicily Association football clubs established in 1900 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs 1900 establishments in Italy 1958 births A.C. Pistoiese players A.C. Reggiana 1919 players F.C. Crotone managers Association football midfielders Genoa C.F.C. managers Italian football managers Italian footballers Living people People from the Province of Turin Delfino Pescara 1936 players U.S. Salernitana 1919 players Serie A players Serie B players U.S. Città di Palermo players U.S.D. Cavese 1919 players Serie A managers Inter Milan managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy 1941 births Living people People from Bagnaria Arsa Italian businesspeople Italian football chairmen and investors Populated coastal places in Italy Mediterranean port cities and towns in Italy Municipalities of the Province of Palermo Palermo Phoenician colonies in Sicily Populated places established in the 8th century BC Capitals of former nations Atalanta B.C. Sport in Bergamo Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Association football clubs established in 1907 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Coppa Italia winners 1907 establishments in Italy Sicily Former countries in Europe Islands of Italy Mediterranean Mediterranean islands NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union Regions of Italy Wine regions of Italy Autonomous regions of Italy 1957 births Living people People from Ottaviano Italian footballers A.S. Varese 1910 players Spezia Calcio players Italian football managers Serie A managers Calcio Lecco 1912 managers A.S. Varese 1910 managers A.C. Siena managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers Watford F.C. managers A.C. Chievo Verona managers The Football League managers Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in England Association football midfielders Carpi F.C. 1909 managers Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners Calcio Catania Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Sicily Association football clubs established in 1946 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs 1946 establishments in Italy 1962 births Living people People from Marsala Italian footballers Italian football managers A.S.D. Ragusa Calcio managers Foggia Calcio managers U.S. Arezzo managers Calcio Catania managers Udinese Calcio managers Parma F.C. managers Genoa C.F.C. managers S.S. Akragas Città dei Templi players A.C.R. Messina players Calcio Catania players Delfino Pescara 1936 managers Vicenza Calcio managers Serie A managers UEFA Pro Licence holders AS Monaco FC Multi-sport clubs in France Expatriated football clubs Association football clubs established in 1919 Football clubs in Monaco UEFA Cup winning managers 1954 births Living people Udinese Calcio managers Parma F.C. managers ACF Fiorentina managers Modena F.C. managers Panathinaikos F.C. managers A.C. Chievo Verona managers Empoli F.C. managers A.C. Siena managers Bologna F.C. 1909 managers Genoa C.F.C. managers Italian football managers Vicenza Calcio players Superleague Greece managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers U.S. Sassuolo Calcio managers Serie A managers Expatriate football managers in Greece Sportspeople from Verona Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe S.L. Benfica 1904 establishments in Portugal Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in Portugal Taça de Portugal winners Primeira Liga clubs Sports clubs established in 1904 Multi-sport clubs in Portugal Sport in Lisbon Golf clubs and courses in Portugal Companies listed on the Euronext exchanges Publicly traded sports companies Unrelegated association football clubs Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1922 Football clubs in Russia FC Spartak Moscow 1922 establishments in Russia Football clubs in Moscow Spartak Moscow Barcelona 10s BC establishments in Spain Historic Jewish communities Mediterranean port cities and towns in Spain Municipalities in Barcelonès Phoenician colonies in Spain Populated places in Barcelonès Recipients of the Royal Gold Medal Roman sites in Spain University towns in Spain 1971 births Armagh Gaelic footballers Association football midfielders Association footballers from Northern Ireland Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Celtic F.C. players Clan na Gael CLG Gaelic footballers Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Football managers from Northern Ireland Gaelic footballers who switched code Glenavon F.C. players NIFL Premiership players Leicester City F.C. players Living people Manchester City F.C. players Northern Ireland B international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Nottingham Forest F.C. players People educated at St Michael's Grammar School, Lurgan People from Lurgan Premier League players Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League managers The Football League players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers The Football League managers Association football positions UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying 2010–11 in English football England at UEFA Euro 2012 2010–11 in Welsh football 2011–12 in Welsh football 2010–11 in Bulgarian football 2011–12 in Bulgarian football 2010–11 in Swiss football 2011–12 in Swiss football 2010–11 in Montenegrin football 2011–12 in Montenegrin football Celtic F.C. Visitor attractions in Glasgow Sports venues in Glasgow Football venues in Scotland 2014 Commonwealth Games venues Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Defunct speedway venues in Scotland Scottish Professional Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1892 1892 establishments in Scotland Scotland national football team venues English-speaking countries and territories History of Ireland Home rule in the United Kingdom Island countries Northern Ireland NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United Kingdom States and territories established in 1921 United Kingdom 1948 establishments in Portugal Media in Lisbon Newspapers published in Portugal Publications established in 1948 Portuguese-language newspapers Sports media in Portugal Sports newspapers 1991 births Kenyan Luhya people A.F.C. Leopards players Association football midfielders Beerschot AC players Belgian Pro League players Celtic F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in Sweden Expatriate footballers in England Helsingborgs IF players Living people Kenya international footballers Kenyan expatriate footballers Kenyan expatriates in Belgium Kenyan expatriates in Sweden Kenyan expatriates in the United Kingdom Kenyan footballers Sportspeople from Nairobi Scottish Premier League players Premier League players 1993 births Airdrieonians F.C. players Association football forwards Celtic F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Belgium K. Lierse S.K. players Living people People from Coatbridge Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland youth international footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Scottish Football League players Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players Belgian Pro League players Standard Liège players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players 1987 births Living people 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Argentina international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Argentine footballers Argentine people of Catalan descent Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine people of Spanish descent Argentine Roman Catholics Association football forwards European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Spain FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona C players FC Barcelona players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics La Liga players Naturalised citizens of Spain Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Olympic medalists in football Sportspeople from Rosario, Santa Fe Pichichi Trophy winners Segunda División B players Tercera División players UNICEF people Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers People of Marchesan descent FIFA Century Club Millionaires Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 2010–11 UEFA Champions League 2010–11 in European football UEFA Champions League seasons 2010–11 in Spanish football 2010–11 in English football 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Leeds English footballers English people of Jamaican descent English people of Irish descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Everton F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 2003–04 in English football