 Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1947 births Living people A.F.C. Bournemouth managers A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football midfielders Brentford F.C. players English autobiographers English footballers English football managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players People from Poplar, London Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Seattle Sounders (1974–83) players Southampton F.C. managers Sportspeople from London The Football League managers The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. players Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Tax evasion Living people 1962 births English Jews English businesspeople Tottenham Hotspur F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham  Fictional characters introduced in 1981 Action figures Comics characters introduced in 1981 Extraterrestrial superheroes Film superheroes Fictional characters with superhuman strength Fictional martial artists Fictional princes Fictional twins Masters of the Universe Heroic Warriors 1980s toys Fictional swordsmen Fictional shapeshifters The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 1970 births Living people People from Schaffhausen Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers S.S. Lazio players Chelsea F.C. players Premier League players Italian football managers Milton Keynes Dons F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate footballers in England FC Schalke 04 managers Bundesliga managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FC Schaffhausen players FC Zürich players FC Aarau players Serie A players Swiss Super League players Swiss people of Italian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League winning managers Italian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Italian expatriates in Germany Association football positions Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 Golf Precision sports Ball and bat games Sports originating in Scotland Leisure activities Summer Olympic sports Scottish games 2014 albums Hip hop albums by American artists Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips  UEFA Cup winning managers 1954 births Living people Spanish footballers Elche CF footballers CD Eldense footballers Alicante CF footballers CD Alcoyano footballers Spanish football managers Elche CF Ilicitano managers CD Alcoyano managers Levante UD managers CD Logroñés managers FC Barcelona B managers Málaga CF managers Rayo Vallecano managers Real Betis managers RCD Espanyol managers Sevilla FC managers UE Lleida managers La Liga managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Premier League managers Real Madrid C.F. managers PFC CSKA Moscow managers Russian Football Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Russia FC Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk managers Ukrainian Premier League managers Linares CF players Spanish expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Ukraine Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England Portsmouth F.C. Association football clubs established in 1898 Football clubs in England Sport in Portsmouth Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Southern Football League clubs Football clubs in Hampshire 1898 establishments in England Fan-owned English League football clubs  2003–04 in English football Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology 1994–95 in European football UEFA Cup Winners' Cup Football League Fourth Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe English football trophies and awards Football managers in England Coaching awards Annual events in England Annual sporting events in the United Kingdom London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports FA Cup Finals FA Cup FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners Bookmakers Gambling terminology Organized crime activity 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1963 births Association football defenders Bristol City F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Drumchapel Amateur F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Hamilton Academical F.C. players La Liga managers Labour Party (UK) people Living people Manchester United F.C. managers Premier League managers Real Sociedad managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Scottish Christians Scottish expatriate football managers Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players UEFA Pro Licence holders Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs 1973 births Living people Association football midfielders Catalan footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate football managers in England People from Noguera (comarca) Spanish footballers Spanish football managers Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom CF Balaguer footballers Real Zaragoza players Motherwell F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Walsall F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. managers Everton F.C. managers La Liga players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Spanish expatriate football managers Expatriate footballers in Wales Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Scotland Spanish expatriates in Wales Expatriate football managers in Wales 1985 births Living people Croatian footballers Croatia under-21 international footballers Croatia international footballers GNK Dinamo Zagreb players NK Inter Zaprešić players HŠK Zrinjski Mostar players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Croatian Roman Catholics Sportspeople from Zadar Croatian First Football League players Premier League players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Croatian expatriate footballers Croatian expatriates in the United Kingdom Croatian expatriates in Spain Croatia youth international footballers 1989 births Living people Footballers from Cardiff Welsh expatriate footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Association football utility players Southampton F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Premier League players The Football League players La Liga players BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year People educated at Whitchurch High School 1948 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues Sport in Haringey Football venues in London Tottenham Hotspur F.C. Premier League venues Sports venues completed in 1898 Football League venues Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. Sport in Inverness Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1994 Scottish Premier League teams 1994 establishments in Scotland Inverness Thistle F.C. Caledonian F.C. Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Falkirk F.C. Sport in Falkirk Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1876 1876 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Cup Football cup competitions in Scotland National association football cups 1873 establishments in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1873 Scottish Cup Finals 2014–15 in Scottish football cups Falkirk F.C. matches 21st century in Glasgow Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. matches