 1963 births Association football defenders Bristol City F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Drumchapel Amateur F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Hamilton Academical F.C. players La Liga managers Labour Party (UK) people Living people Manchester United F.C. managers Premier League managers Real Sociedad managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Scottish Christians Scottish expatriate football managers Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players UEFA Pro Licence holders 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Everton F.C. 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Football League venues Premier League venues Defunct baseball venues Sports venues in Liverpool Visitor attractions in Liverpool Sports venues completed in 1892 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England 1971 births Living people People from Chelmsford British accountants British bankers Alumni of the University of Bristol Manchester United F.C. directors and chairmen Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1978 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football central defenders Black English sportspeople Doping cases in association football English autobiographers English film producers English footballers England international footballers English people of Irish descent English people of Saint Lucian descent English sportspeople in doping cases English television personalities England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players People from Peckham Premier League players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Sportspeople from London The Football League players West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. Football club television channels in the United Kingdom Television channels in the United Kingdom 1998 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1998 Premier League on television Preston North End F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Sport in Preston 1880 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire 2006–07 in European football UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying UEFA European Championship qualifying Villarreal CF La Liga clubs Football clubs in the Valencian Community Football clubs in Spain Association football clubs established in 1923 1923 establishments in Spain FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Association football terminology Association football transfers 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology FA Community Shield National association football supercups Football competitions in England Recurring sporting events established in 1908 Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match La Liga seasons 2008–09 in Spanish football leagues Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Moscow Moscow Governorate 1147 establishments in Russia Capitals in Europe 1973 births Living people Association football midfielders Catalan footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate football managers in England People from Noguera (comarca) Spanish footballers Spanish football managers Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom CF Balaguer footballers Real Zaragoza players Motherwell F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Walsall F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. managers Everton F.C. managers La Liga players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Spanish expatriate football managers Expatriate footballers in Wales Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Scotland Spanish expatriates in Wales Expatriate football managers in Wales Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners 1964 births Living people People from Frederiksberg Danish footballers Association football midfielders Danish Superliga players Kjøbenhavns Boldklub players Brøndby IF players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players S.S. Lazio players La Liga players FC Barcelona players Real Madrid C.F. players J.League players Vissel Kobe players Eredivisie players AFC Ajax players Danish football managers Danish Superliga managers Brøndby IF managers La Liga managers Getafe CF managers RCD Mallorca managers Russian Football Premier League managers FC Spartak Moscow managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Lekhwiya SC managers Denmark under-21 international footballers Denmark international footballers UEFA Euro 1984 players 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1995 King Fahd Cup players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club UEFA Golden Players Danish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Japan Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate football managers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Russia Expatriate football managers in Wales Expatriate football managers in Qatar Danish knights Danish expatriate football managers Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software 1986 births Living people People from Santiago, Cape Verde Sportspeople from Lisbon Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent Cape Verdean emigrants to Portugal Portuguese footballers Association football wingers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Primeira Liga players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Portuguese expatriates in England Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Turkey Portuguese expatriates in Turkey Fenerbahçe footballers Süper Lig players Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1978 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football central defenders Black English sportspeople Doping cases in association football English autobiographers English film producers English footballers England international footballers English people of Irish descent English people of Saint Lucian descent English sportspeople in doping cases English television personalities England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players People from Peckham Premier League players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Sportspeople from London The Football League players West Ham United F.C. players Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Political parties in Ukraine Political parties established in 2008 2008 establishments in Ukraine 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Villarreal CF La Liga clubs Football clubs in the Valencian Community Football clubs in Spain Association football clubs established in 1923 1923 establishments in Spain Ferdinand II of Aragon Aragonese infantes Aragonese monarchs Burials at the Royal Chapel of Granada Castilian monarchs Counts of Barcelona Counts of Cervera Critics of Islam Critics of Judaism Dukes of Montblanc Extra Knights Companion of the Garter Grand Masters of the Order of Santiago Galician monarchs History of Catholicism in Spain House of Trastámara Jure uxoris kings Kings of Sicily Knights of Santiago Knights of the Golden Fleece Leonese monarchs Lords of Balaguer Monarchs of Majorca Monarchs of Naples People from Cinco Villas, Aragon People of the Reconquista Princes of Girona Roman Catholic monarchs Regents of Castile Valencian monarchs 1452 births 1516 deaths 15th-century Spanish people 16th-century Spanish people 15th-century monarchs in Europe 16th-century monarchs in Europe Spanish Roman Catholics Spanish people of Jewish descent Monarchs of Jewish descent Terminology used in multiple sports Madrid Capitals in Europe Municipalities in the Community of Madrid Populated places in the Community of Madrid Populated places established in the 9th century University towns in Spain Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1955 establishments in the United Kingdom ITV Media companies of the United Kingdom