 English-speaking countries and territories History of Ireland Home rule in the United Kingdom Island countries Northern Ireland NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United Kingdom States and territories established in 1921 United Kingdom  Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London Glentoran F.C. Association football clubs established in 1882 United Soccer Association imported teams Association football clubs in Northern Ireland NIFL Premiership clubs Association football clubs in Belfast Association football clubs in County Antrim 1882 establishments in Ireland Football leagues in Northern Ireland Top level football leagues in Europe Sports leagues established in 2008 NIFL Premiership FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events McDonald's Companies based in DuPage County, Illinois Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Companies in the Dow Jones Industrial Average Fast-food chains of the United States Fast-food franchises Fast-food hamburger restaurants Multinational food companies Oak Brook, Illinois Restaurant chains in the United States Restaurants established in 1940 1940 establishments in California 1955 establishments in Illinois Fast-food chains of Australia Fast-food chains of Singapore 1983 births Living people Soccer players from Melbourne Australian people of Scottish descent Australian soccer players Australian expatriate soccer players Australia international soccer players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players National Soccer League (Australia) players Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Australian expatriates in Scotland A.F.C. Bournemouth players Celtic F.C. players Gippsland Falcons players Motherwell F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Wimbledon F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Australian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom 2011 AFC Asian Cup players Scottish league football top scorers Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Golf Precision sports Ball and bat games Sports originating in Scotland Leisure activities Summer Olympic sports Scottish games Belfast British capitals Capitals in Europe Districts of Northern Ireland, 2015-present Populated coastal places in the United Kingdom Port cities and towns in Northern Ireland Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea University towns in Ireland University towns in the United Kingdom Districts of Northern Ireland, 1972–2015 Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Bangor, Gwynedd Cities in Wales Populated places in Gwynedd The Troubles in County Down County Down Ulster Counties of Northern Ireland 1957 births Living people Association football forwards Sportspeople from Belfast Association footballers from Northern Ireland Expatriate association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland international footballers Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Linfield F.C. players Lisburn Distillery F.C. players Lisburn Distillery F.C. managers 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players Limerick F.C. players Limerick F.C. managers Sligo Rovers F.C. players Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland League of Ireland managers League of Ireland players NIFL Premiership players The Football League players Burnley F.C. non-playing staff London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports  Association football clubs established in 1893 Football clubs in England National League (English football) Organisations based in Oxford Oxford United F.C. Sport in Oxford Football clubs in Oxfordshire Football League Cup winners The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs 1893 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1905 Charlton Athletic F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Southern Football League clubs Charlton, London Association football terminology Football clubs in England Sport in Swindon Swindon Town F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1879 Football League Cup winners Southern Football League clubs 1879 establishments in England Football clubs in Wiltshire Northern Ireland national football team European national under-21 association football teams Youth football in Northern Ireland European national under-21 association football teams Portugal national football team 1931 births Sportspeople from Belfast Living people Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland international footballers Everton F.C. managers Association football forwards Glentoran F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Port Vale F.C. players NIFL Premiership players The Football League players 1958 FIFA World Cup players Football managers from Northern Ireland Southport F.C. managers Northern Ireland national football team managers Plymouth Argyle F.C. managers Linfield F.C. managers Expatriate sportspeople from Northern Ireland British expatriates in Greece Expatriate football managers in Greece Greece national football team managers Everton F.C. players PAOK FC managers Mansfield Town F.C. managers The Football League managers 1982 FIFA World Cup managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Members of the Order of the British Empire Algeria Arabic-speaking countries and territories Berber-speaking countries and territories Countries in Africa French-speaking countries and territories G15 nations Maghrebi countries Member states of OPEC Member states of the African Union Member states of the Arab League Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Muslim-majority countries North African countries Republics Requests for audio pronunciation (Arabic) Requests for audio pronunciation (Berber) States and territories established in 1962 World Digital Library related Spain national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Spain UEFA European Championship-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams 1958 births Living people Sportspeople from Derry Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland international footballers Leicester City F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players League of Ireland managers The Football League players People educated at St Columb's College 1967 introductions American sandwiches Hamburgers (food) History of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania McDonald's foods Rihanna songs Song recordings produced by Bangladesh (record producer) Songs written by Rihanna 2012 singles 2011 songs Song recordings produced by Kuk Harrell Songs written by Bangladesh (record producer) Songs about sexuality Songs written by Candice Pillay Songs written by Dem Jointz Romania national football team European national association football teams Football in Romania National sports teams of Romania England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match Association football clubs established in 1898 Association football clubs in Northern Ireland NIFL Premiership clubs Association football clubs in Belfast Crusaders F.C. 1898 establishments in Ireland 1965 births Living people Ards F.C. players Bangor F.C. players Crusaders F.C. players Glentoran F.C. players NIFL Premiership players Linfield F.C. players Association footballers from Northern Ireland Ulster Footballers of the Year Northern Ireland Football Writers' Association Players of the Year Sportspeople from Belfast People from Newtownards Crusaders F.C. managers Abnormal psychology Aftermath of war Stress Trauma and stressor related disorders Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders Emotions Psychiatric diagnosis New Zealand rugby union teams Rugby clubs established in 1996 Sport in Canterbury, New Zealand Super Rugby champions Super Rugby teams Crusaders (rugby union) Northern Ireland national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Northern Ireland 1950s establishments in Northern Ireland 1954 births Living people Sportspeople from Belfast Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland international footballers Manchester United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Örgryte IS players Bury F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Football managers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland national football team managers Macclesfield Town F.C. managers Stockport County F.C. managers 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players The Football League players National League (English football) players Northwich Victoria F.C. managers Northwich Victoria F.C. players Morecambe F.C. managers The Football League managers People educated at Ashfield Boys' High School Posttraumatic stress disorder Abnormal psychology Aftermath of war Homelessness Military medicine Military personnel Military psychiatry Military sociology Military veterans' affairs Psychiatric diagnosis Trauma and stressor related disorders 1965 births Living people Sportspeople from Belfast Association football utility players Association football midfielders Association football forwards Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland international footballers Manchester United F.C. players Everton F.C. players The Football League players Alumni of the University of Salford Alumni of Manchester Metropolitan University 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players British autobiographers Villages in County Down Townlands of County Down Civil parish of Killinchy Civil parish of Comber Daylight saving time in the United Kingdom Arnold Palmer American male golfers Wake Forest Demon Deacons men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Winners of men's major golf championships Winners of senior major golf championships World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Ryder Cup competitors for the United States Golf course architects Golf writers and broadcasters Golfers from Pennsylvania Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Congressional Gold Medal recipients United States Coast Guard personnel People from Latrobe, Pennsylvania Sportspeople from Orlando, Florida 1929 births Living people Golf Precision sports Ball and bat games Sports originating in Scotland Leisure activities Summer Olympic sports Scottish games Pennsylvania Former British colonies States of the Mid-Atlantic Northeastern United States States and territories established in 1787 States of the United States States of the East Coast of the United States Articles containing video clips Golf people Horticulture and gardening Lawn care Games Leisure activities Wake Forest University Educational institutions established in 1834 Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools Universities and colleges in North Carolina Universities and colleges in Winston-Salem, North Carolina Tournament systems American male golfers Ohio State Buckeyes men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for the United States Winners of men's major golf championships Men's Career Grand Slam champion golfers Winners of senior major golf championships World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Golf course architects Golf writers and broadcasters Golfers from Ohio Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients American philanthropists People with poliomyelitis American people of German descent Sportspeople from Columbus, Ohio People from Upper Arlington, Ohio People from Palm Beach County, Florida 1940 births Living people South African golfers Sunshine Tour golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Winners of men's major golf championships Men's Career Grand Slam champion golfers Winners of senior major golf championships World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Golf course architects Golf writers and broadcasters Laureus World Sports Awards winners Recipients of the Order of Ikhamanga Alumni of King Edward VII School (Johannesburg) White South African people South African people of British descent Sportspeople from Johannesburg People from Pixley ka Seme District Municipality People from Jupiter Island, Florida 1935 births Living people Arnold Palmer Lemonade Non-alcoholic mixed drinks Blended tea Comcast Golf Channel Golf in the United States Golf on television English-language television stations in the United States NBCUniversal NBCUniversal networks NBC Sports Television channels and stations established in 1995 Companies based in Orlando, Florida Sports television networks in the United States Social classes Anthropology Social divisions Socialism  Living people Yahoo! employees University of Memphis alumni College of William & Mary alumni People from Lynchburg, Virginia 21st-century American novelists American sportswriters 1968 births Writers from Atlanta, Georgia American male novelists Yahoo! 1994 establishments in California Alibaba Group American websites Companies based in Sunnyvale, California Companies in the PRISM network Companies listed on NASDAQ Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 1994 Internet search engines Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Online companies Software companies based in California Technology companies established in 1994 Web portals Web service providers Websites by company World Wide Web Online Marketing Companies Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Facebook 2004 establishments in Massachusetts Products introduced in 2004 American websites Android (operating system) software Bada software BlackBerry software Blog hosting services Companies based in Menlo Park, California Companies listed on NASDAQ Firefox OS software Human–computer interaction Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2004 IOS software Multilingual websites Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Online gaming services Photo sharing Social information processing Social networking services Social networking websites Student culture Symbian software Technology companies established in 2004 Tor hidden services Websites which mirror Wikipedia Windows Phone software