 Falkirk F.C. Sport in Falkirk Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1876 1876 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. Sport in Inverness Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1994 Scottish Premier League teams 1994 establishments in Scotland Inverness Thistle F.C. Caledonian F.C. Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Cup winners FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe FA Cup Finals FA Cup 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Scottish Cup Football cup competitions in Scotland National association football cups 1873 establishments in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1873 Association football terminology Sports terminology Competition Sports terminology Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Scottish Professional Football League Second level football leagues in Europe Football leagues in Scotland 2013 establishments in Scotland Sports leagues established in 2013 Scottish Championship UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Scotland national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Scotland 1872 establishments in Scotland 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match 1903 establishments in Scotland 2012 Summer Olympic venues 2014 Commonwealth Games venues American football venues in Scotland Athletics (track and field) venues in Scotland Sports venues completed in 1903 Buildings and structures in Glasgow Defunct speedway venues in Scotland Football venues in Scotland Music venues in Glasgow National stadiums Olympic football venues Queen's Park F.C. Rugby World Cup stadiums Rugby union in Glasgow Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Scotland national football team venues Scottish Football League venues Sports venues in Glasgow Scottish Professional Football League venues UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Global Television Network 1974 establishments in Ontario Companies based in North York Television channels and stations established in 1974 1957 in Scotland 1957 in Europe Years of the 20th century in Scotland 1950s in Scotland  England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports 1949 births Living people Sportspeople from Strasbourg FC Mulhouse players Association football sweepers RC Strasbourg players ASPV Strasbourg players Ligue 1 players French footballers French football managers French Roman Catholics AS Nancy managers AS Monaco FC managers Ligue 1 managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Arsenal F.C. managers Honorary Officers of the Order of the British Empire Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Nagoya Grampus managers Expatriate football managers in Japan English Football Hall of Fame inductees University of Strasbourg alumni UEFA Pro Licence holders French expatriate football managers French expatriates in Japan French expatriates in England Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1907–08 in English football 1969 births Living people People from Hertsmere (district) English footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Watford F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Premier League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. non-playing staff English football managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Premier League managers British association football commentators Association football midfielders Aston Villa F.C. managers Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs 1990 births Living people People from Longsight Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players British people of Ghanaian descent Black British sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1993 births Living people Arsenal F.C. players Association football wingers Black English sportspeople England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers English people of Jamaican descent People educated at St John's College (Portsmouth) Sportspeople from Portsmouth Premier League players Southampton F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1985 births Living people People from Nord (French department) French footballers French expatriate footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers Association football defenders Lille OSC players Newcastle United F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players French expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from San Sebastián Spanish footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Basque footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División B players Tercera División players FC Barcelona C players FC Barcelona B players Real Sociedad footballers Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Everton F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriate sportspeople in France Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Scotland 1976 births Living people People from Lifford Sportspeople from County Donegal Association football goalkeepers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland FIFA Century Club Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Celtic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff 1987 births Living people People from Blois French people of Senegalese descent French footballers France international footballers Association football defenders Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players FC Gueugnon players Olympique Lyonnais players Primeira Liga players Vitória F.C. players FC Porto players La Liga players Valencia CF players Premier League players Liverpool F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players French expatriate footballers French expatriates in Spain Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England 1984 births Living people People from Greenwich English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English Christians Association football wingers West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Premier League players Black British sportspeople 1992 births Living people People from Abidjan Danish footballers Denmark under-21 international footballers Denmark international footballers Danish people of Ivorian descent Association football defenders Danish expatriate footballers Ivorian expatriate footballers Boldklubben af 1893 players FC Nordsjælland players Danish Superliga players Aston Villa F.C. players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate footballers in England Premier League players Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Terminology used in multiple sports 1985 births People from West Kirby Living people Association football defenders English footballers Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Carlisle United F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players England youth international footballers People educated at Calday Grange Grammar School Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles 1964 births Association football central defenders Association football forwards Ayr United F.C. players Berwick Rangers F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. managers Falkirk F.C. players Hartlepool United F.C. managers Hibernian F.C. managers Hibernian F.C. players Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. managers Living people Livingston F.C. managers People from Leith Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Junior Football Association players Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Sportspeople from Edinburgh Swansea City A.F.C. players The Football League managers The Football League players Scottish Professional Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1903 Sport in Aberdeen United Soccer Association imported teams Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish Premier League teams Former Highland Football League teams 1903 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology Scottish Football League Scottish League Cup Football cup competitions in Scotland National association football league cups Scottish Professional Football League 1946 establishments in Scotland 1995 births Living people Falkirk F.C. players Scottish Football League players Sportspeople from Falkirk Scottish footballers Scotland youth international footballers Scottish Professional Football League players People educated at Graeme High School Hibernian F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1875 Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Edinburgh United Soccer Association imported teams Leith Scottish Premier League teams 1875 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners 1988 births Living people Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Rangers F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players Carlisle United F.C. players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Football League players People educated at Stranraer Academy Association football forwards Sportspeople from Dumfries Falkirk F.C. players Scottish Professional Football League players Dundee F.C. players Queen of the South F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1919 Sport in Dumfries and Galloway 1919 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners South of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams 1982 births Living people Association football midfielders Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players Superleague Greece players Falkirk F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Asteras Tripoli F.C. players People from Coatbridge Scotland B international footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Greece Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Dundee F.C. players Partick Thistle F.C. players Queen of the South F.C. players Scottish Professional Football League players 1985 births Living people People from Rutherglen Scottish footballers Clyde F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players Stenhousemuir F.C. players Montrose F.C. players Brechin City F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players Airdrieonians F.C. players Raith Rovers F.C. players Dundee F.C. players Partick Thistle F.C. players Association football forwards Sportspeople from South Lanarkshire Scottish Professional Football League players Queen of the South F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Association football terminology 1984 births Living people Footballers from Bristol English footballers Association football defenders Mangotsfield United F.C. players Team Bath F.C. players Newport County A.F.C. players Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. players National League (English football) players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players 1980 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Association football forwards St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Shelbourne F.C. players Carlisle United F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. players Scottish Premier League players League of Ireland players The Football League players Scottish Football League players Home Farm F.C. players Darlington F.C. players Scottish Professional Football League players Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Belvedere F.C. players Inverness Clan Fraser Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Shinty Scottish Professional Football League Scottish Premiership Top level football leagues in Europe Football leagues in Scotland 2013 establishments in Scotland Sports leagues established in 2013 1950 births 2009 deaths 20th-century American writers 21st-century American writers American film directors American film producers American male screenwriters American television writers University of Arizona alumni Burials in Illinois Film directors from Illinois Film directors from Michigan National Lampoon people People from Grosse Pointe, Michigan Writers from Lansing, Michigan People from Northbrook, Illinois Glenbrook North High School alumni Writers from Illinois Writers from Michigan Male television writers Michael Jackson songs Songs from films 1978 songs 1979 singles Songs written by Charlie Smalls Song recordings produced by Quincy Jones Scottish Cup seasons 2012–13 in Scottish football cups UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe Netherlands Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Kingdom of the Netherlands Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Western Europe UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations Kraków City counties of Poland Cities and towns in Lesser Poland Voivodeship Former capitals of Poland Galicia (Eastern Europe) Kraków Voivodeship (1919–39) Historic Jewish communities World Heritage Sites in Poland Members of the Hanseatic League Magdeburg rights 1977 births Living people Dutch footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Italy Netherlands international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Fortuna Sittard players PSV Eindhoven players FC Barcelona players FC Bayern Munich footballers Indo people A.C. Milan players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players La Liga players Bundesliga players Eredivisie players Eerste Divisie players Serie A players People from Maasgouw Dutch expatriates in Spain  Racism Discrimination Hatred Politics and race 1889 establishments in the Netherlands Football in the Netherlands Organisations based in the Netherlands with royal patronage Sports governing bodies in the Netherlands UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1889 Organisations based in Utrecht (province) Zeist 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Poland Central Europe Eastern Europe Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1918 Ukraine 1991 establishments in Ukraine Areas of traditional spread of Ukrainians and Ukrainian language Countries in Europe Eastern Europe Kievan Rus' Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Ukrainian-speaking countries and territories Auschwitz concentration camp 1940 establishments in Germany Human rights abuses Registered museums in Poland Tourism in Eastern Europe World Heritage Sites in Poland World War II sites in Poland World War II sites of Nazi Germany Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions European national association football teams Poland national football team National sports teams of Poland 1921 establishments in Poland Criminology Criminal law Crime prevention Law enforcement Law enforcement techniques Football venues in Poland Lech Poznań Football venues in Poznań UEFA Euro 2012 stadiums in Poland Sports venues in Greater Poland Voivodeship Visitor attractions in Poznań 1933 births Living people Dutch female middle-distance runners Athletes (track and field) at the 1960 Summer Olympics Athletes (track and field) at the 1964 Summer Olympics European Athletics Championships medalists Olympic athletes of the Netherlands Sportspeople from Leiden 1893 establishments in the Netherlands Publications established in 1893 Newspapers published in the Netherlands Dutch-language newspapers Media in Amsterdam BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom Articles with images not understandable by color blind users Dutch language Languages of Belgium Languages of the Netherlands Languages of Saint Martin Languages of the ABC Islands Low Franconian languages Stress-timed languages Subject–object–verb languages Verb-second languages Nazi concentration camps Nazi SS Total institutions UEFA Euro 2000 France at UEFA Euro 2000 Italy at UEFA Euro 2000 Netherlands at UEFA Euro 2000 1999–2000 in Turkish football 1999–2000 in Portuguese football Spain at UEFA Euro 2000 1999–2000 in Romanian football 1999–2000 in Yugoslavian football UEFA European Championship tournaments UEFA Euro 1988 1987–88 in European football International association football competitions hosted by Germany 1987–88 in German football Netherlands at UEFA Euro 1988 1988 in Soviet football Republic of Ireland at UEFA Euro 1988 England at UEFA Euro 1988 Italy at UEFA Euro 1988 Spain at UEFA Euro 1988 Denmark at UEFA Euro 1988 Netherlands national football team 1905 establishments in the Netherlands European national association football teams UEFA European Championship-winning countries Football teams in the Netherlands 1962 births Living people Dutch footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch football managers Player-coaches Dutch people of Surinamese descent HFC Haarlem players Feyenoord players PSV Eindhoven players A.C. Milan players U.C. Sampdoria players Chelsea F.C. players Eredivisie players Serie A players Premier League players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players European Footballer of the Year winners World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners FIFA 100 Association football utility players Chelsea F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers Feyenoord managers LA Galaxy coaches FC Terek Grozny managers Premier League managers Eredivisie managers Major League Soccer coaches Russian Football Premier League managers International opponents of apartheid in South Africa Footballers from Amsterdam Dutch expatriate footballers Dutch expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Italy Dutch expatriates in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate football managers in England Dutch expatriates in the United States Expatriate soccer managers in the United States Dutch expatriates in Russia Expatriate football managers in Russia AFC DWS players Dutch expatriate football managers Knights of the Order of Orange-Nassau Green politics Political correctness BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom 1953 British television programme debuts 1950s British television series 1960s British television series 1970s British television series 1980s British television series 1990s British television series 2000s British television series 2010s British television series British documentary television series BBC television documentaries British television news programmes Current affairs shows BBC television news programmes Nazism Adolf Hitler Anti-communism Antisemitism Fascism Far-right politics Ideologies Jewish German history Nationalism Politics of Nazi Germany Racism The Holocaust Totalitarianism 1955 births 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players AS Nancy players AS Saint-Étienne players Association football midfielders Dual internationalists (football) English Football Hall of Fame inductees European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Italy FIFA 100 Footballers at the 1976 Summer Olympics France international footballers France national football team managers France under-21 international footballers French expatriate footballers French footballers French football managers French people of Italian descent French sports executives and administrators Juventus F.C. players Kuwait international footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Living people Officiers of the Légion d'honneur Officiers of the Ordre national du Mérite Olympic footballers of France Olympic cauldron lighters People from Meurthe-et-Moselle People of Piedmontese descent Presidents of UEFA Recipients of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin Serie A players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA Euro 1984 players UEFA Euro 1992 managers World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners Daylight saving time in the United Kingdom Greece Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Southeastern Europe States and territories established in 1821 Capitals in Europe Cities and towns in Masovian Voivodeship City counties of Poland Silver Crosses of the Virtuti Militari Warsaw Governorate Warsaw World Heritage Sites in Poland