 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Sports officiating Turkey Countries in Europe Western Asian countries Eastern Mediterranean Near Eastern countries Middle Eastern countries Modern Turkic states G20 nations Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1923 1923 establishments in Turkey Eurasia Southeastern Europe Western Asia Muslim-majority countries E7 nations 1976 births Living people Sportspeople from Istanbul Turkish football referees UEFA Champions League referees UEFA Europa League referees 2014 FIFA World Cup referees Insurance agents Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations 1986 births Living people People from Santiago, Cape Verde Sportspeople from Lisbon Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent Cape Verdean emigrants to Portugal Portuguese footballers Association football wingers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Primeira Liga players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Portuguese expatriates in England Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Turkey Portuguese expatriates in Turkey Fenerbahçe footballers Süper Lig players 1983 births Living people People from Salamanca Spanish footballers Castilian-Leonese footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players Deportivo de La Coruña players Premier League players Liverpool F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers 1962 births Living people English footballers England international footballers Burnley F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Association football midfielders Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Stockport County F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff People from Nelson, Lancashire Norwich City F.C. captains Norwich City F.C. non-playing staff Pittsburgh Steelers National Football League teams Steagles Sports clubs established in 1933 Green Bay Packers 1919 establishments in Wisconsin Fan-owned sports teams National Football League teams Publicly traded sports companies Sports clubs established in 1919 Sports in Green Bay, Wisconsin Visitor attractions in Brown County, Wisconsin