  Republic of Ireland association footballers Association football midfielders Crumlin United F.C. players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Limerick F.C. players League of Ireland players Living people 1983 births Sligo Rovers F.C. Association football clubs in Connacht Association football clubs established in 1928 Sligo (town) League of Ireland Premier Division clubs 1928 establishments in Ireland Former Leinster Senior League clubs St Patrick's Athletic F.C. Association football clubs in Dublin (city) Association football clubs established in 1929 League of Ireland Premier Division clubs 1929 establishments in Ireland Former Leinster Senior League clubs 1985 births Living people Association football players from County Dublin Republic of Ireland association footballers Belvedere F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Bohemian F.C. players Dundalk F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Derry City F.C. players The Football League players League of Ireland players Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Sligo (town) County towns in the Republic of Ireland Port cities and towns in the Republic of Ireland Towns and villages in County Sligo Boroughs in the Republic of Ireland Causewayed enclosures Association football venues in the Republic of Ireland Sligo Rovers F.C. Sports venues in County Sligo  Dublin (city) 841 establishments Capitals in Europe Cities in the Republic of Ireland County towns in the Republic of Ireland Leinster Local administrative units of the Republic of Ireland Populated coastal places in the Republic of Ireland Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Staple ports University towns in Ireland Viking Age populated places Populated places established in the 9th century 1985 births Living people Association football players from County Dublin Republic of Ireland association footballers Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Bohemian F.C. players Association football goalkeepers League of Ireland players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players League of Ireland XI players Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Leicester Celtic A.F.C. players 1986 births Living people Haitian footballers Haiti international footballers Haitian people Tampa Spartans men's soccer players Ajax Orlando Prospects players IMG Academy Bradenton players Atlanta Silverbacks U23's players Chicago Fire U-23 players Tampa Bay Rowdies players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Premier Development League players USSF Division 2 Professional League players North American Soccer League players League of Ireland players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland 2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Lindsey Wilson Blue Raiders men's soccer players Expatriate footballers in Thailand Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Bangladesh Sheikh Russel KC players 2014 Caribbean Cup players Jacksonville Armada FC players A.S. Andria BAT players Lindsey Wilson College alumni 1980s American comedy television series 1987 American television series debuts 1990s American comedy television series 1995 American television series endings American Broadcasting Company network shows American television sitcoms English-language television programming Television series about families Television series by Warner Bros. Television Television shows set in San Francisco, California TGIF (ABC) Towns and villages in County Sligo 1987 births Living people Millwall F.C. players Cobh Ramblers F.C. players Sporting Fingal F.C. players Drogheda United F.C. players Dundalk F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Cork City F.C. players Linfield F.C. players NIFL Premiership players League of Ireland players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Association football players from County Louth Belvedere F.C. players 1985 births Living people Sligo Rovers F.C. players League of Ireland players League of Ireland XI players Mansfield Town F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers The Football League players Association football defenders 1960 births Living people Association football forwards Shelbourne F.C. players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Athlone Town A.F.C. players Athlone Town A.F.C. managers St Patrick's Athletic F.C. managers Shamrock Rovers F.C. managers Expatriate footballers in Switzerland Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate soccer players in Canada League of Ireland players League of Ireland managers Irish expatriates in Canada Irish expatriates in Belgium Irish expatriates in Switzerland La Liga players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Association football players from Dublin (city) Racing de Santander players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Vancouver Whitecaps (1974–84) players League of Ireland XI players 1989 births Living people People from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Lincoln City F.C. players Shamrock Rovers F.C. guest players League of Ireland players Bohemian F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Jerez Industrial CF footballers St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players The Football League players Tercera División players 1992 births Living people Republic of Ireland association footballers Association football players from County Dublin Bohemian F.C. players League of Ireland players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players Association football wingers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Belvedere F.C. players 1981 births Living people Republic of Ireland association footballers Association football goalkeepers People from County Meath Shelbourne F.C. players Drogheda United F.C. players Bray Wanderers A.F.C. players Galway United F.C. (1937–2011) players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Dundalk F.C. players League of Ireland players League of Ireland XI players St Francis F.C. players Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Living people 1984 births Republic of Ireland association footballers Association football central defenders Association football players from County Dublin University College Dublin A.F.C. players Shelbourne F.C. players Drogheda United F.C. players League of Ireland players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Bray Wanderers A.F.C. players League of Ireland XI players Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Cherry Orchard F.C. players 1986 births Living people English footballers Chester City F.C. players Accrington Stanley F.C. players Southport F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Derry City F.C. players A.F.C. Telford United players League of Ireland players The Football League players National League (English football) players Sportspeople from Chester League of Ireland XI players Buffy the Vampire Slayer (season 6) episodes 2002 television episodes LGBT-related television episodes Terminology used in multiple sports Association football culture Australian rules football culture Baseball culture Basketball culture Cricket culture Gaelic games culture Rugby football culture Association football terminology Sports culture Doping in sport Cheating Bioethics Amphetamine Boxing Combat sports Sports originating in England Individual sports Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips European martial arts BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom Physicians Healthcare occupations Provincial capitals in Sri Lanka Populated places in North Western Province, Sri Lanka Kurunegala District Kurunegala  Alkylamines Bodybuilding supplements Decongestants Eli Lilly and Company Norepinephrine releasing agents Stimulants Sympathomimetics Withdrawn drugs Sinhalese people Sri Lankan Buddhists Alumni of Nalanda College, Colombo Alumni of the University of Ceylon (Colombo) Living people Pharmaceutical industry Products of chemical industry Delhi Capital districts and territories English-speaking countries and territories Indian Union Territory capitals Metropolitan cities in India Proposed states and territories of India Populated places established in the 6th century BC 6th-century BC establishments in India Burial sites of the Lodhi dynasty Living people Sportspeople from Newport, Wales Boxers at the 2010 Commonwealth Games Boxers at the 2014 Commonwealth Games Welsh boxers Commonwealth Games bronze medallists for Wales Commonwealth Games gold medallists for Wales Commonwealth Games competitors for Wales 1991 births Male boxers Boxing weight classes Bantamweight boxers Anabolic steroids Progestogens  2010 racehorse births Thoroughbred racehorses Racehorses bred in Ireland Racehorses trained in the United Kingdom Thoroughbred family 3-c Cricket in Sri Lanka National cricket teams National sports teams of Sri Lanka Sri Lanka in international cricket Sri Lankan terrorism victims 2012 Summer Olympics 2012 in London Summer Olympics in London 2012 in British sport 2012 in multi-sport events Summer Olympic Games Olympic Games in the United Kingdom Commonwealth Games Multi-sport events Commonwealth sports competitions British Empire Commonwealth of Nations Politics and sports Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Stimulants Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Psychopharmacology Anti-doping organizations Drugs in sport Organisations based in Lausanne International sports bodies based in Switzerland Olympic Games Organizations based in Montreal Sports organisations established in 1999 Sports rules and regulations Doping in sport Jamaica Countries in the Caribbean English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies Former English colonies Former Spanish colonies G15 nations Greater Antilles Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Caribbean Community Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1962 Small Island Developing States Road bicycle racing terminology Sports competitors Sports terminology