 1961 births Living people People from Wimbledon, London English footballers Association football midfielders The Football League players Whyteleafe F.C. players Corinthian-Casuals F.C. players Dulwich Hamlet F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Barnet F.C. players English football managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Reading F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. managers Charlton Athletic F.C. managers Southampton F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers UEFA Pro Licence holders British association football commentators Epsom & Ewell F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. managers Strikes (martial arts) Articles containing video clips Hull City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in England Sport in Kingston upon Hull Football clubs in the East Riding of Yorkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1904 establishments in England Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1989 births Living people People from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Cork City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Blackrock hurlers St. Michael's Gaelic footballers College Corinthians A.F.C. players Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Valencia CF La Liga clubs Football clubs in Valencia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Association football clubs established in 1919 1919 establishments in Spain FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Paris Saint-Germain F.C. Association football clubs established in 1970 Football clubs in France G-14 clubs 16th arrondissement of Paris Ligue 1 clubs Football clubs in Paris 1970 establishments in France Unrelegated association football clubs Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin 2014–15 UEFA Champions League 2014–15 in UEFA football UEFA Champions League seasons Swedish footballers Footballers from Skåne County Association football forwards Malmö FF players AFC Ajax players Juventus F.C. players Inter Milan players FC Barcelona players A.C. Milan players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Allsvenskan players Eredivisie players Serie A players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Sweden international footballers Sweden youth international footballers Sweden under-21 international footballers 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Swedish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Italy Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Spain Swedish expatriate sportspeople in France Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in France Swedish people of Croatian descent Swedish people of Bosniak descent Swedish people of Bosnia and Herzegovina descent Swedish Roman Catholics Sportspeople from Malmö Swedish taekwondo practitioners 1981 births Living people 1998 books Children's picture books Caldecott Honor-winning works David Beckham 1975 births 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.C. Milan players Association football midfielders BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners Brimsdown Rovers F.C. players British expatriate sportspeople in the United States British people of Jewish descent Designated Players (MLS) England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English bloggers English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Italy English expatriates in Spain English expatriates in the United States English Football Hall of Fame inductees English footballers English male models English people of Jewish descent Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club LA Galaxy players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Living people Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players Manchester United F.C. players Officers of the Order of the British Empire Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players People from Leytonstone Premier League players Preston North End F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Serie A players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players Victoria Beckham UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe France Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Western Europe Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 1984 births Living people People from São Paulo (state) Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Association football forwards Guarani Futebol Clube players Santos Futebol Clube players Grêmio Foot-Ball Porto Alegrense players Associação Portuguesa de Desportos players Valencia CF players S.L. Benfica footballers Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players La Liga players Primeira Liga players Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in Spain Expatriate footballers in Spain Association football terminology Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods 1985 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Association football forwards Estudiantes de Buenos Aires footballers Genoa C.F.C. players San Lorenzo footballers S.S.C. Napoli players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Hebei China Fortune F.C. players People from Rosario Department Argentina international footballers Serie A players Ligue 1 players Chinese Super League players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in China 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate footballers Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in France Argentine Roman Catholics Argentine people of Italian descent Football leagues in France Ligue 1 Top level football leagues in Europe 1932 establishments in France 2010s Malayalam-language films Indian thriller films 2010s thriller films Indian films Europe Continents 1959 births 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players A.S. Roma players A.C. Milan players A.C. Milan managers A.C. Reggiana 1919 managers Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in France Expatriate football managers in Spain Juventus F.C. managers Living people Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in England Italian expatriates in France Italian expatriates in Spain Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers La Liga managers Ligue 1 managers People from the Province of Reggio Emilia Paris Saint-Germain F.C. managers Parma F.C. managers Parma F.C. players Premier League managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Recipients of the Order of the Star of Italian Solidarity Serie A managers Serie A players UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 1988 players Games Leisure activities Scoring (sport) Terminology used in multiple sports Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Tournament systems 1971 births Armagh Gaelic footballers Association football midfielders Association footballers from Northern Ireland Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Celtic F.C. players Clan na Gael CLG Gaelic footballers Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Football managers from Northern Ireland Gaelic footballers who switched code Glenavon F.C. players NIFL Premiership players Leicester City F.C. players Living people Manchester City F.C. players Northern Ireland B international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Nottingham Forest F.C. players People educated at St Michael's Grammar School, Lurgan People from Lurgan Premier League players Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League managers The Football League players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers The Football League managers Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 RMS Titanic 1911 ships 1912 in Canada 1912 in the United Kingdom 1912 in the United States Deaths by drowning Deaths due to shipwreck Edwardian era Four funnel liners History of Halifax, Nova Scotia Olympic-class ocean liners Passenger ships of the United Kingdom Ship collisions with icebergs Ships built by Harland and Wolff Ships built in Belfast Ships of Ireland Ships of the White Star Line Ships sunk in collisions Shipwrecks in the Atlantic Ocean Steamships of the United Kingdom Steamships Maritime incidents in 1912 Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1986 births Living people People from Santiago, Cape Verde Sportspeople from Lisbon Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent Cape Verdean emigrants to Portugal Portuguese footballers Association football wingers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Primeira Liga players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Portuguese expatriates in England Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Turkey Portuguese expatriates in Turkey Fenerbahçe footballers Süper Lig players Turkey Countries in Europe Western Asian countries Eastern Mediterranean Near Eastern countries Middle Eastern countries Modern Turkic states G20 nations Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1923 1923 establishments in Turkey Eurasia Southeastern Europe Western Asia Muslim-majority countries E7 nations Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1976 births Living people Sportspeople from Istanbul Turkish football referees UEFA Champions League referees UEFA Europa League referees 2014 FIFA World Cup referees Insurance agents