 FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners 1971 births Living people People from Bages Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players Serie A players Brescia Calcio players A.S. Roma players Qatar Stars League players Al Ahli SC (Doha) players Liga MX players Dorados de Sinaloa footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers Footballers at the 1992 Summer Olympics 1994 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players Olympic footballers of Spain Olympic gold medalists for Spain Olympic medalists in football Doping cases in association football Spanish sportspeople in doping cases Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Qatar Expatriate footballers in Mexico Spanish football managers Spanish expatriate football managers La Liga managers FC Barcelona B managers FC Barcelona managers Bundesliga managers FC Bayern Munich managers Expatriate football managers in Germany UEFA Champions League winning managers Catalonia international footballers Spanish expatriates in Qatar UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain People from Mönchengladbach Sportspeople from North Rhine-Westphalia 1945 births Living people German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers UEFA Euro 1972 players 1974 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Bundesliga players Borussia Mönchengladbach players Hannover 96 players German football managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Portugal UEFA Champions League winning managers German expatriates in Spain German expatriates in Portugal Bundesliga managers La Liga managers Primeira Liga managers Borussia Mönchengladbach managers FC Bayern Munich managers Athletic Bilbao managers Eintracht Frankfurt managers CD Tenerife managers Real Madrid C.F. managers S.L. Benfica managers FC Schalke 04 managers Bayer 04 Leverkusen managers Kicker-Torjägerkanone Award winners England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1955 births Living people People from Lippstadt German expatriate footballers German footballers Germany international footballers Germany B international footballers FC Bayern Munich footballers Inter Milan players Serie A players Servette FC players European Footballer of the Year winners FIFA 100 Kicker-Torjägerkanone Award winners 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1980 players UEFA Euro 1984 players UEFA European Championship-winning players Bundesliga players FC Bayern Munich board members German chief executives Swiss Super League players Expatriate footballers in Italy German expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Switzerland Sportspeople from North Rhine-Westphalia Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Top level football leagues in Europe Bundesliga Professional sports leagues 1963 establishments in West Germany Sports leagues established in 1963 Association football leagues in Germany 1946 births 2005 deaths Sportspeople from Belfast Ulster Scots people Presbyterians from Northern Ireland People educated at Grosvenor Grammar School Association football midfielders Association football wingers Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland international footballers Manchester United F.C. players Expatriate association footballers from Northern Ireland British expatriates in South Africa Expatriate soccer players in South Africa Jewish Guild players Dunstable Town F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Cork Celtic F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Expatriates from Northern Ireland in the United States Los Angeles Aztecs players Fulham F.C. players Fort Lauderdale Strikers (1977–83) players Hibernian F.C. players San Jose Earthquakes (1974–88) players Expatriates from Northern Ireland in Hong Kong Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong Sea Bee players Hong Kong Rangers FC players A.F.C. Bournemouth players British expatriates in Australia Expatriate soccer players in Australia Queensland Lions players Nuneaton Town F.C. players Tobermore United F.C. players The Football League players League of Ireland players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Scottish Football League players North American Soccer League (1968–84) indoor players National Soccer League (Australia) players First Division/Premier League top scorers European Footballer of the Year winners English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 UEFA Golden Players British association football commentators British people convicted of assault Organ transplant recipients Alcohol-related deaths in England Deaths from renal failure Infectious disease deaths in England Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester La Liga Football leagues in Spain Top level football leagues in Europe 1928 establishments in Spain Sports leagues established in 1928 Atlético de Kolkata owners Europe Continents Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom Germany Central Europe Countries in Europe Federal republics G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1871 Western Europe Articles containing video clips Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Management occupations Hospitality occupations 1952 births Living people People from Ulm Sportspeople from Baden-Württemberg German footballers German people convicted of tax crimes German prisoners and detainees Prisoners and detainees of Germany Association football forwards Bundesliga players FC Bayern Munich footballers 1. FC Nürnberg players Germany international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany youth international footballers UEFA Euro 1972 players 1974 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1976 players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Footballers at the 1972 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of West Germany FC Bayern Munich non-playing staff German football chairmen and investors FC Bayern Munich board members Sole survivors Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy Paris Saint-Germain F.C. Association football clubs established in 1970 Football clubs in France G-14 clubs 16th arrondissement of Paris Ligue 1 clubs Football clubs in Paris 1970 establishments in France Unrelegated association football clubs 1964 births Living people Spanish footballers Basque footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards La Liga players Real Sociedad footballers FC Barcelona players Deportivo de La Coruña players J.League players Urawa Red Diamonds players Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 1988 players 1994 FIFA World Cup players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Japan Spanish expatriates in Japan Manchester City F.C. directors and chairmen Etihad Airways Premier League venues Football venues in England Manchester City F.C. Sports venues in Manchester 2002 Commonwealth Games venues Music venues in Greater Manchester Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Rugby union stadiums in England Sports venues completed in 2002 2002 establishments in England Former capitals of Italy Milan Populated places established in the 1st millennium BC 1936 births 21st-century Italian criminals A.C. Milan Forza Italia politicians Italian anti-communists Italian billionaires Italian football chairmen and investors Italian fraudsters Italian mass media owners Italian politicians convicted of crimes Italian publishers (people) Living people Members of Propaganda Due Members of the Chamber of Deputies (Italy) Newspaper publishers (people) Politicians convicted of fraud People expelled from public office People from Milan Presidents of the European Council Prime Ministers of Italy Recipients of the Order of Abdulaziz al Saud Recipients of the Star of Romania Order Silvio Berlusconi The People of Freedom politicians University of Milan alumni Italian Roman Catholics International Emmy Directorate Award Manchester 1st-century establishments in Roman Britain 79 establishments Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North West England Local government districts of North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 1st century FIFA World Cup finals 1966 FIFA World Cup 1966 in London England national football team matches Germany national football team matches Events at Wembley Stadium Germany at the 1966 FIFA World Cup England at the 1966 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup controversies 1966 controversies England–Germany football rivalry Munich German state capitals Populated places established in the 12th century FC Barcelona B FC Barcelona Spanish reserve football teams Football clubs in Spain Football clubs in Barcelona Association football clubs established in 1970 1970 establishments in Spain 1962 births Living people People from Amsterdam Footballers from Amsterdam Dutch people of Surinamese descent Dutch expatriate footballers Dutch footballers Netherlands international footballers AFC DWS players AFC Ajax players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Real Zaragoza players A.C. Milan players Serie A players La Liga players Eredivisie players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Spain UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players 1994 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA European Championship-winning players Association football central defenders Dutch football managers Netherlands national football team managers UEFA Euro 2000 managers Sparta Rotterdam managers FC Barcelona managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Eredivisie managers La Liga managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Süper Lig managers Expatriate football managers in Turkey Saudi Arabia national football team managers UEFA Champions League winning managers FIFA 100 Dutch expatriates in Italy Dutch expatriates in Turkey Spain national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Spain UEFA European Championship-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries 1987 births Living people 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Argentina international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Argentine footballers Argentine people of Catalan descent Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine people of Spanish descent Argentine Roman Catholics Association football forwards European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Spain FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona C players FC Barcelona players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics La Liga players Naturalised citizens of Spain Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Olympic medalists in football Sportspeople from Rosario, Santa Fe Pichichi Trophy winners Segunda División B players Tercera División players UNICEF people Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers People of Marchesan descent FIFA Century Club Millionaires 1980 births Living people People from Terrassa Catalan footballers Spanish footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA Century Club Olympic footballers of Spain Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Olympic silver medalists for Spain Olympic medalists in football 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Catalonia international footballers Expatriate footballers in Qatar Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish expatriates in Qatar 1984 births Living people People from the Province of Albacete Spanish footballers Castilian-Manchegan footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División B players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players Spanish Roman Catholics Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Catalan XI guest footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA European Championship-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA World Cup-winning players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club 1973 births Living people Footballers from Bavaria German footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers German expatriate footballers FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players Newcastle United F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Bundesliga players Premier League players The Football League players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players German football managers Stockport County F.C. managers National League (English football) managers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate football managers in England German expatriates in England German expatriate football managers UEFA Euro 2008 UEFA European Championship tournaments 2007–08 in European football 2007–08 in Austrian football 2007–08 in Swiss football International association football competitions hosted by Austria International association football competitions hosted by Switzerland Austria–Switzerland relations 1981 births Living people Sportspeople from Calgary 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Soccer people from Alberta British expatriates in Germany Canadian expatriate soccer players Canadian expatriate sportspeople in Germany Canadian soccer players Canadian people of English descent Canadian people of Welsh descent Citizens of the United Kingdom through descent English footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Welsh footballers Wales youth international footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players Bundesliga players Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players 1939 establishments in the United States American monthly magazines American women's magazines Condé Nast Magazines established in 1939 Women's fashion magazines Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Football clubs in England Leeds United F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1919 Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Championship clubs 1919 establishments in England Sport in Leeds Phoenix clubs (association football) Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Expatriate footballers in England American soccer players American Roman Catholics American people of Irish descent Furman Paladins men's soccer players CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning players 2005 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players United States men's under-20 international soccer players United States men's international soccer players People from Nacogdoches, Texas New England Revolution players Fulham F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Seattle Sounders FC players Major League Soccer players Designated Players (MLS) Premier League players Soccer players from Texas 1983 births Living people American expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Major League Soccer All-Stars Association football forwards New England Revolution draft picks FIFA Century Club Major League Soccer first round draft picks 1971 births 1993 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 1993 Copa América players 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1995 Copa América players 1996 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 1998 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 1999 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2000 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players American expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom American people of German descent American soccer players Association football goalkeepers Association football goalkeepers who have scored Aston Villa F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Brøndby IF players Columbus Crew SC players Footballers at the 1992 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Galatasaray S.K. footballers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Major League Soccer players Newcastle United F.C. players Olympic soccer players of the United States People from Lakewood, Ohio Premier League players Soccer players from Ohio Sportspeople from Cuyahoga County, Ohio Süper Lig players The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players UCLA Bruins men's soccer players United States men's international soccer players United States men's under-23 international soccer players Major League Soccer broadcasters FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Association football forwards Rangers F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players 1989 births Living people Footballers from Cardiff Welsh expatriate footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Association football utility players Southampton F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Premier League players The Football League players La Liga players BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year People educated at Whitchurch High School 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Leicester English footballers Association football forwards Quorn F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players  Defunct cricket grounds in England Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1932 Sports venues in York York City F.C. Association football terminology 1948 births Living people Sportspeople from Sheffield Footballers from Sheffield English footballers Association football wingers Chesterfield F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Hartlepool United F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Aldershot F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players York City F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players The Football League players English football managers Gainsborough Trinity F.C. managers Burton Albion F.C. managers Scarborough F.C. managers Notts County F.C. managers Torquay United F.C. managers Huddersfield Town A.F.C. managers Plymouth Argyle F.C. managers Oldham Athletic A.F.C. managers Bury F.C. managers Sheffield United F.C. managers Crystal Palace F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers National League (English football) managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. non-playing staff 1977 births Living people Sportspeople from Porto Portuguese football managers FC Porto managers Chelsea F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Russia Primeira Liga managers Premier League managers UEFA Cup winning managers Portuguese people of British descent Portuguese expatriate football managers FC Zenit Saint Petersburg managers Russian Football Premier League managers Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Russia Competition Social events FA Cup seasons 2012–13 domestic association football cups 2012–13 FA Cup 2012–13 in English football Leeds United F.C. Football venues in England Sports venues in Leeds UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby league stadiums in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Sports venues completed in 1897 Football League venues Sports terminology Tournament systems 1990 births Living people People from Enfield Town English people of Nigerian descent English footballers England youth international footballers Black British sportspeople Association football forwards The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players People educated at Bishop Stopford's School at Enfield Yorkshire Counties of England established in antiquity Articles containing video clips Football League Fourth Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England  1907–08 in English football A-League Football Federation Australia Top level football leagues in Asia Summer association football leagues Fox Sports (Australia) Soccer leagues in Australia Professional sports leagues in Australia 2004 establishments in Australia Sports leagues established in 2004  Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Leeds English footballers English people of Jamaican descent English people of Irish descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Everton F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople 1982 births Living people People educated at St Bonaventure's Catholic Comprehensive School Association football forwards English Christians English Roman Catholics English footballers Black English sportspeople English expatriate footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Dominica descent English people of Saint Lucian descent Senrab F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Toronto FC players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Expatriate soccer players in Canada 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Footballers from Newham (London borough) 2010 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup squads 1989 births Living people Icelandic footballers Icelandic expatriate footballers Association football midfielders Breiðablik UBK players Reading F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players TSG 1899 Hoffenheim players Swansea City A.F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Wales Iceland international footballers Iceland under-21 international footballers Sportspeople from Reykjavík Fimleikafélag Hafnarfjarðar players Icelandic expatriates in the United Kingdom 1980 births Living people Sportspeople from Reading, Berkshire English footballers Association football goalkeepers Reading F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Rushden & Diamonds F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Crawley Town F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 1983 births Sportspeople from Córdoba, Argentina Living people Association football forwards Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentine people of Italian descent Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England Boca Juniors footballers RCD Mallorca B players Granada 74 CF footballers Terrassa FC footballers FC Barcelona B players Mérida UD footballers Leeds United F.C. players The Football League players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy Italian people of Argentine descent Norwich City F.C. players Premier League players 1988 births Living people Footballers from Sheffield English people of Irish descent English footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Sheffield United F.C. players Gretna F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Black English sportspeople Near-Earth object tracking Discoveries by institution Jet Propulsion Laboratory Palomar Observatory Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips 1986 births Living people English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Derby County F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black English sportspeople Sportspeople from Nottingham Wales Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union United Kingdom Great Britain Leeds Leeds City Region University towns in the United Kingdom Market towns in West Yorkshire Towns in West Yorkshire Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom 1986 births Living people Footballers from Liverpool English footballers England youth international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Liverpool F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Sports terminology Terminology used in multiple sports Football League Third Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating English football referees Living people 1971 births Sportspeople from Bristol People from Leicester The Football League referees Premier League referees 1985 births Living people People from Clarendon Parish Jamaican footballers Jamaica international footballers Jamaican expatriate footballers Association football midfielders Portmore United F.C. players SK Brann players Leeds United F.C. players Tippeligaen players The Football League players 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2014 Caribbean Cup players 2015 Copa América players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Expatriate footballers in Norway Jamaican expatriate sportspeople in Norway Expatriate footballers in England Jamaican expatriates in England Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Social groups Teams