 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Rio de Janeiro (city) Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Brazilian Christians Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in France Esporte Clube Juventude players FC Porto players FC Porto B players FC Dynamo Moscow players Fluminense Football Club players A.C. Milan players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Serie A players Ligue 1 players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil Olympic silver medalists for Brazil Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic medalists in football 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Association football central defenders European football trophies and awards Association football trophies and awards Awards established in 2008 UEFA Champions League European Champion Clubs' Cup Association football trophies and awards European football trophies and awards Paris Saint-Germain F.C. Association football clubs established in 1970 Football clubs in France G-14 clubs 16th arrondissement of Paris Ligue 1 clubs Football clubs in Paris 1970 establishments in France Unrelegated association football clubs Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1987 births Living people Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Joinville Esporte Clube players Cruzeiro Esporte Clube players S.L. Benfica footballers Chelsea F.C. players Jiangsu Suning F.C. players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Primeira Liga players Premier League players Chinese Super League players Brazilian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in China Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in China Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics 1988 births Living people People from São Paulo (state) Brazilian people of African descent Brazilian Christians Brazilian footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazil youth international footballers Brazil under-20 international footballers Brazil international footballers Expatriate footballers in Ukraine Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in England Association football midfielders Sport Club Corinthians Paulista players FC Shakhtar Donetsk players FC Anzhi Makhachkala players Chelsea F.C. players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Ukrainian Premier League players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Brazilian expatriates in Ukraine Brazilian expatriates in Russia Brazilian expatriates in England Sports competitors Sports terminology 1946 births 2005 deaths Sportspeople from Belfast Ulster Scots people Presbyterians from Northern Ireland People educated at Grosvenor Grammar School Association football midfielders Association football wingers Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland international footballers Manchester United F.C. players Expatriate association footballers from Northern Ireland British expatriates in South Africa Expatriate soccer players in South Africa Jewish Guild players Dunstable Town F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Cork Celtic F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Expatriates from Northern Ireland in the United States Los Angeles Aztecs players Fulham F.C. players Fort Lauderdale Strikers (1977–83) players Hibernian F.C. players San Jose Earthquakes (1974–88) players Expatriates from Northern Ireland in Hong Kong Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong Sea Bee players Hong Kong Rangers FC players A.F.C. Bournemouth players British expatriates in Australia Expatriate soccer players in Australia Queensland Lions players Nuneaton Town F.C. players Tobermore United F.C. players The Football League players League of Ireland players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Scottish Football League players North American Soccer League (1968–84) indoor players National Soccer League (Australia) players First Division/Premier League top scorers European Footballer of the Year winners English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 UEFA Golden Players British association football commentators British people convicted of assault Organ transplant recipients Alcohol-related deaths in England Deaths from renal failure Infectious disease deaths in England Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Europe Continents 1985 births Living people People from Curitiba Brazilian footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazil international footballers Expatriate footballers in Japan Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Saudi Arabia Expatriate footballers in the United Arab Emirates Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players J2 League players Bundesliga players Paraná Clube players Vegalta Sendai players Fluminense Football Club players Hamburger SV players Al-Hilal FC players Clube de Regatas do Flamengo footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FC Shakhtar Donetsk Football clubs in Donetsk Association football clubs established in 1936 1936 establishments in Ukraine Soviet Top League clubs Ukrainian Premier League clubs SCM Holdings Football clubs in the Ukrainian SSR France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries Paris 3rd-century BC establishments in Europe Populated places established in the 3rd century BC Capitals in Europe Cities in France Companions of the Liberation European culture French culture Prefectures in France Departments of Île-de-France 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Ireland Celtic nations Divided regions International islands Northern Europe Western Europe 1986 births Living people People from Thorntonhall Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish footballers Scottish people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in Russia Irish expatriates in Russia Queen's Park F.C. players Celtic F.C. players FC Spartak Moscow players Everton F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Russian Football Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe People from Birkenhead 1983 births Living people Association football forwards Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Wrexham F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology European national association football teams Faroe Islands national football team National sports teams of the Faroe Islands Near-Earth object tracking Discoveries by institution Jet Propulsion Laboratory Palomar Observatory 1986 births Living people Association football players from County Dublin Republic of Ireland association footballers Irish expatriates in the United Kingdom Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Association football forwards University College Dublin A.F.C. players Derry City F.C. players Kilmarnock F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players The Football League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Cherry Orchard F.C. players 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team 1982 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Shelbourne F.C. players Livingston F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Premier League players Belvedere F.C. players 1988 births Association football defenders Blackpool F.C. players Everton F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Gaelic football backs Gaelic footballers who switched code Killybegs Gaelic footballers League of Ireland players Living people Premier League players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Sligo Rovers F.C. players Sportspeople from County Donegal The Football League players Rugby World Cup stadiums Ballsbridge Buildings and structures demolished in 2007 Ireland national football team (1882–1950) Republic of Ireland national football team home stadiums Ireland national rugby union team Leinster Rugby Defunct association football venues in the Republic of Ireland Lansdowne Football Club Wanderers F.C. (rugby union) Sports venues in Dublin (city) Sports venues completed in 1872 Association football venues in County Dublin Republic of Ireland postal system Irish culture Places in Dublin (city) 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Derry Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Institute F.C. players Derry City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players NIFL Premiership players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Republic of Ireland international footballers from Northern Ireland League of Ireland XI players UEFA Euro 2012 players Buildings and structures in Dublin (city) Association football venues in the Republic of Ireland Rugby union stadiums in Ireland Ballsbridge National stadiums Republic of Ireland national football team home stadiums Ireland national rugby union team Sports venues in Dublin (city) Aviva UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Association football venues in County Dublin Bertie Ahern Unbuilt stadiums Proposed buildings and structures in the Republic of Ireland UEFA Euro 2012 Republic of Ireland at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Croatian football 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification 2010 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup qualification LA Galaxy Soccer clubs in the Greater Los Angeles Area Soccer clubs in California Association football clubs established in 1995 1995 establishments in California Sports terminology Association football terminology Cricket terminology Cricket awards and rankings Australian rules football terminology Rugby league terminology Rugby union terminology Association football terminology Ireland national rugby union team Rugby union in Ireland European national rugby union teams National sports teams of Ireland People of the Year Awards winners Multinational sports teams English-language idioms Humour Satire 1961 births Living people People from Glostrup Municipality Danish footballers Denmark international footballers Denmark under-21 international footballers Danish football managers Danish Superliga players Køge BK players Brøndby IF players FC Basel players Trabzonspor footballers Süper Lig players Danish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Switzerland Expatriate footballers in Turkey UEFA Euro 1988 players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players Randers FC managers Odense Boldklub managers Expatriate football managers in the Faroe Islands Faroe Islands national football team managers 2003 establishments in Washington (state) American punk rock groups American post-hardcore musical groups Kerrang! Awards winners Musical groups established in 2003 Musical groups from Seattle, Washington Musical quartets Victory Records artists Musical groups reestablished in 2015 Articles with hAudio microformats Norwich City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1902 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Norwich Premier League clubs 1902 establishments in England Football clubs in Norfolk Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Stoke City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1863 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Football clubs in Staffordshire Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners The Football League founder members Sport in Stoke-on-Trent United Soccer Association imported teams Southern Football League clubs 1863 establishments in England 1980 births Living people Faroese footballers Faroe Islands international footballers Skála ÍF players Types of roads Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills 1986 births Living people People from Tórshavn Faroese footballers Faroe Islands international footballers Association football goalkeepers Havnar Bóltfelag players Boldklubben Frem players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Wrexham F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Professional Football League players National League (English football) players Faroese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Faroe Islands under-21 international footballers Fimleikafélag Hafnarfjarðar players Association football tactics and skills 1971 births Living people Expatriate footballers in Germany Danish footballers Denmark international footballers Danish expatriate footballers FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players FC Sion players Odense Boldklub players F.C. Copenhagen players Brøndby IF players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Watford F.C. players Herfølge Boldklub players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in England Danish football managers Danish Superliga players Bundesliga players People from Esbjerg Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Association football forwards 1985 births Living people Faroese footballers Faroe Islands international footballers VB Vágur players Keflavík ÍF players Notodden FK players Norwegian First Division players Faroese expatriates in Iceland Expatriate footballers in Iceland Expatriate footballers in Norway People from Vágur GÍ Gøta players Myristica Flora of Maluku Medicinal plants Spices Psychedelics, dissociatives and deliriants Monoamine oxidase inhibitors National symbols of Grenada Non-timber forest products Indian spices 1987 births Living people People from Lurgan A.F.C. Bournemouth players Luton Town F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Association footballers from Northern Ireland Republic of Ireland international footballers from Northern Ireland Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers The Football League players Premier League players 1981 births Living people Danish footballers Faroese footballers Faroe Islands international footballers Lyngby Boldklub players Silkeborg IF players Danish Superliga players FC Svendborg players People from Svendborg Association football forwards 1984 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Peterborough United F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Orlando City SC players Colorado Rapids players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Human head and neck Moscow Moscow Governorate 1147 establishments in Russia Capitals in Europe Linguistic morphology Suffixes Shelbourne F.C. Association football clubs established in 1895 Association football clubs in Dublin (city) Former League of Ireland Premier Division clubs Former Irish Football League clubs 1895 establishments in Ireland League of Ireland First Division clubs Former Leinster Senior League clubs Former Athletic Union League (Dublin) clubs 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Navigational equipment Horology Time balls 1982 births Living people Faroese footballers Faroe Islands international footballers Boldklubben Frem players Randers FC players Lyngby Boldklub players Víkingur Gøta players Ross County F.C. players Faroese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Scotland GÍ Gøta players Association football defenders Former national association football teams in Europe Ireland national football team (1882–1950) National sports teams of Ireland History of association football in Ireland 1882 establishments in Ireland Laws of association football Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 2008 in rugby union End-of-year rugby union internationals 2007–08 in English rugby union 2007–08 in Welsh rugby union 2008 in Australian rugby union 2008 in New Zealand rugby union 2008 in South African rugby union FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events