 Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England 1989 births Living people People from Stanmore English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Southampton F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players English children's writers Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Reading F.C. Association football clubs established in 1871 Sport in Reading, Berkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs 1871 establishments in England Football clubs in Berkshire Terminology used in multiple sports 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Oxford English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople English footballers Jamaican footballers Jamaica international footballers Association football wingers Oxford City F.C. players Slough Town F.C. players Bromley F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Reading F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Southern Football League players Isthmian League players 2015 Copa América players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Ball games Summer Olympic sports Racquet sports Sports originating in England Tennis  Football venues in England Sports venues in Reading, Berkshire Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Reading F.C. London Irish Sports venues completed in 1998 Football League venues Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology 1986 births Living people People from Chambéry French footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers French Roman Catholics Association football forwards Grenoble Foot 38 players FC Istres players Tours FC players Montpellier HSC players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England 1991 births Living people French people of Senegalese descent People from Laval, Mayenne French footballers French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players FC Lorient players SC Freiburg players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany French expatriates in England French expatriates in Germany The Football League players 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from Moscow Russian footballers Russia international footballers Russian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Russian expatriates in Germany Russian expatriates in England FC Spartak Moscow players FC Khimki players FC Shinnik Yaroslavl players FC Baltika Kaliningrad players FC Tom Tomsk players FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players VfB Stuttgart players Fulham F.C. players Reading F.C. players FC Dynamo Moscow players Russian Football Premier League players Bundesliga players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1949 births Living people Sportspeople from Strasbourg FC Mulhouse players Association football sweepers RC Strasbourg players ASPV Strasbourg players Ligue 1 players French footballers French football managers French Roman Catholics AS Nancy managers AS Monaco FC managers Ligue 1 managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Arsenal F.C. managers Honorary Officers of the Order of the British Empire Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Nagoya Grampus managers Expatriate football managers in Japan English Football Hall of Fame inductees University of Strasbourg alumni UEFA Pro Licence holders French expatriate football managers French expatriates in Japan French expatriates in England London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports 1961 births Living people People from Slough People educated at Herschel Grammar School English footballers England youth international footballers English expatriate footballers English people of Irish descent Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Fulham F.C. players IFK Norrköping players Oxford United F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Djurgårdens IF Fotboll players Cardiff City F.C. players Exeter City F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players South China AA footballers Slough Town F.C. players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong English football managers Slough Town F.C. managers Woking F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers National League (English football) managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Reading F.C. non-playing staff 1989 births Living people People from Acton, London Sportspeople from London English footballers England youth international footballers Welsh footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers English people of Welsh descent Black British sportspeople Association football wingers Arsenal F.C. players Reading F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 1992 births Living people People from Harlow English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Finnish footballers Finland youth international footballers Finland under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Charlton Athletic F.C. players Welling United F.C. players Eastbourne Borough F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players English people of Finnish descent Sports terminology 1984 births Living people French footballers French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers French people of Moroccan descent French Muslims Moroccan footballers Moroccan expatriate footballers Morocco international footballers Association football forwards FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Arsenal F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 1978 births People from Park Royal Living people English people of Grenadian descent Association football forwards Grenadian footballers Grenada international footballers Hayes F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Members of the Order of the British Empire Sportspeople from London 1985 births Living people French footballers French people of Polish descent French-Polish footballers Association football defenders EA Guingamp players FC Lorient players Tours FC players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Arsenal F.C. players French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England Premier League players People from Tulle France international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1982 births Living people People from Enfield Town English footballers Antigua and Barbuda footballers Antigua and Barbuda international footballers Association football midfielders Wimbledon F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Antigua and Barbuda descent Sportspeople from London Reading F.C. players Black British sportspeople 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from County Waterford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Association football forwards Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Waterford United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players The Football League players 1987 births Living people People from Abidjan Swiss footballers Switzerland youth international footballers Switzerland under-21 international footballers Switzerland international footballers Swiss expatriate footballers Association football defenders Association football utility players Étoile Carouge FC players Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Hannover 96 players Hamburger SV players Premier League players Bundesliga players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Ivorian emigrants to Switzerland Swiss expatriates in the United Kingdom Swiss expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany 1966 births 1998 FIFA World Cup players Arsenal F.C. players Association football central defenders England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English Football Hall of Fame inductees English football managers English footballers Gabala FC managers Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Romford Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1988 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. managers English expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Azerbaijan Arsenal F.C. non-playing staff Arsenal F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players British association football commentators England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English footballers English people of Irish descent Everton F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Sportspeople from Oxford Premier League players Reading F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 2000 players Wembley F.C. players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 1966 births Living people 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Accra Ghanaian footballers English footballers England youth international footballers Ghana international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players FC Ufa players Ghanaian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Russia Russian Football Premier League players English people of Ghanaian descent Akan people 1995 births Living people German people of Ivorian descent German footballers German expatriate footballers Sportspeople from Stuttgart Arsenal F.C. players Association football wingers Expatriate footballers in England Germany youth international footballers Premier League players German expatriates in England Germany under-21 international footballers West Bromwich Albion F.C. players 1981 births Living people Sportspeople from Saint Petersburg Russian footballers Russia international footballers Russian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Russian expatriates in England Association football midfielders FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players Arsenal F.C. players FC Kuban Krasnodar players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Russia under-21 international footballers 1992 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Association football goalkeepers Arsenal F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England The Football League players Premier League players Argentine expatriates in England People from Mar del Plata Rotherham United F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Newport, Wales Welsh footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Cardiff City F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Reading F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 1981 births Living people People from Romford Association football fullbacks English footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Leyton Orient F.C. players Reading F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Fulham F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players FC Pune City players Colchester United F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Indian Super League players Expatriate footballers in India 1984 births Living people Footballers from Liverpool English footballers Association football wingers Liverpool F.C. players Rhyl F.C. players Bangor City F.C. players Accrington Stanley F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players England semi-pro international footballers The Football League players National League (English football) players Players in the Welsh Premier League Place of birth missing (living people) Bala Town F.C. players Chesterfield F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Plymouth English footballers English people of Irish descent Association football defenders Plymouth Argyle F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 1978 births People from Inverurie Living people Association football midfielders Scottish footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Rangers F.C. players Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. players Forfar Athletic F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Vancouver Whitecaps FC players Sheffield United F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in Canada Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players The Football League players Major League Soccer players Designated Players (MLS) Scottish Professional Football League players Association football terminology Australian rules football terminology Rugby league terminology Rugby union terminology 1976 births Living people People from Owerri Nigerian footballers Association football forwards AFC Ajax players Inter Milan players Arsenal F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Eredivisie players Serie A players Iwuanyanwu Nationale players Premier League players The Football League players Nigeria international footballers 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2000 African Cup of Nations players 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players Olympic footballers of Nigeria Olympic gold medalists for Nigeria African Footballer of the Year winners Nigerian expatriate footballers Nigerian expatriates in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Nigerian expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Italy Nigerian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Igbo sportspeople Nigerian Christians 2010 FIFA World Cup players UNICEF people Olympic medalists in football Officers of the Order of the Niger 1985 births Living people People from Nowra Australian people of Italian descent Australian soccer players Australia international soccer players Association football goalkeepers Association football goalkeepers who have scored New South Wales Institute of Sport alumni Australian Institute of Sport soccer players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Maidenhead United F.C. players Northwood F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Southend United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Southern Football League players Olympic soccer players of Australia Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2010 FIFA World Cup players Australian expatriate soccer players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England Australian expatriates in Italy Australian expatriates in England Association football terminology 1981 births Living people People from Edmonton, London Sportspeople from London Black English sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent English footballers Jamaican footballers Jamaica international footballers Association football midfielders Wimbledon F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Watford F.C. players Reading F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2014 Caribbean Cup players 2015 Copa América players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Seoul Subway Line 4 Seoul Metropolitan Subway lines Railway lines opened in 1985  Publications established in 1855 National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Telegraph Media Group 1855 establishments in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London International Olympic Committee 1894 establishments in Switzerland International sports bodies based in Switzerland Olympic Games Organisations based in Lausanne Sports organisations established in 1894 United Nations General Assembly observers Olympic movement International sports federations Committees Russia BRICS nations Caspian littoral states Central Asian countries Countries in Europe East Asian countries Eastern Europe Federal republics G8 nations G20 nations Member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations North Asian countries Northeast Asian countries Russian-speaking countries and territories Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 862 Western Asian countries E7 nations Doping in sport Cheating Bioethics Amphetamine Anti-doping organizations Drugs in sport Organisations based in Lausanne International sports bodies based in Switzerland Olympic Games Organizations based in Montreal Sports organisations established in 1999 Sports rules and regulations Doping in sport International Weightlifting Federation IOC-recognised international federations 1905 establishments in Hungary Vladimir Putin 1952 births Living people 2003 Tuzla island conflict Acting Presidents of Russia Articles containing video clips Confucius Peace Prize winners Directors of the Federal Security Service FSB officers Grand Croix of the Légion d'honneur Grand Crosses of the Order of St. Sava Heads of government of the Russian Federation Independent politicians KGB officers Kyokushin kaikan practitioners Our Home – Russia politicians People from Saint Petersburg People of the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation People of the Chechen wars People of the Russo-Georgian War Plagiarism controversies Presidents of Russia Recipients of the Order of Zayed Russian judoka Russian karateka Russian Orthodox Christians from Russia Russian sambo practitioners Saint Petersburg State University alumni United Russia politicians Soviet Union Communism in Russia Communist states Early Soviet republics Former member states of the United Nations Former polities of the Cold War Former Slavic countries Former socialist republics History of the Soviet Union and Soviet Russia Modern history of Russia One-party states Soviet states States and territories established in 1922 States and territories disestablished in 1991 1922 establishments in the Soviet Union 1991 disestablishments in the Soviet Union 20th century in Russia Atheist states Superpowers 1962 television episodes The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series) episodes Rio de Janeiro (city) Former national capitals Populated coastal places in Rio de Janeiro (state) Populated places established in 1565 Port cities in Brazil World Heritage Sites in Brazil 1565 establishments in Colonial Brazil Russian Empire Early Modern history of Russia Modern history of Russia Former Slavic countries 18th century in Russia 19th century in Russia 20th century in Russia 1721 establishments in Russia 1917 disestablishments in Russia Articles containing video clips Living people Lawyers Officers of the Order of Canada Canada 1867 establishments in Canada English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies Federal monarchies Former French colonies French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1867 British auto racing teams British racecar constructors Can-Am entrants Champ Car teams Companies based in Surrey Companies established in 1963 Formula One constructors Formula One entrants Formula Two entrants McLaren Technology Group Evidence Critical thinking Concepts in epistemology Moscow Moscow Governorate 1147 establishments in Russia Capitals in Europe  Urine Animal physiology Body fluids 2014 Winter Olympics 2014 in multi-sport events 2014 in Russian sport Olympic Games in Russia Sport in Sochi Winter Olympic Games Articles containing video clips Sochi 1838 establishments in Russia Black Sea Governorate History of Kuban History of the Caucasus Populated coastal places in Russia Populated places established in 1838 Port cities of the Black Sea Seaside resorts in Russia Spa towns in Russia Cities and towns in Krasnodar Krai Summer Olympic Games Recurring sporting events established in 1896 Olympic Games Quadrennial sporting events Winter sports  1953 births Living people People from Würzburg International Olympic Committee members Commanders Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany German male fencers Olympic fencers of West Germany Fencers at the 1976 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for West Germany Olympic medalists in fencing Medalists at the 1976 Summer Olympics Presidents of the International Olympic Committee Decision theory Optimal decisions  National members of Tennis Europe Sports governing bodies in Russia Sports organisations established in 2002 Tennis in Russia 2002 establishments in Russia 1947 births Living people Olympic weightlifters of the Soviet Union Olympic gold medalists for the Soviet Union Russian weightlifters Soviet weightlifters Weightlifters at the 1976 Summer Olympics Russian and Soviet-German people Olympic medalists in weightlifting Male weightlifters Weightlifting Weight classes Individual sports Summer Olympic sports Living people International Olympic Committee members 1939 births 1941 births Living people Soviet sportspeople FIFA officials Russian football chairmen and investors UEFA member associations Football in Russia Sports governing bodies in Russia Articles containing video clips Sports organisations established in 1912 1912 establishments in Russia Country classifications Cultural concepts Cultural spheres of influence Eurocentrism Western culture Boycotts Civil disobedience Community organizing Protest tactics Collective punishment 1984 Summer Olympics Olympic Games in California Olympic Games in the United States Summer Olympic Games Events in Los Angeles, California Sports in Los Angeles, California 1984 in California 1984 in American sports 1984 in multi-sport events 20th century in Los Angeles, California Mikhail Gorbachev 1931 births Candidates for President of Russia Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union members Club of Rome members Collars of the Order of the White Lion Communist rulers Grammy Award winners Grawemeyer Award winners Heads of state of the Soviet Union Heads of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Honorary Members of the Russian Academy of Arts Living people Members of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union Moscow State University alumni Nobel Peace Prize laureates People from Stavropol People of the 1991 Soviet coup d'état attempt People of the Soviet–Afghan War Politburo of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union members Recipients of the Indira Gandhi Peace Prize Recipients of the Order of Lenin Recipients of the Order of St. Andrew Recipients of the Order of the October Revolution Recipients of the Order of the Red Banner of Labour Russian atheists Russian communists Russian Nobel laureates Russian people of Ukrainian descent Russian politicians Soviet Nobel laureates Soviet people of Ukrainian descent Johann Sebastian Bach 1685 births 1750 deaths 18th-century classical composers 18th-century German people 18th-century keyboardists Anglican saints Bach family Baroque composers Burials at St. Thomas Church, Leipzig Classical composers of church music Composers for cello Composers for harpsichord Composers for lute Composers for pipe organ Composers for violin German classical composers German classical organists German Lutherans German male classical composers Music in Leipzig Oratorio composers Organ improvisers Organists and composers in the North German tradition People celebrated in the Lutheran liturgical calendar People from Eisenach People from Saxe-Eisenach Thomaskantors Articles containing video clips Collective punishment Punishments Criminal law Human rights abuses Crimes against humanity