 UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1989 births Living people People from Weilheim-Schongau Footballers from Bavaria German footballers Association football forwards Association football midfielders Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers FC Bayern Munich II players FC Bayern Munich footballers Bundesliga players 3. Liga players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Kinshasa Democratic Republic of the Congo footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Democratic Republic of the Congo emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People associated with the University of Bolton Black British sportspeople Alumni of Staffordshire University Intensive care medicine Medical specialties Bolton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester West Pennine Moors Hospital buildings completed in 1855 NHS hospitals in London Bethnal Green 1966 births Living people Sportspeople from Glasgow Dundee United F.C. non-playing staff Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Dumbarton F.C. players Clydebank F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. (1878) players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Ross County F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Falkirk F.C. managers St Johnstone F.C. managers Burnley F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Houston Dynamo coaches Premier League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Republic of Ireland football managers Scottish Roman Catholics Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish people of Irish descent Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Bolton Wanderers F.C. 1877 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1877 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bolton Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Football League Trophy winners Premier League clubs Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. The Football League founder members Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Association football clubs established in 1877 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners United Soccer Association imported teams Sport in Wolverhampton 1877 establishments in England NHS hospital trusts Heart Cardiac anatomy Articles containing video clips RTT Pharmaceutical industry Products of chemical industry Medical terminology Medical terminology High school football High school football in the United States High school football in Canada Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software 2010 debut albums CNBLUE albums FNC Entertainment albums 1952 births 2016 deaths People from Leigh, Greater Manchester English football chairmen and investors Cancer deaths in England 1980s British television series 1990s British television series 2000s British television series 2010s British television series 1988 British television programme debuts ITV television programmes English-language television programming Television series by ITV Studios Living people Year of birth missing (living people) American male journalists American Jews American newspaper editors 1987 births Living people People from Abidjan Swiss footballers Switzerland youth international footballers Switzerland under-21 international footballers Switzerland international footballers Swiss expatriate footballers Association football defenders Association football utility players Étoile Carouge FC players Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Hannover 96 players Hamburger SV players Premier League players Bundesliga players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Ivorian emigrants to Switzerland Swiss expatriates in the United Kingdom Swiss expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany 1980 births Living people People from Stepney English footballers Association football fullbacks 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players A.S. Roma players LA Galaxy players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriates in Italy Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English people of Barbadian descent Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club 1981 births Living people English footballers English expatriate footballers English people of Jamaican descent England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football wingers Nottingham Forest F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players New York Red Bulls players Premier League players The Football League players Major League Soccer players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople English adoptees People from Greenwich People from Brockley Expatriate soccer players in the United States Sports venues completed in 1997 Bolton Wanderers F.C. Buildings and structures in Bolton Borough Football venues in England Premier League venues Sport in Bolton Borough Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester Darts venues Music venues in Greater Manchester Reebok brands Football League venues Bradshaw, Gass & Hope buildings Value Concepts in ethics Concepts in metaphysics Concepts in metaphysics Ontology Reality Reality by type Personality traits Virtue Concepts in ethics Time Concepts in metaphysics Concepts in physics Physical quantities SI base quantities Spacetime Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Aston Villa F.C. Sports venues in Birmingham, West Midlands 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums Football venues in England UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Defunct velodromes in the United Kingdom Darts venues Sports venues completed in 1897 Football League venues Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England The Five Boroughs Leicester Local government in Leicestershire Unitary authority districts of England 50 establishments Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in the East Midlands County towns in England Local government districts of the East Midlands 50s establishments in Roman Britain Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham 1985 births Living people People from Dronfield Sportspeople from Derbyshire English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Aston Villa F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players English people of Irish descent T-shirts 1904 introductions Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Silence Prayer Meetings Death customs Acknowledgements of death Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Living people 1971 births Sportspeople from Rotherham British police officers English football referees UEFA Champions League referees 2010 FIFA World Cup referees FIFA World Cup Final match officials Members of the Order of the British Empire FA Cup Final referees 2014 FIFA World Cup referees Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Tort law Contract law Ethical principles Deontological ethics Virtue Psychology Behavioural sciences Football refereeing in England English football organisations Premier League