 France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Marseille French Muslims French people of Algerian descent French footballers Association football midfielders Association football wingers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Olympique de Marseille players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players French expatriates in England Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Black English sportspeople English people of Barbadian descent Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills France Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Western Europe England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations Donetsk Cities in Donetsk Oblast Special economic zones Populated places established in 1869 Mining cities and regions in Ukraine Articles containing video clips Cities of regional significance in Ukraine Cities and towns of Ukraine built in the Russian Empire 1869 establishments in Russia 1985 births Living people People from Stevenage English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Association football utility players Watford F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders English autobiographers English footballers English expatriate footballers England international footballers English Roman Catholics England under-21 international footballers FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. players LA Galaxy players Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Whiston, Merseyside Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Designated Players (MLS) Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1987 births Living people French people of Algerian descent Sportspeople from Lyon French people of Kabyle descent French Muslims French footballers Association football forwards Ligue 1 players Olympique Lyonnais players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players French expatriate footballers French expatriates in Spain Expatriate footballers in Spain Sweden Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe Scandinavia Year of establishment unknown Swedish-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying 2010–11 in French football France at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Bosnia and Herzegovina football 2010–11 in Bosnia and Herzegovina football 2010–11 in Luxembourgian football 2011–12 in Luxembourgian football 2010–11 in Romanian football 2011–12 in Romanian football 2010–11 in Albanian football 2011–12 in Albanian football 2010 in Belarusian football 2011 in Belarusian football 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway FC Shakhtar Donetsk Football venues in Ukraine UEFA Euro 2012 stadiums in Ukraine Sport in Donetsk Sports venues completed in 2009 Buildings and structures in Donetsk Visitor attractions in Donetsk Oblast SCM Holdings Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps 1986 births Living people People from Wortley, Leeds Association football midfielders Association football wingers Association football utility players Footballers from Leeds English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Nice French footballers French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England French people of Catalan descent France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers Association football goalkeepers OGC Nice players Olympique Lyonnais players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1986 births Living people People from Tourcoing French people of Vietnamese descent French Roman Catholics French footballers France international footballers Lille OSC players Newcastle United F.C. players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players France under-21 international footballers French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England France youth international footballers Sportspeople of Vietnamese descent Association football midfielders 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Crystal Palace F.C. players Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Laws of association football 1993 births Living people Arsenal F.C. players Association football wingers Black English sportspeople England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers English people of Jamaican descent People educated at St John's College (Portsmouth) Sportspeople from Portsmouth Premier League players Southampton F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Middlesbrough English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Middlesbrough F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players 1985 births Living people People from Bastia French people of Moroccan descent French footballers Association football central defenders Ligue 1 players Lille OSC players La Liga players Valencia CF players A.C. Milan players Sevilla FC players France international footballers French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 1981 births Living people People from Villepinte, Seine-Saint-Denis French people of Malian descent French footballers France international footballers Association football midfielders CS Louhans-Cuiseaux players Le Havre AC players FC Bayern Munich II players FC Bayern Munich footballers Liverpool F.C. players SC Bastia players RC Lens players Olympique Lyonnais players FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Olympique de Marseille players West Ham United F.C. players Stade Rennais F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players French expatriate footballers Expatriate sportspeople in Germany Expatriate sportspeople in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in Germany France under-21 international footballers France youth international footballers Sportspeople from Île-de-France 1981 births Living people People from Bamako Malian Muslims Malian footballers Association football midfielders Mali international footballers 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players Malian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Greece Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Monaco Expatriate footballers in England OFI Crete players Olympique Lyonnais players AS Monaco FC players SBV Vitesse players Real Madrid C.F. players Centre Salif Keita players Fulham F.C. players Superleague Greece players Eredivisie players Ligue 1 players La Liga players Premier League players Malian expatriates in Greece Malian expatriates in the Netherlands Malian expatriates in France Malian expatriates in Spain Malian expatriates in Monaco Malian expatriates in the United Kingdom Mali under-20 international footballers 1983 births Living people 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football wingers Converts to Islam Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Turkey FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Metz players France international footballers French expatriate footballers French expatriates in Germany French expatriates in Turkey French footballers French Muslims Bundesliga players Galatasaray S.K. footballers Ligue 1 players Olympique Alès players Olympique de Marseille players People from Boulogne-sur-Mer Stade Brestois 29 players Süper Lig players US Boulogne players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports 1985 births Living people Association football midfielders Sportspeople from Paris Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in Spain French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England French expatriates in Russia French expatriates in Spain French footballers French Muslims French people of Malian descent Ligue 2 players Le Havre AC players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Russian Football Premier League players FC Anzhi Makhachkala players FC Lokomotiv Moscow players November 2015 Paris attacks France under-21 international footballers France international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain 1980 births Living people English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Charlton Athletic F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Footballers from Lambeth Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills 2006 FIFA World Cup 2006 in association football 2005–06 in German football FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by Germany 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Shrewsbury English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Kiev Capitals in Europe Cities with special status in Ukraine Hero Cities of the Soviet Union Holy cities Kiev Governorate Cossack Hetmanate Kiev Voivodeship Populated places established in the 5th century Rus' settlements Magdeburg rights Places of the Euromaidan Advertising Articles containing video clips Branding companies Communication design Internet advertising services and affiliate networks Marketing Media manipulation techniques Product design Promotion and marketing communications Human–computer interaction World Wide Web User interface techniques Usability Types of marketing Information retrieval techniques Application software Concepts in metaphysics Information Information, knowledge, and uncertainty Information science Internet 1969 introductions 1983 introductions American inventions Digital technology Media technology New media Scientific revolution Sociocultural globalization Telegraphy Public services Transport systems Virtual reality 1969 in the United States Mobile software User interface techniques Mobile applications Web browsers Web design Website management Websites World Wide Web 2011 racehorse births American Grade 1 Stakes winners American racehorses Kentucky Derby winners Preakness Stakes winners Racehorses bred in California Thoroughbred family A4 Thoroughbred racehorses Racehorses trained in the United States Eclipse Award winners Kentucky Derby races 2014 in American sports 2014 in Kentucky 2014 in horse racing Digital media Information science Library science Mass media Media technology Articles containing video clips Digital media Digital systems Digital technology Consumer electronics Technology systems Main topic classifications Technology Placeholder names  Consumer theory Household behavior and family economics Utilitarianism Microeconomics Websites European Union 1993 establishments in Europe Confederations G20 nations G7 nations G8 nations International organizations of Europe Organizations awarded Nobel Peace Prizes Organizations established in 1993 Political systems Supranational unions Trade blocs United Nations General Assembly observers Articles containing video clips Information appliances Mobile computers Personal digital assistants Disk images Archive formats Internet privacy Computing and society Policy