 Aldershot Town F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1992 1992 establishments in England Isthmian League National League (English football) Former Football League clubs Football clubs in England Sport in Aldershot Phoenix clubs (association football) 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Southampton British people of Polish descent English people of Irish descent English footballers Association football forwards Swindon Town F.C. players Everton F.C. players Plymouth Argyle F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Burnley F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Scottish Premier League players FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Football clubs in England Middlesbrough F.C. Sport in Middlesbrough Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1876 Football clubs in North Yorkshire Football League Cup winners Football League Championship clubs 1876 establishments in England Northern Football League FA Cup seasons 2012–13 domestic association football cups 2012–13 FA Cup 2012–13 in English football  1983 births Living people People from Camden Town Sportspeople from London English footballers Association football forwards Aldershot Town F.C. players Harlow Town F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Bury F.C. players AFC Wimbledon players Oxford United F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Isthmian League players 1982 births People from Durham, County Durham Living people Association football fullbacks English footballers England under-21 international footballers Middlesbrough F.C. players Halifax Town A.F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Hartlepool United F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Defunct cricket grounds in England Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1932 Sports venues in York York City F.C.  1983 births Living people People from Salé Association football midfielders Moroccan footballers Morocco international footballers Raja Casablanca players Hibernian F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Olympic footballers of Morocco Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Moroccan expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Qatar Expatriate footballers in Scotland Qatar SC footballers Expatriate footballers in the United Arab Emirates The Football League players Expatriate footballers in England 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from London English footballers England semi-pro international footballers Association football midfielders Sutton United F.C. players Barnet F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Millwall F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Articles created via the Article Wizard 1993 births Living people People from Chester-le-Street English footballers England youth international footballers Association football defenders Middlesbrough F.C. players Darlington F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players People educated at Park View School UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Association football clubs established in 1926 Association football clubs disestablished in 1992 Aldershot F.C. Defunct football clubs in England History of Hampshire Defunct Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Football clubs in Hampshire 1926 establishments in England 1992 disestablishments in England Aldershot F.C. Aldershot Town F.C. Football venues in England Sports venues in Hampshire Sports venues completed in 1927 Football League venues Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Australian television soap operas Seven Network shows Channel 5 (UK) television programmes RTÉ television programmes 1988 Australian television series debuts 1980s Australian television series 1990s Australian television series 2000s Australian television series 2010s Australian television series English-language television programming Television shows set in Sydney Television shows set in New South Wales Television series by Seven Productions Jakarta Capital districts and territories Provinces of Indonesia Capitals in Asia Metropolitan areas of Indonesia Populated coastal places in Indonesia Television stations in Indonesia Television channels and stations established in 1962 Publicly funded broadcasters Media in Jakarta State media Ion channels Electrophysiology Membrane biology Integral membrane proteins Educational institutions established in 1953 Universities in Indonesia Universities in Jakarta 1953 establishments in Indonesia Stroke Causes of death RTT Radio stations in California Adult standards radio stations in the United States Radio stations established in 1963 1963 establishments in California Boxing weight classes Light-flyweight boxers Boxing websites MediaWiki websites Internet properties established in 2005 Sports officiating 