 Newspapers published in the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex Newspapers published in Texas Pulitzer Prize-winning newspapers Publications established in 1885 Silver Gavel Award winners 1885 establishments in Texas Daily newspapers published in the United States Fragaria Hybrid fruit Fruit Articles containing video clips Crops Strawberries Algonquian languages Polysynthetic languages Indigenous languages of the North American Subarctic Indigenous languages of the North American Plains Indigenous languages of the North American eastern woodlands Indigenous languages of the North American Southeast Languages of the United States First Nations languages in Canada Great Lakes tribal culture Algonquian peoples Fruit Fruit morphology Edible fruits Pollination Almanacs Reference works Weather lore Publications established in 1792 Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles Copyright law Data management Intellectual property law Metadata Monopoly (economics) Public records Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League Football media in the United Kingdom Media companies of the United Kingdom Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from County Antrim Association footballers from Northern Ireland Ballymena United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Reading F.C. non-playing staff Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff Expatriate football managers from Northern Ireland The Football League managers Watford F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1878 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs West Bromwich FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1878 establishments in England Defunct cricket grounds in England Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1932 Sports venues in York York City F.C. Articles with hAudio microformats Norwich City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1902 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Norwich Premier League clubs 1902 establishments in England Football clubs in Norfolk Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Legal terms English phrases Copyright law Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology La Liga seasons 2008–09 in Spanish football leagues Stoke City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1863 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Football clubs in Staffordshire Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners The Football League founder members Sport in Stoke-on-Trent United Soccer Association imported teams Southern Football League clubs 1863 establishments in England Association football terminology Sports terminology Manchester City F.C. Manchester United F.C. Football in Greater Manchester England football derbies Sport in Manchester Etihad Airways Premier League venues Football venues in England Manchester City F.C. Sports venues in Manchester 2002 Commonwealth Games venues Music venues in Greater Manchester Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Rugby union stadiums in England Sports venues completed in 2002 2002 establishments in England 1963 births Living people People from Saltcoats Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Association football defenders Beith Juniors F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Scottish Football League players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish football managers Newcastle United F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Premier League managers Newcastle United F.C. non-playing staff Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. non-playing staff Liverpool F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from North Ayrshire Reading F.C. managers The Football League managers 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons 1951 births 1974 FIFA World Cup players 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. players Cumbernauld United F.C. players English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players Scottish league football top scorers Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps 1964 births Living people People from Frederiksberg Danish footballers Association football midfielders Danish Superliga players Kjøbenhavns Boldklub players Brøndby IF players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players S.S. Lazio players La Liga players FC Barcelona players Real Madrid C.F. players J.League players Vissel Kobe players Eredivisie players AFC Ajax players Danish football managers Danish Superliga managers Brøndby IF managers La Liga managers Getafe CF managers RCD Mallorca managers Russian Football Premier League managers FC Spartak Moscow managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Lekhwiya SC managers Denmark under-21 international footballers Denmark international footballers UEFA Euro 1984 players 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1995 King Fahd Cup players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club UEFA Golden Players Danish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Japan Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate football managers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Russia Expatriate football managers in Wales Expatriate football managers in Qatar Danish knights Danish expatriate football managers Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London 1969 births Living people Sportspeople from Renfrewshire Expatriate footballers in Germany Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers St Mirren F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Borussia Dortmund players Celtic F.C. players Livingston F.C. players 1998 FIFA World Cup players Scottish Football League players Bundesliga players Scottish Premier League players Scottish expatriate footballers Scottish football managers Livingston F.C. managers Wycombe Wanderers F.C. managers Colchester United F.C. managers Norwich City F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Premier League managers People educated at Linwood High School Scottish Football League representative players Scotland under-21 international footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow  West Ham United F.C. Association football supporters English football supporters' associations Aston Villa F.C. Sports venues in Birmingham, West Midlands 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums Football venues in England UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Defunct velodromes in the United Kingdom Darts venues Sports venues completed in 1897 Football League venues 1958 births Living people People from Stratford, London English people of Irish descent English people of Ghanaian descent Black British sportspeople Irish people of Ghanaian descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Brentford F.C. players UEFA Pro Licence holders UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Premier League managers The Football League players English football managers The Football League managers Republic of Ireland football managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from London Birmingham City F.C. managers Norwich City F.C. managers People educated at St Bonaventure's Catholic Comprehensive School Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. managers Association football defenders Fenerbahçe S.K. Fenerbahçe S.K. (football) Association football clubs established in 1907 Sport in Istanbul Kadıköy 1907 establishments in the Ottoman Empire Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1879 Football clubs in England Fulham F.C. Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1879 establishments in England Fulham The Football League clubs 1970 births Living people People from Schaffhausen Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers S.S. Lazio players Chelsea F.C. players Premier League players Italian football managers Milton Keynes Dons F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate footballers in England FC Schalke 04 managers Bundesliga managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FC Schaffhausen players FC Zürich players FC Aarau players Serie A players Swiss Super League players Swiss people of Italian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League winning managers Italian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Italian expatriates in Germany UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Wigan Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester England football derbies Everton F.C. Liverpool F.C. Sport in Liverpool Everton F.C. 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Football League venues Premier League venues Defunct baseball venues Sports venues in Liverpool Visitor attractions in Liverpool Sports venues completed in 1892 Arsenal F.C. Tottenham Hotspur F.C. London derbies England football derbies Articles containing video clips Arsenal F.C. Football venues in London Sport in Islington Buildings and structures in Islington Premier League venues The Emirates Group Visitor attractions in Islington Sports venues completed in 2006 Sunderland A.F.C. Football venues in England Premier League venues Visitor attractions in the City of Sunderland Buildings and structures in the City of Sunderland Sports venues in Tyne and Wear Sports venues completed in 1997 Football League venues Christmas traditions Christmas-linked holidays Public holidays in Australia Public holidays in Canada Public holidays in New Zealand Public holidays in the United Kingdom December observances FA Cup Finals FA Cup Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Computers Articles containing video clips Articles with example code American inventions 1949 introductions Office equipment Computer peripherals Photocopiers Articles containing video clips Printing processes Forgery Audio engineering Sound recording Media technology Sound production technology Electronics Writing Nonverbal communication Human communication Gloucester Populated places on the River Severn Towns of the Welsh Marches Towns in Gloucestershire Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) County towns in England Non-metropolitan districts of Gloucestershire London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports