 UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe UEFA member associations Football governing bodies in Serbia Futsal in Serbia Sports governing bodies in Serbia Sports organisations established in 2006 2006 establishments in Serbia 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Racism Discrimination Hatred Politics and race 1993 births Living people People from Hereford English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Reading F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Northern Irish descent European national association football teams Serbia national football team National sports teams of Serbia European national under-21 association football teams England national youth football team England national under-21 football team 2013 UEFA European Under-21 Championship UEFA European Under-21 Championship 2012–13 in European football 2012–13 in Israeli football International association football competitions hosted by Israel  Football venues in Serbia Football venues in Serbia and Montenegro Football venues in Yugoslavia Kruševac Populated places in Rasina District Municipalities and cities of Šumadija and Western Serbia Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct 1962 births Living people People from Hammersmith English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English football managers Wealdstone F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players Player-coaches Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Premier League managers 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Pro Licence holders Members of the Order of the British Empire English Football Hall of Fame inductees People from Harrow, London People from Kenton People from Kingsbury Sportspeople from London Olympic managers of Great Britain England national under-21 football team managers UEFA Women's Euro 2013 UEFA Women's Championship 2012–13 in European football 2013 in Swedish women's football International women's association football competitions hosted by Sweden 2013 in women's association football Sport in Gothenburg Sport in Linköping Sport in Kalmar Sport in Halmstad Sport in Växjö Sport in Norrköping Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Doncaster Footballers from South Yorkshire English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Watford F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Black English sportspeople Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Alumni of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge British comedians People educated at Lancing College Living people 1978 births Place of birth missing (living people) 1979 births Living people People from Le Chesnay Association football forwards French footballers French football managers France youth international footballers France international footballers INF Clairefontaine players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Liverpool F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Fenerbahçe footballers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Shanghai Shenhua F.C. players Juventus F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Mumbai City FC players Ligue 1 players Premier League players La Liga players Süper Lig players Serie A players First Division/Premier League top scorers Chinese Super League players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2001 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players French expatriate footballers French expatriate football managers French expatriates in England French expatriates in Spain French expatriates in Turkey French expatriates in China French expatriates in Italy French expatriates in India Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate footballers in China Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in India Expatriate football managers in India French people of Martiniquais descent Converts to Islam French Muslims France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events