 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1979 births Living people People from Galway (city) Association football players from County Galway Association football goalkeepers Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Galway United F.C. (1937–2011) players Barry Town F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Derry City F.C. players Barnet F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Millwall F.C. players League of Ireland players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Belvedere F.C. players 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe 1989 births Living people People from Stanmore English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Southampton F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players English children's writers 1978 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers FIFA Century Club Manchester City F.C. players People educated at Brentwood School (Essex) People from Romford Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players West Ham United F.C. players Conservative Party (UK) people Members of the Order of the British Empire New York City FC players English expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from County Tipperary Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football forwards Cork City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Southampton F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Tipperary hurlers Gortnahoe-Glengoole hurlers UEFA Euro 2012 players 1989 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players English Christians Black British sportspeople Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Living people 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff 1986 births Living people People from Thorntonhall Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish footballers Scottish people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in Russia Irish expatriates in Russia Queen's Park F.C. players Celtic F.C. players FC Spartak Moscow players Everton F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Russian Football Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1939 births Living people 1962 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.C. Milan players ACF Fiorentina managers A.S. Varese 1910 players Association football defenders Cagliari Calcio managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Inter Milan managers FC Bayern Munich managers Expatriate football managers in Austria FC Red Bull Salzburg managers Footballers at the 1960 Summer Olympics Bundesliga managers Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers Italy national football team managers Juventus F.C. managers Olympic footballers of Italy People from the Province of Milan Expatriate football managers in Portugal S.L. Benfica managers Primeira Liga managers Expatriate football managers in the Republic of Ireland Republic of Ireland national football team managers Serie A players Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 2004 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers VfB Stuttgart managers Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in Ireland UEFA Cup winning managers Italian Roman Catholics England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 1988 births Association football defenders Blackpool F.C. players Everton F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Gaelic football backs Gaelic footballers who switched code Killybegs Gaelic footballers League of Ireland players Living people Premier League players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Sligo Rovers F.C. players Sportspeople from County Donegal The Football League players 1984 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Peterborough United F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Orlando City SC players Colorado Rapids players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate soccer players in the United States 1984 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Bury F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Cherry Orchard F.C. players 1982 births Living people People educated at St Bonaventure's Catholic Comprehensive School Association football forwards English Christians English Roman Catholics English footballers Black English sportspeople English expatriate footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Dominica descent English people of Saint Lucian descent Senrab F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Toronto FC players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Expatriate soccer players in Canada 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Footballers from Newham (London borough) 1980 births Living people People from Stepney English footballers Association football fullbacks 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players A.S. Roma players LA Galaxy players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriates in Italy Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English people of Barbadian descent Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club 1961 births Living people 1990 FIFA World Cup players 1994 FIFA World Cup players Apollon Limassol managers Association football midfielders Expatriate football managers in Cyprus Expatriate football managers in Greece Home Farm F.C. players Irish association football commentators League of Ireland players Liverpool F.C. players Olympiakos Nicosia managers Panionios G.S.S. managers Premier League players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland football managers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Association football players from County Dublin Southend United F.C. managers Southend United F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1988 players League of Ireland XI players Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Irish expatriates in the United Kingdom 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football friendly trophies Coats of arms of former countries English coats of arms National symbols of England English heraldry Flags of England Coats of arms with lions Royal arms of European monarchs Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England 1993 births Living people Arsenal F.C. players Association football wingers Black English sportspeople England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers English people of Jamaican descent People educated at St John's College (Portsmouth) Sportspeople from Portsmouth Premier League players Southampton F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Sound production technology DJing Public sphere European anthems Irish patriotic songs Irish words and phrases National anthems National symbols of the Republic of Ireland Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester British patriotic songs Compositions by Thomas Arne Patriotic songs National symbols of the United Kingdom Rangers F.C. songs 1740 songs Curling Winter sports Winter Olympic sports Sports originating in Scotland Precision sports Team sports Scottish games 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Shrewsbury English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Demons Fictional populated places Ireland Celtic nations Divided regions International islands Northern Europe Western Europe Laws of association football Sports rules and regulations Sports venues by type 1986 singles Kenny Loggins songs Songs about the military Songs written by Giorgio Moroder Songs written by Tom Whitlock Columbia Records singles Songs from Top Gun 1986 songs 1904 births 1951 deaths Sportspeople from Johannesburg English cricketers Lancashire cricketers English footballers England international footballers South African soccer players South Africa international soccer players Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players York City F.C. wartime guest players Leeds United F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players English football managers Port Vale F.C. managers The Football League managers Cancer deaths in England Dual internationalists (football) White South African people The Football League players The Football League representative players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Irish songs Irish folk songs Celtic F.C. songs Munster Rugby Ireland national rugby union team Dropkick Murphys songs Great Famine (Ireland) Songs about Ireland Songs written by Pete St. John Football songs and chants 1983 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Watford F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Reading F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Belvedere F.C. players 1984 births Living people People from Kirkby English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Wigan Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Garden features Types of garden Sustainable building Interior design Urban agriculture 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Association football positions 1960 births Living people People from Lörrach (district) Sportspeople from Baden-Württemberg Fenerbahçe football managers German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers German football managers Expatriate football managers in Austria Germany national football team managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers UEFA Euro 2008 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers SC Freiburg players VfB Stuttgart players Eintracht Frankfurt players Karlsruher SC players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Süper Lig managers VfB Stuttgart managers Karlsruher SC managers FK Austria Wien managers Bundesliga managers 2. Bundesliga managers Recipients of the Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Expatriate football managers in Turkey German expatriates in Turkey FC Tirol Innsbruck managers FIFA World Cup-winning managers FC Frauenfeld players Germany's Sports Hall of Fame inductees 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Reading, Berkshire English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football forwards Reading F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Derry Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Institute F.C. players Derry City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players NIFL Premiership players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Republic of Ireland international footballers from Northern Ireland League of Ireland XI players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1992 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Derby County F.C. players The Football League players Association football clubs established in 1885 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Millwall F.C. Southern Football League clubs 1885 establishments in England The Wolfe Tones albums 2001 albums 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification 2010 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup qualification European national association football teams Faroe Islands national football team National sports teams of the Faroe Islands China Central Asian countries Chinese-speaking countries and territories Communist states East Asian countries G20 nations Member states of the United Nations Republics One-party states States and territories established in 1949 BRICS nations E7 nations Ball games Summer Olympic sports Racquet sports Sports originating in England Tennis French Open 16th arrondissement of Paris 1891 establishments in France Clay court tennis tournaments June sporting events May sporting events Recurring sporting events established in 1891 Tennis in Paris Tennis tournaments in France Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments Annual sporting events in France Tennis terminology Grand Slam (tennis) Tennis tournaments Li Na 1982 births Living people Asian Games competitors for China Asian Games bronze medalists Asian Games gold medalists for China Asian Games medalists in tennis Australian Open (tennis) champions Chinese autobiographers Chinese female tennis players French Open champions Grand Slam (tennis) champions in women's singles Huazhong University of Science and Technology alumni Olympic tennis players of China Sportspeople from Wuhan Tennis players at the 2000 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2006 Asian Games Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2010 Asian Games Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Women autobiographers Writers from Wuhan Pop music Record charts Radio formats Beijing Articles containing video clips Articles including recorded pronunciations Burial sites of the House of Holstein-Gottorp-Romanov Capitals in Asia Independent cities Metropolitan areas of China National Famous Historical and Cultural Cities in China National Garden Cities in China North China Plain World Digital Library related Tennis organisations WTA Tour Women's sports organisations Sports organisations established in 1973 History of tennis 1973 establishments in England Paris 3rd-century BC establishments in Europe Populated places established in the 3rd century BC Capitals in Europe Cities in France Companions of the Liberation European culture French culture Prefectures in France Departments of Île-de-France WTA Tour Tennis terminology Glossaries of sports 2007 Wimbledon Championships 1980 births Living people LGBT tennis players LGBT people from Italy French Open champions Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Italian female tennis players Olympic tennis players of Italy Sportspeople from Milan Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Hopman Cup competitors Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Grand Slam (tennis) champions in women's singles Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 1983 births Living people Australian Open (tennis) champions Belgian female tennis players French Open champions People from Bilzen People from Wall Township, New Jersey US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon champions World No. 1 tennis players French Open junior champions US Open (tennis) junior champions Hopman Cup competitors Grand Crosses of the Order of the Crown (Belgium) Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic tennis players of Belgium Grand Slam (tennis) champions in women's singles Grand Slam (tennis) champions in women's doubles Grand Slam (tennis) champions in girls' doubles Sportspeople from Limburg (Belgium) Belgium 1831 establishments in Belgium Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Federal monarchies French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1830 Western Europe Australian Open (tennis) 1905 establishments in Australia Annual sporting events in Australia Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments Hard court tennis tournaments Recurring sporting events established in 1905 Seven Sport Sport in Melbourne Tennis tournaments in Australia Switzerland Countries in Europe Central Europe Western Europe Federal republics French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Italian-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Roger Federer 1981 births Living people Swiss male tennis players Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Australian Open (tennis) champions French Open champions Wimbledon champions US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon junior champions World No. 1 tennis players Olympic medalists in tennis Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Switzerland Olympic silver medalists for Switzerland Olympic tennis players of Switzerland Tennis players at the 2000 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Sports world record holders Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners People from Basel-Stadt People of Afrikaner descent Swiss people of Dutch descent Swiss people of French descent Swiss people of South African descent Swiss Roman Catholics UNICEF people Münchenstein Batting (baseball) Baseball terminology Asia Continents France Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Western Europe 1792 introductions Currencies of British Overseas Territories Currencies of East Timor Currencies of Ecuador Currencies of the Kingdom of the Netherlands Currencies of the United States Currencies of Zimbabwe Historical currencies of the United States Warrants issued in Hong Kong Stock Exchange Living people Canadian sports executives and administrators Sportspeople from Welland Sportspeople from Windsor, Ontario University of Western Ontario alumni Sportspeople from St. Petersburg, Florida Canadian expatriate sportspeople in the United States WTA Tour 1963 births Business and financial operations occupations Corporate governance Management occupations Chief executive officers Corporate executives Badminton Racquet sports Summer Olympic sports Sports originating in South Asia American inventions Laptops Classes of computers Personal computing Blogs Internet terminology Non-fiction genres Words coined in the 1990s Abbreviations 1999 establishments in China Chinese blogs Chinese websites Companies listed on NASDAQ Internet properties established in 1999 Online companies Web portals Media of China China Central Television Foreign television channels broadcasting in the United Kingdom Publicly funded broadcasters Chinese-language television stations Television channels and stations established in 1958 Cable television in Hong Kong Multilingual news services 1958 establishments in China The Championships, Wimbledon Recurring sporting events established in 1877 1877 establishments in the United Kingdom Wimbledon, London Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments July events Grass court tennis tournaments Tennis tournaments in England Tennis in London Sport in Merton Annual sporting events in the United Kingdom Annual events in London Russia BRICS nations Caspian littoral states Central Asian countries Countries in Europe East Asian countries Eastern Europe Federal republics G8 nations G20 nations Member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations North Asian countries Northeast Asian countries Russian-speaking countries and territories Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 862 Western Asian countries E7 nations Shanghai East China Independent cities Metropolitan areas of China Port cities and towns in China National Famous Historical and Cultural Cities in China National Garden Cities in China Populated coastal places in China Populated places established in the 10th century Treaty of Nanking Yangtze River Delta Articles containing video clips Newspapers published in Hong Kong Chinese-language newspapers (Traditional Chinese) Publications established in 1969 Melbourne Australian capital cities Coastal cities in Australia Former national capitals Metropolitan areas of Australia Populated places established in 1835 Populated places established in the 19th century Port cities in Australia 1835 establishments in Australia Regions of Victoria (Australia) Rolex 1905 establishments in England Manufacturing companies established in 1905 Luxury brands Swiss watch brands Privately held companies of Switzerland Watch manufacturing companies of Switzerland Watch brands 1961 establishments in New York Companies based in Oakland, California Companies established in 1961 General Mills brands Ice cream brands Ice cream manufacturers Ice cream parlors Nestlé brands Adhesive tape Medical dressings Surgical instruments Sports management companies Sports event promotion companies Sports agents Service companies of the United States Privately held companies in the United States Companies based in Cleveland, Ohio Silver Lake Partners companies Serena Williams Venus Williams Living people Sibling duos Tennis doubles teams Sportspeople from Compton, California People from Palm Beach Gardens, Florida People from Saginaw, Michigan Sportspeople from West Palm Beach, Florida African-American tennis players American female tennis players Australian Open (tennis) champions French Open champions Wimbledon champions US Open (tennis) champions Grand Slam (tennis) champions in women's singles Grand Slam (tennis) champions in women's doubles Grand Slam (tennis) champions in mixed doubles Medalists at the 2000 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for the United States Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic tennis players of the United States Tennis players at the 2000 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics World No. 1 tennis players Sports families of the United States Coventry University Business schools in England 1877 establishments in the United Kingdom Cricket in England Cricket in Wales England and Wales England in international cricket National cricket teams National sports teams of England National sports teams of Wales Sports organisations of England Wales in international cricket 1917 establishments in the United States American business magazines Biweekly magazines Companies based in Jersey City, New Jersey Magazines established in 1917 Magazines published in New Jersey Media in Hudson County, New Jersey Nationalism Political terminology Patriotism