 Annual sporting events in the United States US Open (tennis) Recurring sporting events established in 1881 Sports venues in Queens, New York Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments National championships in the United States US Open Series Hard court tennis tournaments in the United States 1881 establishments in the United States Andy Murray 1987 births BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Clan Murray Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Officers of the Order of the British Empire Olympic gold medallists for Great Britain Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic silver medallists for Great Britain Olympic tennis players of Great Britain Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish male tennis players Scottish Olympic medallists Sportspeople from Glasgow Sportspeople from Dunblane Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics US Open (tennis) champions US Open (tennis) junior champions Wimbledon champions The Championships, Wimbledon Recurring sporting events established in 1877 1877 establishments in the United Kingdom Wimbledon, London Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments July events Grass court tennis tournaments Tennis tournaments in England Tennis in London Sport in Merton Annual sporting events in the United Kingdom Annual events in London Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy ATP Tour Tennis rankings Sports world rankings Toronto 1834 establishments in Canada Former colonial capitals in Canada Populated places established in 1793 Populated places on the Great Lakes Populated places on the Underground Railroad Port settlements in Ontario Ohio States of the United States Midwestern United States States and territories established in 1803 Former British colonies Former French colonies Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Beauty pageants in the United States 1937 establishments in the United States American awards Canadian children's television series 1993 Canadian television series debuts 1997 Canadian television series endings 1990s Canadian television series Global Television Network shows Disney Channel shows Teen dramas Television series produced in Toronto English-language television programming Facebook 2004 establishments in Massachusetts Products introduced in 2004 American websites Android (operating system) software Bada software BlackBerry software Blog hosting services Companies based in Menlo Park, California Companies listed on NASDAQ Firefox OS software Human–computer interaction Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2004 IOS software Multilingual websites Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Online gaming services Photo sharing Social information processing Social networking services Social networking websites Student culture Symbian software Technology companies established in 2004 Tor hidden services Websites which mirror Wikipedia Windows Phone software Catalan language Subject–verb–object languages Living people 1961 births Sportspeople from Manacor Spanish tennis coaches Rafael Nadal Recurring sporting events established in 1900 Davis Cup World championships Tournament systems Andy Murray Nicknamed groups of tennis players Novak Djokovic Rafael Nadal Roger Federer Tennis rivalries Quartets Roger Federer 1981 births Living people Swiss male tennis players Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Australian Open (tennis) champions French Open champions Wimbledon champions US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon junior champions World No. 1 tennis players Olympic medalists in tennis Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Switzerland Olympic silver medalists for Switzerland Olympic tennis players of Switzerland Tennis players at the 2000 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Sports world record holders Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners People from Basel-Stadt People of Afrikaner descent Swiss people of Dutch descent Swiss people of French descent Swiss people of South African descent Swiss Roman Catholics UNICEF people Münchenstein Novak Djokovic Rafael Nadal Tennis rivalries ATP Tour Companies based in London Sports organisations established in 1972 Tennis organisations History of tennis Cincinnati Masters Tennis tournaments in the United States Hard court tennis tournaments WTA Tour Sports in Cincinnati, Ohio Recurring events established in 1899 Visitor attractions in Warren County, Ohio US Open Series ATP Tour ATP World Tour Masters 1000 Cincinnati, Ohio Cities in Ohio Tennis terminology Grand Slam (tennis) Tennis tournaments Ball games Summer Olympic sports Racquet sports Sports originating in England Tennis Association football clubs established in 1875 Football clubs in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. Sport in Blackburn The Football League founder members Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1875 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire 1986 births Living people People from Torsby Municipality Swedish footballers IFK Göteborg players FC Groningen players Hamburger SV players Panathinaikos F.C. players Allsvenskan players Bundesliga players Eredivisie players Superleague Greece players Swedish expatriate footballers Swedish expatriate sportspeople in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Germany Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Greece Sweden youth international footballers Sweden under-21 international footballers Sweden international footballers Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1969 births Living people People from Eidsvoll 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1998 FIFA World Cup players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players FIFA Century Club Kniksen award winners Lillestrøm SK players Manchester United F.C. players Norway international footballers Norway youth international footballers Norway under-21 international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Norwegian footballers Norwegian football managers Tippeligaen players Premier League players Rangers F.C. players Scottish Premier League players UEFA Euro 2000 players Vålerenga Fotball players KFUM-Kameratene Oslo players Norwegian expatriate footballers Lyn Fotball managers Lillestrøm SK managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Legia Warsaw managers Expatriate football managers in England Norwegian expatriate football managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. Premier League venues Football venues in England Buildings and structures in Blackburn Sports venues completed in 1882 Football League venues Norway Countries in Europe Nordic countries Scandinavia Northern Europe Liberal democracies States and territories established in 872 States and territories established in 1905 Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Germanic countries and territories  1963 births Living people People from Ruabon Welsh footballers Welsh expatriate footballers Association football forwards Wales international footballers Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Germany Welsh expatriates in Germany FC Bayern Munich footballers Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Southampton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Welsh football managers Wales national football team managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Fulham F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Stoke City F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Bundesliga players English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Ysgol Rhiwabon Officers of the Order of the British Empire La Liga players Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Christmas traditions Christmas-linked holidays Public holidays in Australia Public holidays in Canada Public holidays in New Zealand Public holidays in the United Kingdom December observances 1963 births Living people Sportspeople from Bellshill People from Ross and Cromarty Scottish footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers Aberdeen F.C. players FC Metz players Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Ligue 1 players Scottish Football League players Motherwell F.C. managers Coventry City F.C. managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Scottish football managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Scottish Premier League managers Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from Highland (council area) Scotland under-21 international footballers Wigan Athletic F.C. non-playing staff Rotherham United F.C. non-playing staff Rotherham United F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff 1963 births Living people Sportspeople from York English footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football goalkeepers Halifax Town A.F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Everton F.C. players Notts County F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players York City F.C. players Mansfield Town F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. non-playing staff Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Bolton Wanderers F.C. non-playing staff English football organisations Association football trade unions Honor Ethics Social status Warrior code Virtue Association football terminology Association football transfers Towns in Lancashire West Pennine Moors Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom Blackburn Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Food companies of India Companies based in Pune Companies established in 1971 Indian companies established in 1971 Current association football seasons La Liga seasons 2015–16 in European association football leagues 2015–16 in Spanish football leagues 2015–16 La Liga Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1966 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Association football forwards Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Premier League players Preston North End F.C. players Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Scottish footballers Scottish Football League players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players People from Clydebank Scotland under-21 international footballers Lyn Fotball Football clubs in Norway Association football clubs established in 1896 1896 establishments in Norway Football clubs in Oslo Football clubs in Norway Association football clubs established in 1917 1917 establishments in Norway Sport in Akershus Lillestrøm SK BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom 1903 births 1957 deaths Sportspeople from Bellshill Association football forwards Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Queen of the South F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. (1878) players Newcastle United F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Notts County F.C. players Grimsby Town F.C. players Gateshead F.C. players Association football players who committed suicide The Football League players York City F.C. wartime guest players Suicides by train Suicides in England English Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish Football League representative players 1951 births 1974 FIFA World Cup players 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. players Cumbernauld United F.C. players English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players Scottish league football top scorers The Amazing Race 2011 television seasons