 Masters Tournament Recurring sporting events established in 1934 Economy of Augusta, Georgia Visitor attractions in Augusta, Georgia Annual sporting events in the United States 1934 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) Golf clubs and courses Leeds Leeds City Region University towns in the United Kingdom Market towns in West Yorkshire Towns in West Yorkshire Cider Apple products Halloween food Fermented beverages World cuisine Alcoholic beverages Alcohol Mardi Gras food Vodkas Polish inventions Russian inventions Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England Magistrates' courts in England and Wales English businesspeople English football chairmen and investors Chelsea F.C. chairmen and investors Chairmen of Leeds United F.C. Chairmen of Oldham Athletic F.C. Chairmen of Wigan Athletic F.C. People educated at Ealing County Grammar School for Boys People from Ealing 1931 births Living people Football clubs in England Leeds United F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1919 Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Championship clubs 1919 establishments in England Sport in Leeds Phoenix clubs (association football) Leeds United F.C. Football venues in England Sports venues in Leeds UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby league stadiums in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Sports venues completed in 1897 Football League venues Types of beer 1981 births Living people People from Barwell English footballers Association football goalkeepers Coventry City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Premier League players The Football League players Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 Yorkshire Counties of England established in antiquity Articles containing video clips Derby Local government in Derbyshire Railway towns in England Unitary authority districts of England County towns in England Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in the East Midlands Local government districts of the East Midlands The Five Boroughs Trenton, New Jersey 1719 establishments in New Jersey Cities in Mercer County, New Jersey County seats in New Jersey Faulkner Act Mayor-Council Former capitals of the United States New Jersey Supreme Court New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Populated places established in 1719 1829 establishments in the United Kingdom Annual events in London History of rowing Mortlake, London Oxbridge Recurring sporting events established in 1829 Rowing at the University of Oxford Rowing at the University of Cambridge Rowing on the River Thames Rowing races Oxbridge sporting rivalries Water sports in London The Boat Race Annual sporting events in the United Kingdom Cambridge Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in the East of England County towns in England Local government in Cambridgeshire University towns in the United Kingdom Non-metropolitan districts of Cambridgeshire Local government districts of the East of England Oxford Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in South East England County towns in England History of Oxford Local authorities adjoining the River Thames Local government in Oxfordshire Populated places established in the 8th century Tourism in Oxford University towns in the United Kingdom Non-metropolitan districts of Oxfordshire Local government districts of South East England River Thames North Sea Rivers of Berkshire Rivers of Buckinghamshire Rivers of Essex Rivers of Gloucestershire Rivers of Kent Rivers of London Rivers of Oxfordshire Rivers of Surrey River navigations in the United Kingdom Thames drainage basin Visitor attractions in London Drainage basins of the United Kingdom Crimes English law Common law offences in England and Wales Public sphere Sheffield Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in Yorkshire and the Humber Local government districts in South Yorkshire Local government districts of Yorkshire and the Humber Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 1st millennium Cheltenham Towns in Gloucestershire Spa towns in England Non-metropolitan districts of Gloucestershire Local government districts of South West England Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Beer styles Units of volume Non-SI metric units Imperial units Units of volume 3GPP standards Mobile telecommunication services Mobile telecommunications standards Text messaging Email Internet terminology Electronic documents History of the Internet 1971 introductions Newspapers published in Yorkshire Media in Leeds Publications established in 1754 1754 establishments in England 1933 songs 1950 singles The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Sports venues in Sheffield Football venues in England Hillsborough, South Yorkshire UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums Football venues in South Yorkshire Premier League venues Football League venues Hillsborough disaster Sports venues completed in 1899 1899 establishments in England 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Manchester United F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players