 1982 births Living people Olympic tennis players of Spain People from Xàbia Spanish male tennis players Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Valencian tennis players French Open 16th arrondissement of Paris 1891 establishments in France Clay court tennis tournaments June sporting events May sporting events Recurring sporting events established in 1891 Tennis in Paris Tennis tournaments in France Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments Annual sporting events in France Tennis terminology Grand Slam (tennis) Tennis tournaments Tennis Tennis terminology Scoring (sport) LGBT history LGBT-related legislation Marriage Mating systems Same-sex marriage Tennis shots Computer errors Central processing unit Paris 3rd-century BC establishments in Europe Populated places established in the 3rd century BC Capitals in Europe Cities in France Companions of the Liberation European culture French culture Prefectures in France Departments of Île-de-France Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 1984 births Living people Olympic tennis players of Sweden People from Monte Carlo People from Tibro Municipality Swedish expatriates in Monaco Swedish male tennis players Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics 16th arrondissement of Paris 1928 establishments in France French Open Sports venues completed in 1928 Sports venues in Paris Tennis venues in France Tennis in Paris France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries Spanish Empire Former empires History of modern European colonialism History of the Americas House of Habsburg Overseas empires Spanish colonization of the Americas 1986 births Living people People from Trelawny Parish Jamaican sprinters Male sprinters Jamaican male athletes World record holders in athletics (track and field) Olympic athletes of Jamaica Olympic gold medalists for Jamaica Olympic medalists in athletics (track and field) Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Athletes (track and field) at the 2004 Summer Olympics Athletes (track and field) at the 2008 Summer Olympics Athletes (track and field) at the 2012 Summer Olympics World Championships in Athletics athletes for Jamaica World Championships in Athletics medalists Commonwealth Games competitors for Jamaica Commonwealth Games gold medallists for Jamaica Commonwealth Games medallists in athletics Athletes (track and field) at the 2014 Commonwealth Games Jamaican Roman Catholics Jamaican autobiographers Laureus World Sports Awards winners Members of the Order of Jamaica Recipients of the Order of Distinction Hollywood California culture Communities on U.S. Route 66 Film production districts Former municipalities in California Neighborhoods in Los Angeles, California Populated places established in 1853 Central Los Angeles Northwest Los Angeles Leonardo DiCaprio 1974 births Living people 20th-century American male actors 21st-century American male actors American environmentalists American film producers American male child actors American male film actors American male soap opera actors American male television actors American people of German descent American people of Italian descent American people of Russian descent American philanthropists Best Actor AACTA Award winners Best Drama Actor Golden Globe (film) winners Best Musical or Comedy Actor Golden Globe (film) winners California Democrats Formula E team owners Film producers from California Male actors from Hollywood, California Male actors of Italian descent People from Echo Park, Los Angeles Silver Bear for Best Actor winners Best Actor Academy Award winners Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Facebook 2004 establishments in Massachusetts Products introduced in 2004 American websites Android (operating system) software Bada software BlackBerry software Blog hosting services Companies based in Menlo Park, California Companies listed on NASDAQ Firefox OS software Human–computer interaction Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2004 IOS software Multilingual websites Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Online gaming services Photo sharing Social information processing Social networking services Social networking websites Student culture Symbian software Technology companies established in 2004 Tor hidden services Websites which mirror Wikipedia Windows Phone software Roger Federer 1981 births Living people Swiss male tennis players Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Australian Open (tennis) champions French Open champions Wimbledon champions US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon junior champions World No. 1 tennis players Olympic medalists in tennis Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Switzerland Olympic silver medalists for Switzerland Olympic tennis players of Switzerland Tennis players at the 2000 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Sports world record holders Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners People from Basel-Stadt People of Afrikaner descent Swiss people of Dutch descent Swiss people of French descent Swiss people of South African descent Swiss Roman Catholics UNICEF people Münchenstein Novak Djokovic 1987 births Living people Australian Open (tennis) champions Eastern Orthodox Christians from Serbia Expatriate sportspeople in Monaco Grand Crosses of the Order of St. Sava Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Members of the Serbian Orthodox Church Olympic bronze medalists for Serbia Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic tennis players of Serbia People from Monte Carlo Serbia and Montenegro male tennis players Serbian expatriate sportspeople Serbian expatriates in Germany Serbian expatriates in Monaco Serbian male tennis players Sports world record holders Sportspeople from Belgrade Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics UNICEF people US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon champions World No. 1 tennis players Andy Murray 1987 births BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Clan Murray Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Officers of the Order of the British Empire Olympic gold medallists for Great Britain Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic silver medallists for Great Britain Olympic tennis players of Great Britain Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish male tennis players Scottish Olympic medallists Sportspeople from Glasgow Sportspeople from Dunblane Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics US Open (tennis) champions US Open (tennis) junior champions Wimbledon champions 1975 racehorse births 1993 racehorse deaths Thoroughbred racehorses Northern Dancer bloodline Racehorses bred in Maryland Racehorses trained in Ireland Irish racehorses Thoroughbred family 8-f Dog breeds Dog breeds originating in France Scent hounds Dog breeds originating in England Dog breeds originating in Scotland Dog breeds originating in Belgium Belgian inventions Hunting with hounds Tennis Tennis court surfaces Sports rules and regulations Ball games Summer Olympic sports Racquet sports Sports originating in England Tennis Batting (baseball) Baseball terminology Precipitation Rain Marathon running Events in athletics (track and field) Road running competitions Athletic culture based on Greek antiquity Long-distance running Summer Olympic disciplines in athletics Dueling Human rights Children's rights Children's rights concepts France Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Western Europe Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League 1960 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid UEFA Cup winning managers Spanish football managers Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla managers Liverpool F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Valencia CF managers CA Osasuna managers CF Extremadura managers CD Tenerife managers Real Valladolid managers La Liga managers Segunda División managers Premier League managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy UEFA Pro Licence holders Polytechnic University of Madrid alumni Linares CF players S.S.C. Napoli managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Spanish expatriate football managers Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Urban areas of England Geography of Tyne and Wear NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom River Tyne 2001–02 in English football 1207 establishments Liverpool Cities in North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated coastal places in Merseyside Populated places established in the 13th century Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Port cities and towns in England Towns in Merseyside Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Local government districts of North West England NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom 1935 births 2009 deaths People from Lancaster, Lancashire English footballers England international footballers Preston North End F.C. players Morecambe F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Wrexham F.C. players Bradford Park Avenue A.F.C. players The Football League players A.F.C. Bournemouth Association football clubs established in 1899 Sport in Bournemouth Football League Trophy winners 1899 establishments in England Football clubs in Dorset Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Publications established in 1855 National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Telegraph Media Group 1855 establishments in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London 1964 births Living people English businesspeople in retailing English billionaires Newcastle United F.C. directors and chairmen People from Burnham, Buckinghamshire People educated at Burnham Grammar School Leicester City F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Leicester Association football clubs established in 1884 Football League Cup winners Midland Football League (1889) Football League Championship clubs 1884 establishments in England Football clubs in Leicestershire Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams 1954 births Living people Alumni of the University of Bolton Blackpool F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players British association football commentators British expatriate sportspeople in the United States Coventry City F.C. players English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Ireland English expatriates in the United States English football managers English footballers Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football central defenders League of Ireland managers League of Ireland players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Limerick F.C. managers Limerick F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Notts County F.C. managers People from Dudley Premier League managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League managers The Football League players Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93) players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain Football clubs in England Sport in Rotherham Rotherham United F.C. Association football clubs established in 1925 Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1925 establishments in England Preston North End F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Sport in Preston 1880 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire 1985 births Living people People from Funchal Portuguese footballers Madeiran footballers Association football forwards Association football wingers Primeira Liga players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Portugal youth international footballers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers Portuguese Roman Catholics UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Portugal Golden Globes (Portugal) winners Grand Officers of the Order of Prince Henry First Division/Premier League top scorers Pichichi Trophy winners European Footballer of the Year winners FIFA World Player of the Year winners World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners FIFA Century Club Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Portuguese male models Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Spain 1989 births Living people Footballers from Cardiff Welsh expatriate footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Association football utility players Southampton F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Premier League players The Football League players La Liga players BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year People educated at Whitchurch High School 1986 births Living people People from Seville (comarca) Spanish footballers Andalusian footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División B players Sevilla Atlético players Sevilla FC players Real Madrid C.F. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA Century Club Real Madrid C.F. Football venues in Spain 1982 FIFA World Cup stadiums 1964 European Nations' Cup stadiums Sports venues in Madrid Sports venues completed in 1947 National stadiums 1947 establishments in Spain Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Newcastle upon Tyne English footballers Welsh footballers Association football defenders Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Newcastle United F.C. players Gateshead F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players National League (English football) players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players 1986 births Living people People from Villeneuve-Saint-Georges SM Caen players Association football forwards French footballers France under-21 international footballers FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Newcastle United F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England French people of Guadeloupean descent France youth international footballers 1986 births Living people People from Greenwich English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers Association football defenders Newcastle United F.C. players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Wallsend Boys Club players England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Collaborative projects Social media Mass media Revolutionary tactics 1948 births Living people British fantasy writers British science fiction writers Edgar Award winners British non-fiction writers 20th-century British writers 21st-century British writers 20th-century British novelists 21st-century British novelists British male writers British male novelists Association football terminology Association football transfers 1966 births Living people People from Carlisle, Cumbria English footballers England under-21 international footballers Manchester City F.C. players Finn Harps F.C. players League of Ireland players Oxford United F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players Carlisle United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English football managers Rochdale A.F.C. managers Carlisle United F.C. managers Northwich Victoria F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. managers Shrewsbury Town F.C. managers Stockport County F.C. managers The Football League managers Derby County F.C. non-playing staff UEFA Pro Licence holders 1982 births Living people Mayors of Timmins People from Oshawa Timmins city councillors Queen's University alumni 1973 births Living people People from the Province of Latina Italian footballers Italian football managers S.S.C. Napoli players Juventus F.C. players U.C. Sampdoria players Torino F.C. players Bologna F.C. 1909 players Calcio Como players A.C. Siena players Serie A players Serie B players Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Italy Association football midfielders Frosinone Calcio players Foggia Calcio players A.S. Avellino 1912 players Ascoli Calcio 1898 players Italy under-21 international footballers 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players Sevilla FC players Albacete Balompié players Hércules CF players CD Toledo footballers Spanish football managers Segunda División managers Real Valladolid managers Albacete Balompié managers Liverpool F.C. non-playing staff 1960 births Living people Association football forwards BBC sports presenters and reporters British association football commentators England B international footballers England international footballers English footballers Everton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Leicester City F.C. players Nagoya Grampus players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in Spain English expatriate footballers FIFA 100 Golf writers and broadcasters 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players The Football League players First Division/Premier League top scorers English Football Hall of Fame inductees Expatriate footballers in Japan J.League players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at City of Leicester Boys' Grammar School Sportspeople from Leicester Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software English football organisations Association football trade unions