 Sweden Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe Scandinavia Year of establishment unknown Swedish-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Paris Masters Tennis tournaments in France Indoor tennis tournaments Hard court tennis tournaments BNP Paribas Tennis in Paris ATP World Tour Masters 1000 Andy Murray 1987 births BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Clan Murray Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Officers of the Order of the British Empire Olympic gold medallists for Great Britain Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic silver medallists for Great Britain Olympic tennis players of Great Britain Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish male tennis players Scottish Olympic medallists Sportspeople from Glasgow Sportspeople from Dunblane Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics US Open (tennis) champions US Open (tennis) junior champions Wimbledon champions French Open 16th arrondissement of Paris 1891 establishments in France Clay court tennis tournaments June sporting events May sporting events Recurring sporting events established in 1891 Tennis in Paris Tennis tournaments in France Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments Annual sporting events in France Masters Tournament Recurring sporting events established in 1934 Economy of Augusta, Georgia Visitor attractions in Augusta, Georgia Annual sporting events in the United States 1934 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) 1974 births Living people Australian Open (tennis) junior champions French Open junior champions Olympic tennis players of Sweden People from Monte Carlo Sportspeople from Stockholm Swedish expatriates in Monaco Swedish male tennis players Tennis players at the 1996 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Wimbledon junior champions Cincinnati, Ohio Cities in Ohio Ball games Summer Olympic sports Racquet sports Sports originating in England Tennis Batting (baseball) Baseball terminology Buildings and structures completed in 1984 Indoor arenas in France Sports venues in Paris Indoor ice hockey venues in France Basketball venues in France Tennis venues in France Handball venues in France Boxing venues in France 12th arrondissement of Paris Sports venues completed in 1984 Indoor track and field venues 1984 establishments in France Music venues completed in 1984 IIHF World Championship venues Tennis shots Largest cities of Europe templates Serbia templates Serbia Balkans Countries in Europe Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Republics Serbian-speaking countries and territories Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 2006 Southeastern Europe Recurring sporting events established in 1900 Davis Cup World championships 1931 films British films 1930s comedy films Films directed by Walter Forde British comedy films British black-and-white films 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group 1988 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers Club Atlético Independiente footballers People from Quilmes La Liga players Premier League players Atlético Madrid footballers Manchester City F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers Argentine expatriate footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Olympic medalists in football 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriates in England 1989 births Living people Footballers from Cardiff Welsh expatriate footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Association football utility players Southampton F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Premier League players The Football League players La Liga players BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year People educated at Whitchurch High School West Bromwich Albion F.C. Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1878 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs West Bromwich FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1878 establishments in England Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders English autobiographers English footballers English expatriate footballers England international footballers English Roman Catholics England under-21 international footballers FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. players LA Galaxy players Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Whiston, Merseyside Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Designated Players (MLS) Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London 1989 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players English Christians Black British sportspeople Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Living people 1985 births Living people Sportspeople from Buenos Aires Argentine footballers Association football fullbacks Expatriate footballers in England San Lorenzo footballers RCD Espanyol footballers Manchester City F.C. players La Liga players Premier League players Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Argentine Primera División players Naturalised citizens of Spain Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Olympic medalists in football Argentine people of Basque descent Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina international footballers Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentine expatriates in England Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Laws of association football Association football terminology 1982 births Living people People educated at St Bonaventure's Catholic Comprehensive School Association football forwards English Christians English Roman Catholics English footballers Black English sportspeople English expatriate footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Dominica descent English people of Saint Lucian descent Senrab F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Toronto FC players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Expatriate soccer players in Canada 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Footballers from Newham (London borough) Defunct cricket grounds in England Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1932 Sports venues in York York City F.C. Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1996–97 in English football 1964 births Living people People from Iesi Italian Roman Catholics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Bologna F.C. 1909 players U.C. Sampdoria players S.S. Lazio players Leicester City F.C. players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers S.S. Lazio managers ACF Fiorentina managers Inter Milan managers Serie A managers Premier League players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Manchester City F.C. managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology Argentina national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries National sports teams of Argentina South American national association football teams Football teams in Argentina 1986 births Living people People from Wortley, Leeds Association football midfielders Association football wingers Association football utility players Footballers from Leeds English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1207 establishments Liverpool Cities in North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated coastal places in Merseyside Populated places established in the 13th century Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Port cities and towns in England Towns in Merseyside Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Local government districts of North West England NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Sports officiating Bosnia and Herzegovina Balkans Countries in Europe Federal republics Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the Council of Europe Bosnian-speaking countries and territories Croatian-speaking countries and territories Serbian-speaking countries and territories Slavic countries and territories Member states of the United Nations Southeastern Europe Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Shrewsbury English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from County Antrim Association footballers from Northern Ireland Ballymena United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Reading F.C. non-playing staff Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff Expatriate football managers from Northern Ireland The Football League managers Watford F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Oldham Athletic A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England Sport in Oldham Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Greater Manchester Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England  1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Premier League players Serie A players Bundesliga players FC Barcelona C players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players Villarreal CF players Liverpool F.C. players S.S.C. Napoli players FC Bayern Munich footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Catalan XI guest footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Germany Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy Spanish expatriates in Germany Laws of association football Sports rules and regulations Sports venues by type Argentina Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1816 Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Football League Fourth Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe Football League Third Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe 1960 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid UEFA Cup winning managers Spanish football managers Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla managers Liverpool F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Valencia CF managers CA Osasuna managers CF Extremadura managers CD Tenerife managers Real Valladolid managers La Liga managers Segunda División managers Premier League managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy UEFA Pro Licence holders Polytechnic University of Madrid alumni Linares CF players S.S.C. Napoli managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Spanish expatriate football managers Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League Macedonia national football team European national association football teams Football in the Republic of Macedonia National sports teams of the Republic of Macedonia Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people People from Strumica Macedonian footballers Macedonia international footballers Macedonian expatriate footballers Association football defenders AEK Athens F.C. players Red Star Belgrade footballers Odra Wodzisław players Levadiakos F.C. players Egaleo F.C. players SC Heerenveen players FC Dynamo Kyiv players FK Belasica players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Superleague Greece players Ekstraklasa players Eredivisie players Ukrainian Premier League players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Serbia Expatriate footballers in Greece Expatriate footballers in Poland Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in Ukraine Expatriate footballers in England Macedonian expatriates in Serbia Macedonian expatriates in Greece Macedonian expatriates in Poland Macedonian expatriates in the Netherlands Macedonian expatriates in Ukraine Macedonian expatriates in England Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations 1990 births Living people Footballers from Sheffield English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Sheffield United F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople People educated at High Storrs School British people of Barbadian descent Wales Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union United Kingdom Great Britain  Articles with hAudio microformats Norwich City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1902 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Norwich Premier League clubs 1902 establishments in England Football clubs in Norfolk 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Lomé Yoruba sportspeople 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players African Footballer of the Year winners Arsenal F.C. players AS Monaco FC players Association football forwards Crystal Palace F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Monaco Expatriate footballers in Spain FC Metz players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Manchester City F.C. players Premier League players Real Madrid C.F. players Togo international footballers Togolese expatriate footballers Togolese expatriates in France Togolese footballers Togolese Christians Togolese people of Nigerian descent Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Africa Cup of Nations Confederation of African Football competitions for national teams UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1981 births Living people People from Tashkent Russian footballers Nigerian footballers Uzbekistani footballers Nigerian Christians Nigeria international footballers Nigerian expatriate footballers Association football forwards FC KAMAZ Naberezhnye Chelny players PFC CSKA Moscow players Bendel Insurance players R.A.A. Louviéroise players Lille OSC players FC Lokomotiv Moscow players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Ligue 1 players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Wales Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Nigeria Olympic silver medalists for Nigeria 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players Russian people of Nigerian descent 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Nigerian expatriates in England Nigerian expatriates in France Nigerian expatriates in Russia Nigerian expatriates in Wales Association football terminology Association football transfers