 Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange 1983 establishments in the United States AT&T Bell System Companies based in Dallas, Texas Companies established in 1983 Internet service providers of the United States Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Tier 1 networks Telecommunications companies of the United States American brands Scottish Football Association Football governing bodies in Scotland UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1873 1873 establishments in Scotland Organisations based in Glasgow Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1985 births Living people People from Ballymena Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland youth international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Aston Villa F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Premier League players Scottish Premier League players People educated at Ballymena Academy 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Association football goalkeepers Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Hull City A.F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players Süper Lig players Premier League players Scottish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Turkey Scottish expatriates in Turkey People educated at Forrester High School 1987 births Living people Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Expatriate association footballers from Northern Ireland Burnley F.C. players Darlington F.C. players Rangers F.C. players FC Sion players U.S. Città di Palermo players Norwich City F.C. players Çaykur Rizespor footballers The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Swiss Super League players Serie B players Süper Lig players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Switzerland Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Turkey Association football forwards People educated at Devenish College People from Enniskillen British expatriates in Switzerland British expatriates in Italy British expatriates in Turkey 1991 births Living people Scottish footballers Association football midfielders Rangers F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish Premier League players The Football League players People educated at Marr College People from Troon Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Bankruptcy Corporate law Insolvency Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff 1986 births Association football forwards Kilmarnock F.C. players Living people People from East Ayrshire Rangers F.C. players Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish people of Welsh descent Scottish people of English descent Everton F.C. players Premier League players Norwich City F.C. players 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Association football defenders Association football utility players Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Hibernian F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scottish Premier League players People educated at Lasswade High School Centre Norwich City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Lothian Thistle Hutchison Vale F.C. players 1989 births Living people People from Hounslow Sportspeople from London English footballers England youth international footballers Nigerian footballers Nigeria international footballers Association football wingers Birmingham City F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Premier League players English people of Nigerian descent Black English sportspeople 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from West Lothian Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Rangers F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Credit Debt Judicial remedies Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Association football fullbacks Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players Scottish Professional Football League players Heart of Midlothian F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland youth international footballers Scotland B international footballers People educated at Forrester High School English-speaking countries and territories History of Ireland Home rule in the United Kingdom Island countries Northern Ireland NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United Kingdom States and territories established in 1921 United Kingdom Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1985 births Living people Cowdenbeath F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players Scottish Football League players Scottish Premier League players Arniston Rangers F.C. players Scottish Junior Football Association players Sportspeople from Edinburgh Association football defenders Scottish footballers Scottish Professional Football League players Rangers F.C. players Hibernian F.C. players 1907 establishments in the United Kingdom Association football trade unions English football organisations Trade unions established in 1907 Trade unions in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Manchester Rangers F.C. Football leagues in Scotland Football league systems in Europe Raith Rovers F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Kirkcaldy 1883 establishments in Scotland Sport in Fife Scottish Football League teams Association football clubs established in 1883 Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish League Cup winners Falkirk F.C. Sport in Falkirk Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1876 1876 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Employment compensation Labor economics National accounts Occupations Management Employment Personal development Labour law Labour relations Social programs Employment compensation Working conditions Working time United Kingdom labour law Statutory Instruments of the United Kingdom 2006 in British law 2006 in labour relations FIFA Association football governing bodies International sports federations IOC-recognised international federations International sports bodies based in Switzerland Organisations based in Zürich Sports organisations established in 1904 Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England R.S.C. Anderlecht Association football clubs established in 1908 1908 establishments in Belgium Multi-sport clubs in Belgium Football clubs in Belgium Anderlecht 1948 births 2010 deaths English football chairmen and investors German expatriates in Switzerland Southampton F.C. directors and chairmen Swiss businesspeople People from Biberach (district) Canadian Hockey League trophies and awards Ice hockey tournaments in Canada Memorial Cup 1919 establishments in Canada Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Glasgow Council areas of Scotland Districts of Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Populated places established in the 6th century Port cities and towns in Scotland Forms of government Government Government institutions Political terminology Taxation Basic financial concepts Finance Public finance Insolvency law of the United Kingdom Business law United Kingdom company law Tennis terminology Grand Slam (tennis) Tennis tournaments Switzerland Countries in Europe Central Europe Western Europe Federal republics French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Italian-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Tennis shots Roger Federer 1981 births Living people Swiss male tennis players Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Australian Open (tennis) champions French Open champions Wimbledon champions US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon junior champions World No. 1 tennis players Olympic medalists in tennis Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Switzerland Olympic silver medalists for Switzerland Olympic tennis players of Switzerland Tennis players at the 2000 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Sports world record holders Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners People from Basel-Stadt People of Afrikaner descent Swiss people of Dutch descent Swiss people of French descent Swiss people of South African descent Swiss Roman Catholics UNICEF people Münchenstein Novak Djokovic 1987 births Living people Australian Open (tennis) champions Eastern Orthodox Christians from Serbia Expatriate sportspeople in Monaco Grand Crosses of the Order of St. Sava Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Members of the Serbian Orthodox Church Olympic bronze medalists for Serbia Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic tennis players of Serbia People from Monte Carlo Serbia and Montenegro male tennis players Serbian expatriate sportspeople Serbian expatriates in Germany Serbian expatriates in Monaco Serbian male tennis players Sports world record holders Sportspeople from Belgrade Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics UNICEF people US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon champions World No. 1 tennis players Australian Open (tennis) by year 2014 Australian Open 2014 in tennis 2014 ATP World Tour 2014 WTA Tour 2014 in Australian tennis Australian Open (tennis) 1905 establishments in Australia Annual sporting events in Australia Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments Hard court tennis tournaments Recurring sporting events established in 1905 Seven Sport Sport in Melbourne Tennis tournaments in Australia Tennis rivalries Roger Federer Rafael Nadal Andy Murray Nicknamed groups of tennis players Novak Djokovic Rafael Nadal Roger Federer Tennis rivalries Quartets Andy Murray 1987 births BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Clan Murray Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Officers of the Order of the British Empire Olympic gold medallists for Great Britain Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic silver medallists for Great Britain Olympic tennis players of Great Britain Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish male tennis players Scottish Olympic medallists Sportspeople from Glasgow Sportspeople from Dunblane Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics US Open (tennis) champions US Open (tennis) junior champions Wimbledon champions 1988 births Argentine male tennis players Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine Roman Catholics Living people People from Tandil US Open (tennis) champions Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic tennis players of Argentina Olympic bronze medalists for Argentina Olympic medalists in tennis Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2009 US Open (tennis) 2009 US Open Series 2009 in tennis 2009 in American sports Conceptions of God First Nations culture Gods of the indigenous peoples of North America 1960 films 1960s comedy films French black-and-white films French films French romantic comedy films French-language films Films directed by Philippe de Broca Film scores by Georges Delerue Super Furry Animals songs 2002 singles Tennis shots Tennis terminology Tennis records and statistics