 Australia Member states of the United Nations G20 nations English-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Champions Trophy (field hockey) International field hockey competitions Netherlands Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Kingdom of the Netherlands Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Western Europe 1976 births Living people People from Egmond Dutch male field hockey players Olympic field hockey players of the Netherlands Olympic gold medalists for the Netherlands Olympic silver medalists for the Netherlands Field hockey players at the 1996 Summer Olympics Field hockey players at the 2000 Summer Olympics Field hockey players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Field hockey players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic medalists in field hockey Field hockey players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 1979 births Australian field hockey players Sportspeople from Melbourne Living people Olympic field hockey players of Australia Olympic bronze medalists for Australia Field hockey players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Commonwealth Games gold medallists for Australia Field hockey players at the 2006 Commonwealth Games Field hockey players at the 2010 Commonwealth Games Olympic medalists in field hockey Date of birth missing (living people) Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Field hockey terminolgy Australian field hockey players Living people 1979 births Australian field hockey players Living people Commonwealth Games gold medallists for Australia Olympic medalists in field hockey Olympic gold medalists for Australia Olympic bronze medalists for Australia Field hockey players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Field hockey players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Field hockey players at the 2002 Commonwealth Games Field hockey players at the 2006 Commonwealth Games Field hockey players at the 2010 Commonwealth Games Sportspeople from Queensland People from Rockhampton Field hockey players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic field hockey players of Australia Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics People from Tamworth, New South Wales Field hockey venues American football venues in Germany Mönchengladbach Sports venues in North Rhine-Westphalia Field hockey representative teams in Australia Men's national sports teams of Australia Men's national field hockey teams Sports clubs established in 1922 Field hockey in Australia 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology Olympic Games Athletic culture based on Greek antiquity Recurring sporting events established in 1896 Multi-sport events Germany Central Europe Countries in Europe Federal republics G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1871 Western Europe Articles containing video clips 1980 births Living people Dutch male field hockey players Olympic field hockey players of the Netherlands Olympic silver medalists for the Netherlands Field hockey players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Field hockey players at the 2008 Summer Olympics People from Leiderdorp Olympic medalists in field hockey Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy New Zealand Archipelagoes of the Pacific Ocean Countries in Oceania English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the United Nations Polynesia States and territories established in 1840 Zealandia (continent) Companies based in McLean, Virginia Gannett publications National newspapers published in the United States Publications established in 1982 USA Today Daily newspapers published in the United States 1982 establishments in the United States  Republic of Ireland association footballers Association football midfielders Crumlin United F.C. players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Limerick F.C. players League of Ireland players Living people 1983 births Sligo Rovers F.C. Association football clubs in Connacht Association football clubs established in 1928 Sligo (town) League of Ireland Premier Division clubs 1928 establishments in Ireland Former Leinster Senior League clubs St Patrick's Athletic F.C. Association football clubs in Dublin (city) Association football clubs established in 1929 League of Ireland Premier Division clubs 1929 establishments in Ireland Former Leinster Senior League clubs 1985 births Living people Association football players from County Dublin Republic of Ireland association footballers Belvedere F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Bohemian F.C. players Dundalk F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Derry City F.C. players The Football League players League of Ireland players Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Sligo (town) County towns in the Republic of Ireland Port cities and towns in the Republic of Ireland Towns and villages in County Sligo Boroughs in the Republic of Ireland Causewayed enclosures Association football venues in the Republic of Ireland Sligo Rovers F.C. Sports venues in County Sligo  Dublin (city) 841 establishments Capitals in Europe Cities in the Republic of Ireland County towns in the Republic of Ireland Leinster Local administrative units of the Republic of Ireland Populated coastal places in the Republic of Ireland Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Staple ports University towns in Ireland Viking Age populated places Populated places established in the 9th century 1985 births Living people Association football players from County Dublin Republic of Ireland association footballers Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Bohemian F.C. players Association football goalkeepers League of Ireland players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players League of Ireland XI players Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Leicester Celtic A.F.C. players 1986 births Living people Haitian footballers Haiti international footballers Haitian people Tampa Spartans men's soccer players Ajax Orlando Prospects players IMG Academy Bradenton players Atlanta Silverbacks U23's players Chicago Fire U-23 players Tampa Bay Rowdies players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Premier Development League players USSF Division 2 Professional League players North American Soccer League players League of Ireland players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland 2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Lindsey Wilson Blue Raiders men's soccer players Expatriate footballers in Thailand Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Bangladesh Sheikh Russel KC players 2014 Caribbean Cup players Jacksonville Armada FC players A.S. Andria BAT players Lindsey Wilson College alumni 1980s American comedy television series 1987 American television series debuts 1990s American comedy television series 1995 American television series endings American Broadcasting Company network shows American television sitcoms English-language television programming Television series about families Television series by Warner Bros. Television Television shows set in San Francisco, California TGIF (ABC) Towns and villages in County Sligo 1987 births Living people Millwall F.C. players Cobh Ramblers F.C. players Sporting Fingal F.C. players Drogheda United F.C. players Dundalk F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Cork City F.C. players Linfield F.C. players NIFL Premiership players League of Ireland players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Association football players from County Louth Belvedere F.C. players 1985 births Living people Sligo Rovers F.C. players League of Ireland players League of Ireland XI players Mansfield Town F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers The Football League players Association football defenders 1960 births Living people Association football forwards Shelbourne F.C. players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Athlone Town A.F.C. players Athlone Town A.F.C. managers St Patrick's Athletic F.C. managers Shamrock Rovers F.C. managers Expatriate footballers in Switzerland Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate soccer players in Canada League of Ireland players League of Ireland managers Irish expatriates in Canada Irish expatriates in Belgium Irish expatriates in Switzerland La Liga players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Association football players from Dublin (city) Racing de Santander players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Vancouver Whitecaps (1974–84) players League of Ireland XI players 1989 births Living people People from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Lincoln City F.C. players Shamrock Rovers F.C. guest players League of Ireland players Bohemian F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Jerez Industrial CF footballers St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players The Football League players Tercera División players 1992 births Living people Republic of Ireland association footballers Association football players from County Dublin Bohemian F.C. players League of Ireland players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players Association football wingers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Belvedere F.C. players 1981 births Living people Republic of Ireland association footballers Association football goalkeepers People from County Meath Shelbourne F.C. players Drogheda United F.C. players Bray Wanderers A.F.C. players Galway United F.C. (1937–2011) players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Dundalk F.C. players League of Ireland players League of Ireland XI players St Francis F.C. players Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Living people 1984 births Republic of Ireland association footballers Association football central defenders Association football players from County Dublin University College Dublin A.F.C. players Shelbourne F.C. players Drogheda United F.C. players League of Ireland players St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Bray Wanderers A.F.C. players League of Ireland XI players Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Cherry Orchard F.C. players 1986 births Living people English footballers Chester City F.C. players Accrington Stanley F.C. players Southport F.C. players Sligo Rovers F.C. players Derry City F.C. players A.F.C. Telford United players League of Ireland players The Football League players National League (English football) players Sportspeople from Chester League of Ireland XI players Buffy the Vampire Slayer (season 6) episodes 2002 television episodes LGBT-related television episodes Terminology used in multiple sports Association football culture Australian rules football culture Baseball culture Basketball culture Cricket culture Gaelic games culture Rugby football culture Association football terminology Sports culture