 Publications established in 1855 National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Telegraph Media Group 1855 establishments in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London Association football clubs established in 1887 Barnsley F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in South Yorkshire Sport in Barnsley FA Cup winners 1887 establishments in England Midland Football League (1889) Leeds Leeds City Region University towns in the United Kingdom Market towns in West Yorkshire Towns in West Yorkshire Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London 1984 births Sportspeople from Leicester Living people English footballers Association football forwards Leicester City F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Darlington F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Grimsby Town F.C. players Kidderminster Harriers F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Forest Green Rovers F.C. players Tamworth F.C. players Harrogate Town F.C. players Corby Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players National League (English football) players Southern Football League players English football managers Corby Town F.C. managers FIFA Association football governing bodies International sports federations IOC-recognised international federations International sports bodies based in Switzerland Organisations based in Zürich Sports organisations established in 1904 Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom English football organisations Association football trade unions Singapore Capitals in Asia Chinese-speaking countries and territories City-states Commonwealth republics English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies Island countries Malay-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the United Nations Populated coastal places Republics Southeast Asian countries States and territories established in 1965 Tamil-speaking countries and territories Small Island Developing States 1956 births Association football forwards Celtic F.C. players Clyde F.C. players Kilsyth Rangers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Living people Queen of the South F.C. managers Queen of the South F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish Football League representative players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Shotts Bon Accord F.C. players Sportspeople from Glasgow St Mirren F.C. players Scottish league football top scorers Business Entrepreneurship 1869 introductions American football Ball games Football codes Sports originating in the United States Gridiron football 1968 births Living people People from Driffield English footballers Association football forwards North Ferriby United A.F.C. players Guiseley A.F.C. players Halifax Town A.F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Scarborough F.C. players Wakefield F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players The Football League players Sportspeople from Yorkshire Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Articles with inconsistent citation formats Criminal law 1981 births Living people People from Newmarket, Suffolk English footballers England semi-pro international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Watford F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Heart of Midlothian F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Chesterfield F.C. players Kilmarnock F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players English football managers Oldham Athletic A.F.C. managers Barnsley F.C. managers Bristol City F.C. managers The Football League managers 1977 births Sportspeople from Barnsley Living people Association football defenders English footballers Manchester United F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Scarborough F.C. players Hartlepool United F.C. players Darlington F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Mansfield Town F.C. players Gateshead F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Footballers from South Yorkshire 1954 births Living people Alumni of the University of Bolton Blackpool F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players British association football commentators British expatriate sportspeople in the United States Coventry City F.C. players English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Ireland English expatriates in the United States English football managers English footballers Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football central defenders League of Ireland managers League of Ireland players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Limerick F.C. managers Limerick F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Notts County F.C. managers People from Dudley Premier League managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League managers The Football League players Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93) players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England  Crime Criminal law Criminology Morality Sin Vices Concepts in metaphysics Information Information, knowledge, and uncertainty Information science 1972 births People from Paramaribo Living people Surinamese emigrants to the Netherlands Dutch people of Surinamese descent Dutch footballers Netherlands international footballers Association football forwards SC Telstar players AZ Alkmaar players Dutch expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Portugal Boavista F.C. players S.C. Campomaiorense players Expatriate footballers in England Leeds United F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Atlético Madrid footballers Chelsea F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Eerste Divisie players Primeira Liga players Premier League players La Liga players The Football League players First Division/Premier League top scorers 1998 FIFA World Cup players British people of Surinamese descent Dutch emigrants to the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Nottingham Forest F.C. non-playing staff Dutch football managers Royal Antwerp F.C. managers Dutch expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Belgium Expatriate football managers in England Burton Albion F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers The Football League managers Dutch expatriates in Portugal Dutch expatriates in England Dutch expatriates in Spain Dutch expatriates in Belgium Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1956 births Living people Cagliari Calcio Leeds United F.C. Date of birth missing (living people) Italian businesspeople Italian expatriates in the United States Italian expatriates in England Italian fraudsters People from Cagliari Leeds United F.C. non-playing staff Association football terminology Football clubs in England Leeds United F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1919 Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Championship clubs 1919 establishments in England Sport in Leeds Phoenix clubs (association football) Sports agents Business and financial operations occupations Sports business Cities and towns in Sicily Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Trade Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP 1999 singles Vertical Horizon songs Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles Billboard Adult Top 40 number-one singles Songs written by Matt Scannell 1998 songs RCA Records singles England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Legal entities Companies Investment Macroeconomics Economics Risk Actuarial science Economics of uncertainty Probability Environmental social science concepts Enterprise modelling Process management Business process 1978 births 2013 deaths 24 Hours of Daytona drivers 24 Hours of Le Mans drivers American Le Mans Series drivers British Formula Renault 2.0 drivers British GT Championship drivers Danish racing drivers European Le Mans Series drivers FIA GT Championship drivers FIA World Endurance Championship drivers Formula Ford drivers Formula Palmer Audi drivers German Formula Three Championship drivers Rolex Sports Car Series drivers People from Odense Racing drivers killed while racing Sport deaths in France V8 Supercar drivers ADAC GT Masters drivers 24 Hours of Spa drivers Asian Le Mans Series drivers Sports car racing Racing car classes Grand tourers Denmark Countries in Europe Danish-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union Scandinavia States and territories established in 1814 24 Hours of Le Mans Sarthe Recurring events established in 1923 Group C World Sportscar Championship races Visitor attractions in Sarthe Aston Martin British auto racing teams Sports clubs established in 2004 2004 establishments in the United Kingdom 24 Hours of Le Mans teams American Le Mans Series teams FIA GT Championship teams European Le Mans Series teams FIA World Endurance Championship teams Blancpain Endurance Series teams Audi Baden-Württemberg Car manufacturers of Germany Companies based in Bavaria Companies established in 1909 Companies disestablished in 1939 Companies established in 1965 German brands Ingolstadt Luxury motor vehicle manufacturers Motor vehicle manufacturers of Germany Saxony Sports car manufacturers Volkswagen Group Aston Martin Sports car manufacturers Motor vehicle manufacturers of the United Kingdom Luxury motor vehicle manufacturers Formula One constructors Formula One entrants 24 Hours of Le Mans teams World Sportscar Championship teams British auto racing teams British racecar constructors Car manufacturers of the United Kingdom Companies based in Warwickshire British Royal Warrant holders 1913 establishments in England British GT Championship teams Grand tourers Sports cars Car classifications Sports car racing Motorsport terminology Metaphors referring to sport Sarthe 1790 establishments in France Departments of Pays de la Loire Accuracy and precision Concepts in epistemology Concepts in logic Critical thinking Philosophy of science Reality Statements Units of information (cognitive processes) Truth Austria Countries in Europe Central Europe Federal constitutional republics German-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nuclear-free zones States and territories established in 1955 Erasmus Prize winners Germanic countries and territories Western Europe Austrian racing drivers Austrian Formula One drivers Osella Formula One drivers European Formula Two Championship drivers Racing drivers killed while racing 1954 births 1986 deaths Sport deaths in France 24 Hours of Le Mans drivers World Sportscar Championship drivers France Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Western Europe 1976 births 1997 deaths People from Seclin 24 Hours of Le Mans drivers French racing drivers Racing drivers killed while racing Sport deaths in France Sports venues in Sarthe Buildings and structures in Le Mans Sport in Le Mans Visitor attractions in Sarthe Car classifications Formula One Automotive safety technologies Motorsport terminology Marshall Islands Countries in Oceania Archipelagoes of the Pacific Ocean English-speaking countries and territories Former German colonies Former Japanese colonies Associated states of the United States Island countries World War II sites Liberal democracies Micronesia Republics States and territories established in 1986 Member states of the United Nations World Digital Library related Small Island Developing States Racing formulas Formula Ford Motorsport categories in Australia Australian GT Championship Auto racing series in Australia Auto races in Australia 1960 establishments in Australia 1963 disestablishments in Australia 1982 establishments in Australia 1985 disestablishments in Australia 2005 establishments in Australia Sports leagues established in 1957 Sports leagues established in 1982 Sports leagues established in 2005 Sports car racing series Asian Le Mans Series Asian auto racing series 1986 births Living people People from Gentofte Municipality Danish racing drivers ADAC GT Masters drivers FIA GT1 World Championship drivers FIA World Endurance Championship drivers 24 Hours of Le Mans drivers 24 Hours of Daytona drivers United SportsCar Championship drivers European Le Mans Series drivers 1975 births Living people Danish racing drivers Danish Touring Car Championship drivers World Touring Car Championship drivers 24 Hours of Le Mans drivers European Le Mans Series drivers FIA World Endurance Championship drivers ADAC GT Masters drivers European Touring Car Cup drivers 1979 births Living people People from Brackley People from Hemel Hempstead English racing drivers English Formula One drivers Minardi Formula One drivers BAR Formula One drivers Super Aguri Formula One drivers Karting World Championship drivers Formula Ford drivers British Formula Three Championship drivers 24 Hours of Le Mans drivers American Le Mans Series drivers McLaren Autosport BRDC Award nominees European Le Mans Series drivers 24 Hours of Daytona drivers Rolex Sports Car Series drivers FIA World Endurance Championship drivers 24 Hours of Spa drivers Motorsport announcers  Industrial design Production and manufacturing Prototypes Toyota Car manufacturers of Japan Electric vehicle manufacturers Motor vehicle manufacturers of Japan Multinational companies headquartered in Japan Marine engine manufacturers Military vehicle manufacturers Defense companies of Japan Robotics companies Conglomerate companies of Japan Conglomerate companies established in 1937 Manufacturing companies established in 1937 Technology companies established in 1937 Vehicle manufacturing companies established in 1937 1937 establishments in Japan Companies listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange Companies listed on the Fukuoka Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Nikkei 225 Belgian Royal Warrant holders Japanese brands 1969 births Living people Scottish Formula One drivers Toyota Formula One drivers Scottish racing drivers British Formula Three Championship drivers Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters drivers FIA GT Championship drivers 24 Hours of Le Mans drivers 24 Hours of Le Mans winning drivers American Le Mans Series drivers International Formula 3000 drivers Segrave Trophy recipients European Le Mans Series drivers People educated at St Joseph's College, Dumfries Sportspeople from Dumfries 24 Hours of Daytona drivers Rolex Sports Car Series drivers FIA World Endurance Championship drivers Motorsport announcers 1982 births Living people People from Chartres French racing drivers Karting World Championship drivers Formule Campus Renault Elf drivers French Formula Renault 2.0 drivers Formula 3 Euro Series drivers Formula Nippon drivers Super Formula drivers A1 Team France drivers 24 Hours of Le Mans drivers 24 Hours of Le Mans winning drivers European Le Mans Series drivers Super GT drivers American Le Mans Series drivers Asian Le Mans Series drivers FIA World Endurance Championship drivers Formula E drivers 1967 births Living people People from Hobro Danish racing drivers International Formula 3000 drivers Japanese Formula 3000 Championship drivers Formula Nippon drivers German Formula Three Championship drivers All-Japan Formula Three Championship drivers British Touring Car Championship drivers Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters drivers Japanese Touring Car Championship drivers 24 Hours of Le Mans drivers 24 Hours of Le Mans winning drivers American Le Mans Series drivers European Le Mans Series drivers FIA World Endurance Championship drivers Blancpain Endurance Series drivers 24 Hours of Spa drivers Toyota in motorsport Panasonic Formula One constructors Formula One entrants Formula One engine manufacturers