 Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England Swedish footballers Footballers from Skåne County Association football forwards Malmö FF players AFC Ajax players Juventus F.C. players Inter Milan players FC Barcelona players A.C. Milan players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Allsvenskan players Eredivisie players Serie A players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Sweden international footballers Sweden youth international footballers Sweden under-21 international footballers 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Swedish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Italy Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Spain Swedish expatriate sportspeople in France Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in France Swedish people of Croatian descent Swedish people of Bosniak descent Swedish people of Bosnia and Herzegovina descent Swedish Roman Catholics Sportspeople from Malmö Swedish taekwondo practitioners 1981 births Living people Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1963 births Living people People from Setúbal Portuguese footballers Association football midfielders Primeira Liga players Rio Ave F.C. players C.F. Os Belenenses players Portuguese football managers Primeira Liga managers S.L. Benfica managers U.D. Leiria managers FC Porto managers Premier League managers Chelsea F.C. managers Serie A managers Inter Milan managers La Liga managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Golden Globes (Portugal) winners UEFA Cup winning managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Technical University of Lisbon alumni Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Spain Portuguese expatriate football managers Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Italy Portuguese expatriates in Spain Portuguese Roman Catholics 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match 1991 births Living people People from the Province of Bergamo Italian footballers Serie A players Serie B players Atalanta B.C. players A.S. Cittadella players U.C. Sampdoria players Juventus F.C. players Bologna F.C. 1909 players S.S.C. Napoli players Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues 1961 births Living people French footballers French football managers AS Monaco FC players Ligue 1 players People from Tarn (department) AS Monaco FC managers Lille OSC managers Olympique Lyonnais managers OGC Nice managers Ligue 1 managers Terminology used in multiple sports  Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Predation Biological pest control 1991 births Living people People from Montsià Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players Valencia CF players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Bundesliga players VfB Stuttgart players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Olympic footballers of Spain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Germany Articles containing video clips 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Bilbao Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Basque footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Tercera División players Premier League players Real Zaragoza B players Real Zaragoza players Athletic Bilbao footballers Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Olympic footballers of Spain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Southampton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in South East England Local government districts of South East England Local government in Hampshire Populated coastal places in Hampshire Port cities and towns in England Ports and harbours of Hampshire Ports and harbours of the English Channel Staple ports Towns in Hampshire Unitary authority districts of England 1988 births Living people People from Hexham English footballers Association football goalkeepers Wallsend Boys Club players Newcastle United F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Southampton F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players People educated at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle Scottish Professional Football League players England international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Geography of Greenwich Time zones Time in the United Kingdom Laws of association football Association football terminology Sweden Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe Scandinavia Year of establishment unknown Swedish-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Warrington English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football wingers Manchester United F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Derby County F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Black British sportspeople 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs 2004–05 UEFA Champions League 2004–05 in Turkish football Liverpool F.C. matches Sport in Istanbul UEFA Champions League Finals A.C. Milan matches Association football penalty shootouts International club association football competitions hosted by Turkey 2007–08 La Liga La Liga seasons 2007–08 in Spanish football leagues Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Football League Trophy Finals Events at Wembley Stadium Walsall F.C. matches Bristol City F.C. matches 2015 in London 2014–15 Football League Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers 1935 births 2004 deaths English football managers Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. managers Derby County F.C. managers Hartlepool United F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers The Football League managers Premier League managers UEFA Champions League winning managers English footballers Association football forwards England international footballers England B international footballers England under-23 international footballers The Football League players Middlesbrough F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Billingham Synthonia F.C. players Sportspeople from Middlesbrough Officers of the Order of the British Empire Deaths from stomach cancer English Football Hall of Fame inductees Cancer deaths in England English socialists Royal Air Force airmen Footballers from North Yorkshire The Football League representative players Brian Clough Football League Fourth Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe  Gold Greek mythology Mythology of Macedonia (region) Kings of Phrygia Supernatural legends Bogs Landforms Types of soil Wetlands Association football terminology Association football transfers UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe AS Saint-Étienne Football clubs in France Association football clubs established in 1919 1919 establishments in France Sport in Saint-Étienne Environmental crime Environmental issues Hunting methods Illegal occupations Wildlife smuggling Hunting legislation Gridiron football penalties 1989 births Living people People from Southwark Black English sportspeople England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football fullbacks Gillingham F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics English footballers Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División B players Atlético Madrid B players Atlético Madrid footballers Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England 1994 births Living people Association football midfielders England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers English footballers Sportspeople from Portsmouth Premier League players Southampton F.C. players 1988 births Living people People from Bačka Topola Serbian footballers Association football midfielders Serbia international footballers Serbia under-21 international footballers Olympic footballers of Serbia Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics FK Bačka Topola players FK Vojvodina players FC Groningen players FC Twente players Southampton F.C. players Serbian SuperLiga players Eredivisie players Premier League players Serbian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Serbian expatriates in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in England Serbian expatriates in England 1993 births Living people People from Seine-et-Marne French footballers Association football midfielders French people of Guinean descent Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers Juventus F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Italy Serie A players France international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players Sportspeople from Île-de-France French expatriates in England French expatriates in Italy A.F.C. Bournemouth Association football clubs established in 1899 Sport in Bournemouth Football League Trophy winners 1899 establishments in England Football clubs in Dorset Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata Football clubs in England Watford F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1881 Southern Football League clubs 1881 establishments in England Football clubs in Hertfordshire Watford Buildings and structures in Watford Football venues in England Rugby union stadiums in England Sports venues in Hertfordshire Watford F.C. Premier League venues Defunct rugby league venues in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues completed in 1922 Football League venues 1988 births 2012 deaths People from Pallars Jussà Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football defenders Segunda División players Segunda División B players UE Lleida players Xerez CD footballers FC Cartagena footballers Real Betis players The Football League players Liverpool F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Cancer deaths in Spain Real Betis La Liga clubs Football clubs in Andalusia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1907 1907 establishments in Spain 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain Recurring sporting events established in 1952 Youth football cup competitions in England FA Youth Cup 1952 establishments in England Association football terminology Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands 1905 establishments in the Ottoman Empire Association football clubs established in 1905 Galatasaray S.K. (football) Unrelegated association football clubs UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe La Liga Football leagues in Spain Top level football leagues in Europe 1928 establishments in Spain Sports leagues established in 1928 Atlético de Kolkata owners Liverpool F.C. Sports venues in Liverpool Football venues in England Premier League venues Football League venues UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Visitor attractions in Liverpool Everton F.C. Sports venues completed in 1884 Association football terminology Oldham Athletic A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England Sport in Oldham Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Greater Manchester Football clubs in Andalusia Xerez CD Association football clubs established in 1947 1947 establishments in Spain Football clubs in the Region of Murcia Association football clubs established in 1995 FC Cartagena 1995 establishments in Spain 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England