 Golf terminology Scoring (sport) Golf terminology Men's major golf championships Male golfers Stroke Causes of death RTT South African golfers PGA Tour golfers European Tour golfers Sunshine Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers European Seniors Tour golfers Winners of senior major golf championships Sportspeople from Cape Town Alumni of Paarl Boys' High School South African people of British descent 1959 births Living people  Champions Tour events Golf in Alabama Golf in Arizona Golf in Oregon Sports in Birmingham, Alabama Sports in Hillsboro, Oregon Sports in Scottsdale, Arizona Recurring sporting events established in 1989 1989 establishments in Arizona Champions Tour events Recurring sporting events established in 1937 American male golfers Minnesota Golden Gophers men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for the United States Winners of men's major golf championships Winners of senior major golf championships Golfers from Minnesota Golfers from Arizona American Christians People from Austin, Minnesota Sportspeople from Scottsdale, Arizona 1959 births Living people German golfers European Tour golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Winners of men's major golf championships Winners of senior major golf championships World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Ryder Cup competitors for Europe People from Augsburg (district) 1957 births Living people Sportspeople from Boca Raton, Florida 1871 establishments in Alabama Birmingham, Alabama Birmingham–Hoover metropolitan area Cities in Alabama Cities in Jefferson County, Alabama Cities in Shelby County, Alabama County seats in Alabama Populated places established in 1871 U.S. Route 11 World Golf Hall of Fame Golf museums and halls of fame Golf in the United States Golf in Florida Halls of fame in Florida International halls of fame in the United States Sports museums in Florida Museums in St. Augustine, Florida International Sports Heritage Association Awards established in 1974 1974 establishments in North Carolina Baseball terminology Baseball rules Precipitation Motorsport terminology 1997 films 1990s comedy films American criminal comedy films Buddy films Touchstone Pictures films Films set in Arizona Films shot in New Jersey Films directed by Steve Oedekerk American action comedy films American films The Sun (United Kingdom) National newspapers published in the United Kingdom News UK Newspapers published in Ireland 1964 establishments in the United Kingdom Publications established in 1964 Champions Tour events Golf in California Sports in Orange County, California Newport Beach, California Visitor attractions in Orange County, California Recurring sporting events established in 1995 Toshiba 1995 establishments in California Sports competitions in California California States and territories established in 1850 States of the United States States of the West Coast of the United States Golf terminology Golf terminology 1970 songs 1971 singles 1987 singles 2001 singles Anti-war songs Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs number-one singles Charity singles Charity singles following the September 11 attacks Counterculture of the 1960s Cyndi Lauper songs Grammy Award for Best Traditional R&B Vocal Performance Marvin Gaye songs Motown singles Music videos directed by Andy Morahan Music videos directed by Jake Scott (director) Protest songs Songs of the Vietnam War Songs written by Marvin Gaye Songs written by Al Cleveland Songs written by Renaldo Benson Soul ballads Song recordings produced by Marvin Gaye Tamla Records singles Song recordings produced by Steve Levine Funk ballads Golf terminology American male golfers Ohio State Buckeyes men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Ryder Cup competitors for the United States Golfers from Ohio Golfers from California Golfers from Florida Sportspeople from Toledo, Ohio People from Windermere, Florida 1957 births Living people Mexican male golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Golfers from Colorado People from Mexicali People from Douglas County, Colorado 1962 births Living people Golf terminology American male golfers Nevada Wolf Pack men's golfers PGA Tour golfers European Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Winners of senior major golf championships Golfers from California Golfers from Arizona People from San Mateo, California Sportspeople from Scottsdale, Arizona 1959 births Living people American male golfers Kentucky Wildcats men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Winners of senior major golf championships Golfers from Kentucky Sportspeople from Paducah, Kentucky St. Mary High School (Paducah, Kentucky) alumni 1958 births Living people American male golfers UCLA Bruins men's golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Golfers from California Sportspeople from Los Angeles, California People from Northridge, Los Angeles 1962 births Living people Champions Tour events European Seniors Tour events Golf tournaments in the United Kingdom R&A championships 1987 establishments in the United Kingdom Recurring sporting events established in 1987 Mitsubishi Electric Mitsubishi companies Electronics companies of Japan Robotics companies Electrical equipment manufacturers Mobile phone manufacturers Display technology companies Elevator manufacturers HVAC manufacturing companies Companies based in Tokyo Companies established in 1921 1921 establishments in Japan Companies listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange Companies listed on the London Stock Exchange Spacecraft manufacturers Escalator manufacturers Japanese brands Defense companies of Japan Companies of Japan Hawaii States and territories established in 1959 States of the United States Western United States Landforms of Bond County, Illinois Landforms of Clinton County, Illinois Landforms of Montgomery County, Illinois Rivers and streams of Illinois South African golfers Sunshine Tour golfers PGA Tour golfers Champions Tour golfers Winners of men's major golf championships Men's Career Grand Slam champion golfers Winners of senior major golf championships World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Golf course architects Golf writers and broadcasters Laureus World Sports Awards winners Recipients of the Order of Ikhamanga Alumni of King Edward VII School (Johannesburg) White South African people South African people of British descent Sportspeople from Johannesburg People from Pixley ka Seme District Municipality People from Jupiter Island, Florida 1935 births Living people PGA Championship Golf in Alabama Sports in Birmingham, Alabama 1984 in golf 1984 in American sports 1984 in Alabama 1982 births Living people People from Huyton Sportspeople from Liverpool English footballers English expatriate footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Olympique de Marseille players Burnley F.C. players Premier League players Ligue 1 players The Football League players English prisoners and detainees English people convicted of assault English columnists Expatriate footballers in France English expatriates in France English male writers 1988 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers Club Atlético Independiente footballers People from Quilmes La Liga players Premier League players Atlético Madrid footballers Manchester City F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers Argentine expatriate footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Olympic medalists in football 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriates in England Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations 1986 births Living people People from Uccle Belgian people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgian expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Association football central defenders Association football utility players R.S.C. Anderlecht players Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players Premier League players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Belgium Belgian expatriates in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1907 establishments in the United Kingdom Association football trade unions English football organisations Trade unions established in 1907 Trade unions in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Manchester Malaysian people of Indian descent Malaysian people of Portuguese descent People of Goan descent 1964 births Living people Malaysian people of Kristang descent Alumni of the London School of Economics People educated at Epsom College Formula One team owners Commanders of the Order of the British Empire English football chairmen and investors Queens Park Rangers F.C. directors and chairmen AirAsia Malaysian motorsport people Malaysian Christians Malaysian businesspeople Businesspeople of Indian descent 1963 births Living people People from Ruabon Welsh footballers Welsh expatriate footballers Association football forwards Wales international footballers Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Germany Welsh expatriates in Germany FC Bayern Munich footballers Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Southampton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Welsh football managers Wales national football team managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Fulham F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Stoke City F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Bundesliga players English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Ysgol Rhiwabon Officers of the Order of the British Empire La Liga players Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe 1944 births Living people People from Ashton-under-Lyne English footballers Leaders of British trade unions Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Vancouver Whitecaps (1974–84) players Bury F.C. players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at Ashton-under-Lyne Grammar School Alumni of Manchester Metropolitan University Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League Criminal law Criminal law legal terms Legal terms Sports venues in London Football venues in London Defunct rugby union venues in England Sports venues completed in 1904 Shepherd's Bush Football League venues 1980s ballads 1989 songs 1989 singles 1990 singles Billboard Adult Contemporary number-one singles Janet Jackson songs Pop ballads Rhythm and blues ballads Songs written by Janet Jackson Songs written by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis Song recordings produced by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis Music videos directed by Dominic Sena A&M Records singles BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1984 births Living people People from Buenos Aires Province Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers 2004 Copa América players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Olympic footballers of Argentina Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine Primera División players Boca Juniors footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Brazil Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Serie A players Sport Club Corinthians Paulista players Expatriate footballers in England Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Association football forwards Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Brazil Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom South American Footballer of the Year winners Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Expatriate footballers in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriates in England 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English footballers Black English sportspeople England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Footballers from Leeds Leeds United F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players Aston Villa F.C. players Premier League players England youth international footballers Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Italy British people of Barbadian descent Etihad Airways Premier League venues Football venues in England Manchester City F.C. Sports venues in Manchester 2002 Commonwealth Games venues Music venues in Greater Manchester Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Rugby union stadiums in England Sports venues completed in 2002 2002 establishments in England 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software 1986 births Living people People from Praia People from Valais People from Santiago, Cape Verde Cape Verdean emigrants to Switzerland Swiss people of Cape Verdean descent Swiss footballers Swiss expatriates in Italy Switzerland international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Germany Swiss expatriate footballers Swiss expatriates in the United Kingdom Swiss expatriates in Germany Association football midfielders FC Sion players Manchester City F.C. players AS Saint-Étienne players A.C. Chievo Verona players Leicester City F.C. players Udinese Calcio players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers SC Freiburg players Stade Rennais F.C. players Swiss Super League players Premier League players The Football League players Ligue 1 players Serie A players Primeira Liga players Bundesliga players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Swiss Roman Catholics Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports French footballers France international footballers Association football forwards AJ Auxerre players Liverpool F.C. players Olympique de Marseille players Sunderland A.F.C. players Panathinaikos F.C. players S.S. Lazio players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Al-Gharafa Sports Club players FC Kuban Krasnodar players SC Bastia players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players French people of Ivorian descent French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Greece Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Qatar Expatriate footballers in Russia 1981 births Living people Ligue 1 players Premier League players Superleague Greece players Serie A players Russian Football Premier League players People from Arles France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers Qatar Stars League players French expatriates in England French expatriates in Italy French expatriates in Greece French expatriates in Russia French expatriates in Qatar French former Muslims Converts to Roman Catholicism from Islam Association football video games PlayStation (console) games PlayStation 2 games Video games developed in the United Kingdom 1951 births Living people Portuguese footballers Association football forwards Primeira Liga players G.D. Fabril players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Vitória F.C. players Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers Portuguese football managers Primeira Liga managers Vitória F.C. managers C.F. Estrela da Amadora managers S.C. Campomaiorense managers C.D. Santa Clara managers Sporting Clube de Portugal managers U.D. Leiria managers Expatriate football managers in Angola 1948 births Living people Sportspeople from Sheffield Footballers from Sheffield English footballers Association football wingers Chesterfield F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Hartlepool United F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Aldershot F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players York City F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players The Football League players English football managers Gainsborough Trinity F.C. managers Burton Albion F.C. managers Scarborough F.C. managers Notts County F.C. managers Torquay United F.C. managers Huddersfield Town A.F.C. managers Plymouth Argyle F.C. managers Oldham Athletic A.F.C. managers Bury F.C. managers Sheffield United F.C. managers Crystal Palace F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers National League (English football) managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. non-playing staff