 Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England 1949 births Living people Sportspeople from Strasbourg FC Mulhouse players Association football sweepers RC Strasbourg players ASPV Strasbourg players Ligue 1 players French footballers French football managers French Roman Catholics AS Nancy managers AS Monaco FC managers Ligue 1 managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Arsenal F.C. managers Honorary Officers of the Order of the British Empire Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Nagoya Grampus managers Expatriate football managers in Japan English Football Hall of Fame inductees University of Strasbourg alumni UEFA Pro Licence holders French expatriate football managers French expatriates in Japan French expatriates in England Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1989 births Living people People from Stanmore English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Southampton F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players English children's writers Football venues in England Sports venues in Reading, Berkshire Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Reading F.C. London Irish Sports venues completed in 1998 Football League venues  Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football terminology Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League 1984 births Living people French footballers French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers French people of Moroccan descent French Muslims Moroccan footballers Moroccan expatriate footballers Morocco international footballers Association football forwards FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Arsenal F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology 1986 births Living people People from Chambéry French footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers French Roman Catholics Association football forwards Grenoble Foot 38 players FC Istres players Tours FC players Montpellier HSC players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England 1948 births Living people Sportspeople from Los Angeles, California Players of American football from California American football defensive ends American football defensive tackles Northern Arizona Lumberjacks football players New York Jets players Newcastle United F.C. 2012 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Football venues in England Football League venues Premier League venues Sports venues in Newcastle upon Tyne Sports venues completed in 1892 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from County Waterford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Association football forwards Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Waterford United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players The Football League players Football in England Non-League football Sunday events 1962 births Living people Arsenal F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England B international footballers Association football central defenders Stoke City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Sportspeople from Stoke-on-Trent Arsenal F.C. non-playing staff Premier League players The Football League players 1964 films 1960s comedy films American comedy films American films English-language films Films about dogs Films based on short fiction Films set in Paris Universal Pictures films Screenplays by Waldo Salt Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Italy national football team Football in Italy Italian words and phrases 2004 albums Twista albums Atlantic Records albums Albums produced by Jazze Pha Albums produced by Jermaine Dupri Albums produced by Kanye West Albums produced by R. Kelly 1180 establishments Cities in South East England Local government districts of South East England Local government in Hampshire Populated coastal places in Hampshire Port cities and towns in England Ports and harbours of Hampshire Ports and harbours of the English Channel Portsmouth Towns in Hampshire Unitary authority districts of England UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1996–97 in English football 1978 births People from Park Royal Living people English people of Grenadian descent Association football forwards Grenadian footballers Grenada international footballers Hayes F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Members of the Order of the British Empire Sportspeople from London 1989 births Living people People from Acton, London Sportspeople from London English footballers England youth international footballers Welsh footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers English people of Welsh descent Black British sportspeople Association football wingers Arsenal F.C. players Reading F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 1976 births Living people People from Owerri Nigerian footballers Association football forwards AFC Ajax players Inter Milan players Arsenal F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Eredivisie players Serie A players Iwuanyanwu Nationale players Premier League players The Football League players Nigeria international footballers 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2000 African Cup of Nations players 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players Olympic footballers of Nigeria Olympic gold medalists for Nigeria African Footballer of the Year winners Nigerian expatriate footballers Nigerian expatriates in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Nigerian expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Italy Nigerian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Igbo sportspeople Nigerian Christians 2010 FIFA World Cup players UNICEF people Olympic medalists in football Officers of the Order of the Niger 1985 births Living people French footballers French people of Polish descent French-Polish footballers Association football defenders EA Guingamp players FC Lorient players Tours FC players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Arsenal F.C. players French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England Premier League players People from Tulle France international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Newport, Wales Welsh footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Cardiff City F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Reading F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 1982 births Living people People from Enfield Town English footballers Antigua and Barbuda footballers Antigua and Barbuda international footballers Association football midfielders Wimbledon F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Antigua and Barbuda descent Sportspeople from London Reading F.C. players Black British sportspeople Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1981 births Living people Sportspeople from Saint Petersburg Russian footballers Russia international footballers Russian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Russian expatriates in England Association football midfielders FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players Arsenal F.C. players FC Kuban Krasnodar players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Russia under-21 international footballers Urban areas of England Geography of Tyne and Wear NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom River Tyne 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Sports radio Sports television Sports terminology American inventions Computer keyboards Computing input devices Video game control methods Flexible electronics Computer peripherals Defunct liberal political parties New Model Army English Christian socialists Republicanism in England Levellers Liberalism in the United Kingdom Socialism in the United Kingdom Christian radicalism Popular sovereignty Morocco Countries in Africa North African countries Arabic-speaking countries and territories French-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Arab League Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Muslim-majority countries States and territories established in 1956 Articles containing Arabic-language text 1992 births Living people Footballers from Barcelona Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football defenders SD Ponferradina players Premier League players The Football League players Arsenal F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from Moscow Russian footballers Russia international footballers Russian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Russian expatriates in Germany Russian expatriates in England FC Spartak Moscow players FC Khimki players FC Shinnik Yaroslavl players FC Baltika Kaliningrad players FC Tom Tomsk players FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players VfB Stuttgart players Fulham F.C. players Reading F.C. players FC Dynamo Moscow players Russian Football Premier League players Bundesliga players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football terminology 2005 singles 2005 songs McFly songs Island Records singles Charity singles Comic Relief singles Irish Singles Chart number-one singles UK Singles Chart number-one singles Songs written by Tom Fletcher Resurrection Miracles Mythemes Mythology Afterlife Religious belief and doctrine Sports terminology Association football terminology Cricket terminology Cricket awards and rankings Australian rules football terminology Rugby league terminology Rugby union terminology Waves Length Association football terminology PBS network shows American documentary films American films Beaches of the United States Documentary films about the United States 1983 births Living people People from Sens French footballers France under-21 international footballers French Muslims Association football defenders AJ Auxerre players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players French people of Senegalese descent Premier League players France international footballers Expatriate footballers in England French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England Ligue 1 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FC Sens players 1985 births Living people Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium under-21 international footballers Belgium international footballers Association football defenders AFC Ajax players RKC Waalwijk players Arsenal F.C. players FC Barcelona players Eredivisie players Premier League players La Liga players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Belgium Belgian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Belgian expatriates in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in England Belgian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Belgian expatriates in Spain Flemish people Flemish sportspeople 2014 FIFA World Cup players People from Kapellen, Antwerp 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Hanover German Protestants German footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers German expatriate footballers Bundesliga players Premier League players Hannover 96 players Hannover 96 II players SV Werder Bremen players Arsenal F.C. players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA Century Club Expatriate footballers in England 1983 births Living people Brazilian footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Sport Club Corinthians Paulista players Figueirense Futebol Clube players Clube de Regatas do Flamengo footballers Clube Atlético Mineiro players Fenerbahçe footballers Arsenal F.C. players Grêmio Foot-Ball Porto Alegrense players FC Goa players Botafogo Futebol Clube (SP) players Süper Lig players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Turkey Brazilian expatriates in Turkey Expatriate footballers in England Brazilian expatriates in the United Kingdom 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2011 Copa América players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Brazil international footballers Association football fullbacks Expatriate footballers in India 1991 births Living people French people of Senegalese descent People from Laval, Mayenne French footballers French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players FC Lorient players SC Freiburg players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany French expatriates in England French expatriates in Germany The Football League players Arsenal F.C. Association football supporters English football supporters' associations Arsenal F.C. Football venues in London Sport in Islington Buildings and structures in Islington Premier League venues The Emirates Group Visitor attractions in Islington Sports venues completed in 2006 Oldham Athletic A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England Sport in Oldham Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Greater Manchester 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Marseille French footballers Comorian footballers Comoros international footballers French people of Comorian descent CS Sedan Ardennes players Troyes AC players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players The Football League players 1987 births Living people People from Salto, Uruguay Uruguayan footballers Association football forwards 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2011 controversies Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 controversies 2014 FIFA World Cup players Copa América-winning players Club Nacional de Football players FC Groningen players AFC Ajax players Liverpool F.C. players FC Barcelona players Uruguayan Primera División players Eredivisie players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain First Division/Premier League top scorers Olympic footballers of Uruguay Uruguay youth international footballers Uruguay international footballers Uruguayan expatriate footballers Uruguayan expatriates in the Netherlands Uruguayan expatriates in England Uruguayan expatriates in Spain Uruguay under-20 international footballers Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Violence in sports 1991 births Living people English footballers England youth international footballers Association football defenders Manchester City F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Nigerian descent Black English sportspeople 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders English autobiographers English footballers English expatriate footballers England international footballers English Roman Catholics England under-21 international footballers FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. players LA Galaxy players Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Whiston, Merseyside Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Designated Players (MLS) Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1207 establishments Liverpool Cities in North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated coastal places in Merseyside Populated places established in the 13th century Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Port cities and towns in England Towns in Merseyside Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Local government districts of North West England NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams 1972 births Living people People from Livingston, West Lothian Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland international footballers British people of Bulgarian descent Association football forwards Arsenal F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish football managers Oldham Athletic A.F.C. managers Doncaster Rovers F.C. managers The Football League managers Oldham Oldham Borough 865 establishments Populated places established in the 9th century Towns in Greater Manchester 9th-century establishments in England 1994 births Living people Sportspeople from Kingston, Jamaica People from Wembley England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English footballers Association football wingers Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent Jamaican emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People acquitted of assault Living people 1990 births 2011 Copa América players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Copa América-winning players Association football central defenders Club Nacional de Football players Liverpool F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Olympic footballers of Uruguay Uruguayan Primera División players Premier League players Sportspeople from Montevideo Uruguay international footballers Uruguayan expatriate footballers Uruguayan expatriates in England Uruguayan footballers Uruguayan people of Scottish descent 1985 births Living people People from Higher End English footballers England youth international footballers Association football midfielders Derby County F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Liverpool English footballers England youth international footballers Association football midfielders Association football forwards Association football utility players Everton F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players People from Bootle Doping cases in association football English sportspeople in doping cases Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English footballers Association football forwards New Mills A.F.C. players Redditch United F.C. players Droylsden F.C. players Solihull Moors F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Macclesfield Town F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Alumni of the University of Manchester People educated at Pate's Grammar School Sportspeople from Gloucestershire Association football terminology Association football records and statistics  1982 births Living people Association football goalkeepers Australia international soccer players Australian expatriate soccer players Australian people of English descent Australian soccer players Derby County F.C. players Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics League of Ireland players Middlesbrough F.C. players Shelbourne F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players NEC Nijmegen players Olympic soccer players of Australia People educated at John Curtin College of the Arts People from Perth, Western Australia Premier League players The Football League players Eredivisie players 2007 AFC Asian Cup players 2011 AFC Asian Cup players  Defunct rugby league venues in England Buildings and structures in Oldham Oldham Athletic A.F.C. Sports venues in Greater Manchester Football venues in England 1904 establishments in England Sports venues completed in 1904 Football League venues Premier League venues Sport in Oldham  Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons 1989 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players English Christians Black British sportspeople Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Living people 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Bologna Italian footballers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards Bologna F.C. 1909 players Chelsea F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Parma F.C. players A.S. Roma players Liverpool F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Wales UEFA Euro 2012 players Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom 1985 births People from Poole Living people English footballers Association football forwards Cambridge City F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Alumni of Loughborough University 1984 births Living people People from Handlová Slovak footballers Association football defenders FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players Slovakia international footballers Slovak expatriate footballers FK AS Trenčín players Slovak Super Liga players Russian Football Premier League players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Slovak expatriates in Russia Expatriate footballers in Russia Slovak expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England 2010 FIFA World Cup players 1982 births People from Dublin (city) Association football players from Dublin (city) Living people Association football defenders Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Irish expatriates in the United Kingdom Sunderland A.F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players The Football League players Derry City F.C. players League of Ireland players Pound sterling Circulating currencies Currencies of British Overseas Territories Currencies of Europe Currencies of North America Currencies of Oceania Currencies of South America Currencies of the United Kingdom Numismatics 1990 births Living people Soccer players from Sydney Australian people of Greek descent Australian soccer players Greek footballers Australian expatriate soccer players Association football goalkeepers Liverpool F.C. players Sydney FC players Accrington Stanley F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Aris Thessaloniki F.C. players Superleague Greece players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in England New South Wales Institute of Sport alumni Carlisle United F.C. players Western Sydney Wanderers FC players Near-Earth object tracking Discoveries by institution Jet Propulsion Laboratory Palomar Observatory Capitals of former nations Cities in South East England County towns in England Former national capitals Winchester 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from County Antrim Association footballers from Northern Ireland Ballymena United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Reading F.C. non-playing staff Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff Expatriate football managers from Northern Ireland The Football League managers Watford F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories