 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Sevilla FC La Liga clubs Football clubs in Andalusia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners Association football clubs established in 1905 1905 establishments in Spain Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Rayo Vallecano footballers Sevilla FC players Spain youth international footballers UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1989 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players English Christians Black British sportspeople Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Living people 1986 births Living people People from Wortley, Leeds Association football midfielders Association football wingers Association football utility players Footballers from Leeds English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Football clubs in Switzerland FC Basel Association football clubs established in 1893 Multi-sport clubs in Switzerland 1893 establishments in Switzerland Football League Third Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1987 births Living people French footballers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers French people of Portuguese descent RC Strasbourg players FC Lorient players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Sevilla FC players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in Spain Association football forwards People from Senlis French expatriates in Spain Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Laws of association football Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1974 births Living people Swedish football referees UEFA Champions League referees 2014 FIFA World Cup referees Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams 1980 births Living people People from Porto Alegre Brazilian people of African descent 1999 Copa América players 1999 FIFA Confederations Cup players Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Brazilian footballers Brazil under-20 international footballers Brazil youth international footballers Brazil international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian expatriates in France Brazilian expatriates in Spain Brazilian expatriates in Italy Brazilian expatriates in Mexico Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Mexico European Footballer of the Year winners FIFA 100 Copa América-winning players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA World Player of the Year winners Association football forwards Naturalised citizens of Spain Olympic footballers of Brazil Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Ligue 1 players La Liga players Serie A players Liga MX players Grêmio Foot-Ball Porto Alegrense players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players FC Barcelona players A.C. Milan players Clube de Regatas do Flamengo footballers Clube Atlético Mineiro players Querétaro F.C. footballers Fluminense Football Club players Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Monica's Gang 1991 births Living people People from Stockwell Black English sportspeople English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Crystal Palace F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Footballers from Greater London 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Seville Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Andalusian footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División B players Sevilla Atlético players Sevilla FC players Liverpool F.C. players Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England 1981 births Living people People from Bouaké Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Ivorian footballers Ivorian expatriate footballers Ivorian emigrants to the United Kingdom Ivory Coast international footballers Doping cases in association football Expatriate footballers in England ASEC Mimosas players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Ivorian sportspeople in doping cases FIFA Century Club Africa Cup of Nations-winning players Ivorian Muslims 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Las Palmas Spanish footballers Canarian footballers Association football wingers La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players UD Las Palmas Atlético players UD Las Palmas players Sevilla FC players Spain international footballers 1988 births Living people People from Sint-Truiden Belgian footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium under-21 international footballers Belgium international footballers Flemish people Flemish sportspeople Katholieke Universiteit Leuven alumni Association football goalkeepers Association football goalkeepers who have scored K. Sint-Truidense V.V. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Belgian Second Division players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Belgian expatriates in England Liverpool F.C. players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Rosario, Santa Fe Argentine footballers Association football midfielders Argentine Primera División players Boca Juniors footballers Newell's Old Boys footballers La Liga players Atlético Madrid footballers Valencia CF players Sevilla FC players Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina international footballers 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Argentine expatriates in Spain UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe 2001–02 in English football UEFA Euro 2008 UEFA European Championship tournaments 2007–08 in European football 2007–08 in Austrian football 2007–08 in Swiss football International association football competitions hosted by Austria International association football competitions hosted by Switzerland Austria–Switzerland relations  Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology 1988 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers Club Atlético Independiente footballers People from Quilmes La Liga players Premier League players Atlético Madrid footballers Manchester City F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers Argentine expatriate footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Olympic medalists in football 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriates in England 1986 births Living people People from Wortley, Leeds Association football midfielders Association football wingers Association football utility players Footballers from Leeds English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1964 births Living people People from Iesi Italian Roman Catholics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Bologna F.C. 1909 players U.C. Sampdoria players S.S. Lazio players Leicester City F.C. players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers S.S. Lazio managers ACF Fiorentina managers Inter Milan managers Serie A managers Premier League players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Manchester City F.C. managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Marseille French Muslims French people of Algerian descent French footballers Association football midfielders Association football wingers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Olympique de Marseille players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players French expatriates in England Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues 1984 births Living people People from Buenos Aires Province Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers 2004 Copa América players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Olympic footballers of Argentina Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine Primera División players Boca Juniors footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Brazil Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Serie A players Sport Club Corinthians Paulista players Expatriate footballers in England Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Association football forwards Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Brazil Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom South American Footballer of the Year winners Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Expatriate footballers in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriates in England 1986 births Living people People from Mogán, Las Palmas Spanish footballers Canarian footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Valencia CF Mestalla footballers Valencia CF players SD Eibar footballers Celta de Vigo players Premier League players Manchester City F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish people of Japanese descent Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Spanish expatriates in England 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División B players Atlético Madrid B players Atlético Madrid footballers Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Association football terminology Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports 1986 births Living people People from Uccle Belgian people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgian expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Association football central defenders Association football utility players R.S.C. Anderlecht players Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players Premier League players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Belgium Belgian expatriates in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players Derby County F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in England The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1884 Football clubs in Derbyshire FA Cup winners Football League Championship clubs Sport in Derby 1884 establishments in England Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861  Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 2009 films American films English-language films 2000s comedy films American comedy films American sex comedy films American teen comedy films Cheerleading films Directorial debut films Teen comedy films 1990 births Living people People from Longsight Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players British people of Ghanaian descent Black British sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1992 births Living people Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers Footballers from Greater Manchester Manchester United F.C. players People from Chorley People from Clayton-le-Woods Sportspeople from Preston, Lancashire Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1978 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football central defenders Black English sportspeople Doping cases in association football English autobiographers English film producers English footballers England international footballers English people of Irish descent English people of Saint Lucian descent English sportspeople in doping cases English television personalities England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players People from Peckham Premier League players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Sportspeople from London The Football League players West Ham United F.C. players Laws of association football Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1968 births Living people English football referees People from Heswall FA Cup Final referees The Football League referees Premier League referees 1985 births Living people People from Stevenage English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Association football utility players Watford F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 1973 births Living people Association football wingers BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Welsh people of Sierra Leonean descent English Football Hall of Fame inductees Manchester United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Officers of the Order of the British Empire Footballers from Cardiff Premier League players The Football League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Wales international footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers People educated at Moorside High School Welsh football managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers Salford City F.C. Living people 1981 births People from Hastings English footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Everton F.C. players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2000 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams 1983 births Living people Footballers from Rotterdam Dutch footballers Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Association football forwards SBV Excelsior players Feyenoord players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Fenerbahçe footballers Eredivisie players Premier League players Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Dutch expatriates in England Dutch expatriates in Turkey Expatriate footballers in Turkey FIFA Century Club Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Manchester United F.C. Argentina Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1816 1985 births Living people Sportspeople from Buenos Aires Argentine footballers Association football fullbacks Expatriate footballers in England San Lorenzo footballers RCD Espanyol footballers Manchester City F.C. players La Liga players Premier League players Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Argentine Primera División players Naturalised citizens of Spain Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Olympic medalists in football Argentine people of Basque descent Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina international footballers Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentine expatriates in England