 Namibia Countries in Africa Member states of the African Union English-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Afrikaans-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Republics States and territories established in 1990 Member states of the United Nations Bantu countries and territories Commonwealth republics Former German colonies COSAFA Cup COSAFA competitions Populated places in Zala County Madagascar Countries in Africa East African countries Island countries Islands of Madagascar Islands of Africa Islands of the Indian Ocean Former French colonies French-speaking countries and territories Least developed countries Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the African Union Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1960 Physiographic provinces Republics Southern Africa Southeast Africa Mozambique Countries in Africa East African countries Southeast Africa Bantu countries and territories Former Portuguese colonies Least developed countries Member states of the African Union Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the United Nations Portuguese-speaking countries and territories Republics States and territories established in 1975 Swahili-speaking countries and territories Commonwealth republics Botswana Countries in Africa Bantu countries and territories English-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the African Union Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Republics Geography of Botswana States and territories established in 1966 Member states of the United Nations Commonwealth republics Former British protectorates Zimbabwe Bantu countries and territories Countries in Africa English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies G15 nations Landlocked countries Member states of the African Union Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1980 Africa Cup of Nations qualification 2012 Africa Cup of Nations 2010 in African football 2011 in African football Soccer venues in South Africa Rustenburg Sports venues completed in 2009 Sports venues in North West (South African province) South Africa national soccer team Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1991 births Living people Namibian footballers Namibia international footballers Association football midfielders People from Swakopmund Curling Winter sports Winter Olympic sports Sports originating in Scotland Precision sports Team sports Scottish games 1988 births Malagasy footballers Madagascar international footballers Living people FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events  2008 films 2008 computer-animated films American films English-language films American animated films American children's films Animated comedy films Paramount Pictures animated films Buddy films Computer-animated films DreamWorks Animation animated films Animated films about penguins Films set in Madagascar Films using computer-generated imagery Paramount Pictures films Sequel films Film scores by Hans Zimmer Films featuring anthropomorphic characters 2000s American animated films Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League 1985 births Living people Senegalese footballers Senegalese expatriate footballers FC Metz players AS Cherbourg Football players LB Châteauroux players SC Freiburg players Newcastle United F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Association football forwards Sportspeople from Dakar Senegalese expatriates in Germany Senegalese expatriates in England Senegalese Muslims 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players Premier League players Senegalese expatriates in France 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Plzeň Association football goalkeepers Czech footballers Czech Republic youth international footballers Czech Republic under-21 international footballers Czech Republic international footballers FK Chmel Blšany players AC Sparta Prague players Czech expatriate footballers Czech expatriates in France Czech expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Stade Rennais F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Czech First League players FIFA Century Club Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology The Clash 1976 establishments in England 1986 disestablishments in England English anti-fascists Political music English buskers English punk rock groups Grammy Award winners Musical groups disestablished in 1986 Musical groups established in 1976 Musical groups from London Musical quartets Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees 1978 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players African Footballer of the Year winners Ivory Coast international footballers Ivorian Roman Catholics EA Guingamp players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in China Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate soccer players in Canada Association football forwards French people of Ivorian descent Ivorian expatriates in France Ivorian expatriates in England Ivorian expatriates in China Ivorian expatriate footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players Chinese Super League players Süper Lig players Major League Soccer players Designated Players (MLS) Living people Naturalized citizens of France Levallois SC players Le Mans FC players Olympique de Marseille players Chelsea F.C. players Shanghai Shenhua F.C. players Galatasaray S.K. footballers Montreal Impact players People from Abidjan First Division/Premier League top scorers 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players Ivorian expatriates in Turkey Ivorian footballers Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football terminology 1970 births Living people People from Schaffhausen Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers S.S. Lazio players Chelsea F.C. players Premier League players Italian football managers Milton Keynes Dons F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate footballers in England FC Schalke 04 managers Bundesliga managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FC Schaffhausen players FC Zürich players FC Aarau players Serie A players Swiss Super League players Swiss people of Italian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League winning managers Italian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Italian expatriates in Germany FA Cup Finals FA Cup 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match 1978 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers FIFA Century Club Manchester City F.C. players People educated at Brentwood School (Essex) People from Romford Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players West Ham United F.C. players Conservative Party (UK) people Members of the Order of the British Empire New York City FC players English expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players 1988 births Living people People from the Province of Burgos Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Castilian-Leonese footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Real Madrid C.F. players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Valencia CF players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club 1991 births Living people Italian footballers People from the Province of Ferrara Ravenna Calcio players Inter Milan players A.C. Cesena players Newcastle United F.C. players Association football defenders Serie A players Premier League players Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players Italy youth international footballers Italian Roman Catholics 1979 births Living people People from Cayenne French people of French Guianan descent French Guianan footballers French footballers French Roman Catholics France international footballers LB Châteauroux players EA Guingamp players FC Metz players Association football forwards Olympique Lyonnais players Chelsea F.C. players Trabzonspor footballers Delhi Dynamos FC players Wadi Degla FC players 2006 FIFA World Cup players French expatriate footballers French Guianan expatriate footballers Premier League players Ligue 1 players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate footballers in India UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Süper Lig players French expatriates in England French expatriates in Turkey 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from Porto Portuguese footballers Association football midfielders Primeira Liga players Segunda Liga players Portuguese Second Division players C.D. Aves players Boavista F.C. players FC Porto players FC Porto B players Premier League players Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Süper Lig players Fenerbahçe footballers Portugal youth international footballers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Portugal Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Turkey Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League Finals 2014–15 UEFA Champions League 2014–15 in German football Sport in Berlin 21st century in Berlin International club association football competitions hosted by Germany Juventus F.C. matches FC Barcelona matches 2014–15 in Italian football 2014–15 in Spanish football La Liga clubs in Europe FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners 1960–61 domestic association football cups 1959–60 in Israeli football 1960–61 in Israeli football Israel State Cup seasons Senegal Countries in Africa Member states of the African Union Economic Community of West African States G15 nations French-speaking countries and territories Least developed countries Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Republics States and territories established in 1960 Member states of the United Nations West African countries Liberal democracies Muslim-majority countries SC Freiburg Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Baden-Württemberg Association football clubs established in 1904 1904 establishments in Germany 1986 births Living people People from Yamoussoukro Association football midfielders Ivorian footballers Ivory Coast international footballers 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Ivorian expatriate footballers Ivorian expatriates in Belgium Ivorian expatriates in the Netherlands Ivorian emigrants to the United Kingdom Ivorian Muslims R.S.C. Anderlecht players Roda JC players FC Twente players Newcastle United F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Eredivisie players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in England Africa Cup of Nations-winning players 1981 births Living people People from Zaria Nigerian footballers Nigeria international footballers English footballers England under-21 international footballers Black English sportspeople English people of Nigerian descent English people of Yoruba descent Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Association football forwards Newcastle United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Gaziantep B.B. footballers Crystal Palace F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Fleetwood Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Yoruba sportspeople Nigerian emigrants to the United Kingdom 2014 FIFA World Cup players Expatriate footballers in Turkey 1961 births Living people People from Wimbledon, London English footballers Association football midfielders The Football League players Whyteleafe F.C. players Corinthian-Casuals F.C. players Dulwich Hamlet F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Barnet F.C. players English football managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Reading F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. managers Charlton Athletic F.C. managers Southampton F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers UEFA Pro Licence holders British association football commentators Epsom & Ewell F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology Bolton Wanderers F.C. 1877 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1877 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bolton Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Football League Trophy winners Premier League clubs Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Newcastle United F.C. 2012 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Football venues in England Football League venues Premier League venues Sports venues in Newcastle upon Tyne Sports venues completed in 1892 Association football terminology 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs UEFA Champions League Finals 2010–11 UEFA Champions League 2010–11 in English football 2010–11 in Spanish football 2011 in London Football competitions hosted by London Events at Wembley Stadium FC Barcelona matches Manchester United F.C. matches La Liga clubs in Europe 1980 births Living people People from Stepney English footballers Association football fullbacks 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players A.S. Roma players LA Galaxy players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriates in Italy Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English people of Barbadian descent Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club 1952 births Living people American bloggers American historians American political pundits University of Michigan faculty Islam and politics Translators from Arabic Middle Eastern studies in the United States University of California, Los Angeles alumni Northwestern University alumni People from Albuquerque, New Mexico Science fiction fans UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Association football midfielders French footballers Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Stade Rennais F.C. players AS Monaco FC players West Ham United F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Premier League players Olympique de Marseille players AJ Auxerre players 1978 births Living people Expatriate footballers in Turkey Süper Lig players Ligue 1 players French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England French people of Senegalese descent Senegalese expatriates in the United Kingdom Pau FC players Association football terminology 1984 births Living people People from Sremska Mitrovica Association football defenders Association football utility players Serbian footballers Serbia and Montenegro international footballers Serbia international footballers Serbian expatriate footballers Serbian expatriates in Russia Serbian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in England FK Srem players OFK Beograd players FC Lokomotiv Moscow players Chelsea F.C. players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Serbia under-21 international footballers 1985 births Living people Sportspeople from Paris French people of Senegalese descent French footballers French Muslims Senegalese footballers Senegal international footballers Senegalese Muslims Association football forwards FC Rouen players R.E. Mouscron players TSG 1899 Hoffenheim players West Ham United F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Shanghai Shenhua F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Premier League players Süper Lig players Chinese Super League players Senegalese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate footballers in China Senegalese expatriates in Germany Senegalese expatriates in France Senegalese expatriates in Belgium Senegalese expatriates in Turkey 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players Senegalese expatriates in England 1989 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players English Christians Black British sportspeople Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Living people Ivory Coast Blood diamonds Countries in Africa Economic Community of West African States Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative French-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the African Union Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1960 West African countries World Digital Library related 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from County Tipperary Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football forwards Cork City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Southampton F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Tipperary hurlers Gortnahoe-Glengoole hurlers UEFA Euro 2012 players 1980 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football central defenders Chelsea F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Living people Nottingham Forest F.C. players People acquitted of crimes People from Barking Premier League players Senrab F.C. players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Time Concepts in metaphysics Concepts in physics Physical quantities SI base quantities Spacetime 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1207 establishments Liverpool Cities in North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated coastal places in Merseyside Populated places established in the 13th century Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Port cities and towns in England Towns in Merseyside Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Local government districts of North West England NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Towns in Lancashire West Pennine Moors Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom Blackburn