 Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe 1982 births Living people People from Bari Italian footballers Association football forwards Serie A players F.C. Bari 1908 players A.S. Roma players U.C. Sampdoria players A.C. Milan players Inter Milan players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Parma F.C. players 1979 births Association football midfielders Brescia Calcio players Inter Milan players Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Living people A.C. Milan players Juventus F.C. players New York City FC players Reggina Calcio players Olympic footballers of Italy Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Olympic medalists in football People from the Province of Brescia Serie A players Serie B players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Officers of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Italian expatriates in the United States Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italian Roman Catholics Parma F.C. players Juventus F.C. players FIFA 100 Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players Association football goalkeepers Serie A players Serie B players FIFA World Cup-winning players People from Carrara 1978 births Living people FIFA Century Club 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1939 births Living people 1962 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.C. Milan players ACF Fiorentina managers A.S. Varese 1910 players Association football defenders Cagliari Calcio managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Inter Milan managers FC Bayern Munich managers Expatriate football managers in Austria FC Red Bull Salzburg managers Footballers at the 1960 Summer Olympics Bundesliga managers Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers Italy national football team managers Juventus F.C. managers Olympic footballers of Italy People from the Province of Milan Expatriate football managers in Portugal S.L. Benfica managers Primeira Liga managers Expatriate football managers in the Republic of Ireland Republic of Ireland national football team managers Serie A players Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 2004 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers VfB Stuttgart managers Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in Ireland UEFA Cup winning managers Italian Roman Catholics 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 1979 births Living people Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Irish expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in Australia Irish expatriates in Australia Melbourne City FC players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players A-League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club Leicester Celtic A.F.C. players 1977 births Living people A.S. Varese 1910 players Empoli F.C. players Association football forwards Italian footballers Italy international footballers Sportspeople from Naples Serie A players Serie B players Udinese Calcio players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Watford F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Irish expatriates in England Stella Maris F.C. players 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) 2012–13 in European football 2013–14 in European football Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams Croatia Balkans Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Croatian-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Member states of NATO Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Southeastern Europe Central Europe UEFA Euro 2012 Republic of Ireland at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Croatian football England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 2013 albums Basshunter albums 1976 births Living people People from Lifford Sportspeople from County Donegal Association football goalkeepers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland FIFA Century Club Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Celtic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players 1979 births Living people People from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Home Farm F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1994 FIFA World Cup 1994 in association football FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by the United States 1994 in American soccer Sports in Stanford, California 1984 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Bury F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Cherry Orchard F.C. players Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Peterborough United F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Orlando City SC players Colorado Rapids players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Slang English-language idioms Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Atlético Madrid La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners Multi-sport clubs in Spain Association football clubs established in 1903 1903 establishments in Spain Dalian Wanda Group Atlético de Kolkata owners  Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain Terminology used in multiple sports 1992 births Living people People from Bree, Belgium Flemish people Flemish sportspeople Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium international footballers Association football goalkeepers Belgian Pro League players La Liga players Premier League players K.R.C. Genk players Chelsea F.C. players Atlético Madrid footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Belgian expatriates in England Belgian expatriates in Spain 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Lisbon Capitals in Europe Cities in Portugal Marinas in Portugal Municipalities of Portugal Phoenician colonies Populated coastal places in Portugal Populated places in Lisbon District Port cities and towns in Portugal Roman towns and cities in Portugal Municipalities of Lisbon District 1989 births Living people Footballers from Cardiff Welsh expatriate footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Association football utility players Southampton F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Premier League players The Football League players La Liga players BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year People educated at Whitchurch High School Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1986 births Living people People from Rosario, Uruguay Uruguayan people of French descent Uruguayan footballers Association football defenders Uruguayan Primera División players C.A. Cerro players Club Nacional de Football players La Liga players Villarreal CF players Atlético Madrid footballers Uruguay international footballers 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Copa América-winning players Uruguayan expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Uruguayan expatriates in Spain 1986 births Living people People from Seville (comarca) Spanish footballers Andalusian footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División B players Sevilla Atlético players Sevilla FC players Real Madrid C.F. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA Century Club FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Atlético Madrid B players Atlético Madrid footballers Getafe CF footballers Real Zaragoza players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Argentine footballers Argentine people of Italian descent Argentina youth international footballers Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina international footballers FIFA Century Club Association football midfielders Atlético Madrid footballers Inter Milan players A.C. Pisa 1909 players Racing Club de Avellaneda footballers S.S. Lazio players Sevilla FC players Club Atlético Vélez Sarsfield footballers La Liga players Serie A players Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic silver medalists for Argentina Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics 1991 Copa América players 1992 King Fahd Cup players 1993 Copa América players 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1995 Copa América players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 1999 Copa América players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Copa América-winning players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Argentine football managers Racing Club de Avellaneda managers River Plate managers Estudiantes de La Plata managers Calcio Catania managers Serie A managers Atlético Madrid managers La Liga managers People from Buenos Aires 1970 births Living people Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Expatriate football managers in Italy Olympic medalists in football Primeira Liga managers UEFA Cup winning managers La Liga Football leagues in Spain Top level football leagues in Europe 1928 establishments in Spain Sports leagues established in 1928 Atlético de Kolkata owners Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Agence France-Presse 1835 establishments in France Companies established in 1835 Media companies of France News agencies based in France Companies based in Paris Media in Paris 1985 births Living people People from Funchal Portuguese footballers Madeiran footballers Association football forwards Association football wingers Primeira Liga players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Portugal youth international footballers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers Portuguese Roman Catholics UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Portugal Golden Globes (Portugal) winners Grand Officers of the Order of Prince Henry First Division/Premier League top scorers Pichichi Trophy winners European Footballer of the Year winners FIFA World Player of the Year winners World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners FIFA Century Club Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Portuguese male models Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Spain UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe Association football terminology Copa del Rey Football cup competitions in Spain National association football cups 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Rosario, Santa Fe Argentine footballers Association football midfielders Argentine Primera División players Rosario Central footballers Primeira Liga players S.L. Benfica footballers La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Manchester United F.C. players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Premier League players Ligue 1 players Argentina international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Olympic medalists in football Argentine expatriate footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Spain Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriates in Portugal Argentine expatriates in England Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine people of Spanish descent Naturalised citizens of Italy 1990 debut albums Brand Nubian albums Elektra Records albums Madrid Capitals in Europe Municipalities in the Community of Madrid Populated places in the Community of Madrid Populated places established in the 9th century University towns in Spain 1959 births 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players A.S. Roma players A.C. Milan players A.C. Milan managers A.C. Reggiana 1919 managers Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in France Expatriate football managers in Spain Juventus F.C. managers Living people Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in England Italian expatriates in France Italian expatriates in Spain Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers La Liga managers Ligue 1 managers People from the Province of Reggio Emilia Paris Saint-Germain F.C. managers Parma F.C. managers Parma F.C. players Premier League managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Recipients of the Order of the Star of Italian Solidarity Serie A managers Serie A players UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 1988 players 1919 births 1996 deaths Bishop Auckland F.C. players Bristol City F.C. wartime guest players British Army personnel of World War II English Football Hall of Fame inductees English football managers English footballers Liverpool F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. non-playing staff Liverpool F.C. players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People from Hetton-le-Hole The Football League players UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Cup winning managers Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 RTVE Spanish-language television stations Television channels and stations established in 1956 1956 establishments in Spain Companies established in 1956 Argentina Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1816 Hip extensors Knee flexors Muscles of the lower limb Posterior compartment of thigh Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology  Wales Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union United Kingdom Great Britain 1981 births Living people People from Viana do Castelo Portuguese footballers Association football midfielders Primeira Liga players S.C. Braga players S.L. Benfica footballers Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Ligue 1 players Olympique Lyonnais players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players La Liga players Atlético Madrid footballers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in France Portuguese expatriates in Spain Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1985 births Living people People from Baix Vinalopó Spanish footballers Valencian footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Association football utility players La Liga players Segunda División B players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players RCD Espanyol footballers CA Osasuna players Atlético Madrid footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players 1981 births Living people People from Móstoles Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Primeira Liga players Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players FC Porto players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2000 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning captains FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning captains FIFA Century Club 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Portugal Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Portuguese-speaking countries and territories Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe Western Europe Southwestern Europe 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Stuttgart German people of Tunisian descent German people of Arab descent German footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers Association football midfielders Association football utility players Bundesliga players VfB Stuttgart II players VfB Stuttgart players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Juventus F.C. players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players German expatriate footballers German expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Italy German expatriates in Spain Expatriate footballers in Spain 1985 births Living people Croatian footballers Croatia under-21 international footballers Croatia international footballers GNK Dinamo Zagreb players NK Inter Zaprešić players HŠK Zrinjski Mostar players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Croatian Roman Catholics Sportspeople from Zadar Croatian First Football League players Premier League players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Croatian expatriate footballers Croatian expatriates in the United Kingdom Croatian expatriates in Spain Croatia youth international footballers Belgium national football team 1904 establishments in Belgium Articles containing video clips European national association football teams Football in Belgium National sports teams of Belgium Belgium at the Olympics