 Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England 1984–85 European Cup 1984–85 in Italian football 1985 crimes in Belgium 1985 disasters 1985 in Belgian sport 1985 riots Association football hooliganism Crime in Belgium Disasters in Belgium Filmed deaths Football in Belgium History of Brussels History of football in England History of Liverpool History of Turin Hooliganism Human stampedes in 1985 Juventus F.C. Liverpool F.C. UEFA Champions League Stadium disasters Sport in Brussels Sports riots 20th century in Brussels 1949 births Living people Sportspeople from Strasbourg FC Mulhouse players Association football sweepers RC Strasbourg players ASPV Strasbourg players Ligue 1 players French footballers French football managers French Roman Catholics AS Nancy managers AS Monaco FC managers Ligue 1 managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Arsenal F.C. managers Honorary Officers of the Order of the British Empire Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Nagoya Grampus managers Expatriate football managers in Japan English Football Hall of Fame inductees University of Strasbourg alumni UEFA Pro Licence holders French expatriate football managers French expatriates in Japan French expatriates in England Terminology used in multiple sports  Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Football venues in England Sports venues in Reading, Berkshire Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Reading F.C. London Irish Sports venues completed in 1998 Football League venues Meetings Financial economics Annual events National association football league cups Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League 1961 births Living people People from Slough People educated at Herschel Grammar School English footballers England youth international footballers English expatriate footballers English people of Irish descent Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Fulham F.C. players IFK Norrköping players Oxford United F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Djurgårdens IF Fotboll players Cardiff City F.C. players Exeter City F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players South China AA footballers Slough Town F.C. players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong English football managers Slough Town F.C. managers Woking F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers National League (English football) managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Reading F.C. non-playing staff UCI World Tour Recurring sporting events established in 2009 UCI tours Men's road cycling Cycle racing organisations Union Cycliste Internationale Sports organisations established in 1900 International sports bodies based in Switzerland Aigle  Internet properties established in 1995 British websites European news websites Cycling media Sport websites Road bicycle racing terminology Russia BRICS nations Caspian littoral states Central Asian countries Countries in Europe East Asian countries Eastern Europe Federal republics G8 nations G20 nations Member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations North Asian countries Northeast Asian countries Russian-speaking countries and territories Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 862 Western Asian countries E7 nations Catalan cyclists Spanish male cyclists 1979 births Living people Sportspeople from Barcelona Spanish Vuelta a España stage winners Spanish Tour de France stage winners Spanish Giro d'Italia stage winners Tour de France cyclists Giro d'Italia cyclists Vuelta a España cyclists 2010 Tour de France stage winners   Tinkoff UCI WorldTeams Cycling teams based in Denmark Sports clubs established in 1998 Cycling teams based in Russia UCI tours UCI Continental Circuits Men's road cycling