 1982 births Living people People from Huyton Sportspeople from Liverpool English footballers English expatriate footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Olympique de Marseille players Burnley F.C. players Premier League players Ligue 1 players The Football League players English prisoners and detainees English people convicted of assault English columnists Expatriate footballers in France English expatriates in France English male writers 1988 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers Club Atlético Independiente footballers People from Quilmes La Liga players Premier League players Atlético Madrid footballers Manchester City F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers Argentine expatriate footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Olympic medalists in football 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriates in England Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations 1986 births Living people People from Uccle Belgian people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgian expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Association football central defenders Association football utility players R.S.C. Anderlecht players Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players Premier League players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Belgium Belgian expatriates in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1907 establishments in the United Kingdom Association football trade unions English football organisations Trade unions established in 1907 Trade unions in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Manchester Malaysian people of Indian descent Malaysian people of Portuguese descent People of Goan descent 1964 births Living people Malaysian people of Kristang descent Alumni of the London School of Economics People educated at Epsom College Formula One team owners Commanders of the Order of the British Empire English football chairmen and investors Queens Park Rangers F.C. directors and chairmen AirAsia Malaysian motorsport people Malaysian Christians Malaysian businesspeople Businesspeople of Indian descent 1963 births Living people People from Ruabon Welsh footballers Welsh expatriate footballers Association football forwards Wales international footballers Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Germany Welsh expatriates in Germany FC Bayern Munich footballers Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Southampton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Welsh football managers Wales national football team managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Fulham F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Stoke City F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Bundesliga players English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Ysgol Rhiwabon Officers of the Order of the British Empire La Liga players Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe 1944 births Living people People from Ashton-under-Lyne English footballers Leaders of British trade unions Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Vancouver Whitecaps (1974–84) players Bury F.C. players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at Ashton-under-Lyne Grammar School Alumni of Manchester Metropolitan University Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League Criminal law Criminal law legal terms Legal terms Sports venues in London Football venues in London Defunct rugby union venues in England Sports venues completed in 1904 Shepherd's Bush Football League venues 1980s ballads 1989 songs 1989 singles 1990 singles Billboard Adult Contemporary number-one singles Janet Jackson songs Pop ballads Rhythm and blues ballads Songs written by Janet Jackson Songs written by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis Song recordings produced by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis Music videos directed by Dominic Sena A&M Records singles BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1984 births Living people People from Buenos Aires Province Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers 2004 Copa América players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Olympic footballers of Argentina Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine Primera División players Boca Juniors footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Brazil Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Serie A players Sport Club Corinthians Paulista players Expatriate footballers in England Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Association football forwards Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Brazil Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom South American Footballer of the Year winners Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Expatriate footballers in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriates in England 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English footballers Black English sportspeople England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Footballers from Leeds Leeds United F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players Aston Villa F.C. players Premier League players England youth international footballers Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Italy British people of Barbadian descent Etihad Airways Premier League venues Football venues in England Manchester City F.C. Sports venues in Manchester 2002 Commonwealth Games venues Music venues in Greater Manchester Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Rugby union stadiums in England Sports venues completed in 2002 2002 establishments in England 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software 1986 births Living people People from Praia People from Valais People from Santiago, Cape Verde Cape Verdean emigrants to Switzerland Swiss people of Cape Verdean descent Swiss footballers Swiss expatriates in Italy Switzerland international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Germany Swiss expatriate footballers Swiss expatriates in the United Kingdom Swiss expatriates in Germany Association football midfielders FC Sion players Manchester City F.C. players AS Saint-Étienne players A.C. Chievo Verona players Leicester City F.C. players Udinese Calcio players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers SC Freiburg players Stade Rennais F.C. players Swiss Super League players Premier League players The Football League players Ligue 1 players Serie A players Primeira Liga players Bundesliga players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Swiss Roman Catholics Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports French footballers France international footballers Association football forwards AJ Auxerre players Liverpool F.C. players Olympique de Marseille players Sunderland A.F.C. players Panathinaikos F.C. players S.S. Lazio players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Al-Gharafa Sports Club players FC Kuban Krasnodar players SC Bastia players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players French people of Ivorian descent French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Greece Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Qatar Expatriate footballers in Russia 1981 births Living people Ligue 1 players Premier League players Superleague Greece players Serie A players Russian Football Premier League players People from Arles France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers Qatar Stars League players French expatriates in England French expatriates in Italy French expatriates in Greece French expatriates in Russia French expatriates in Qatar French former Muslims Converts to Roman Catholicism from Islam Association football video games PlayStation (console) games PlayStation 2 games Video games developed in the United Kingdom 1951 births Living people Portuguese footballers Association football forwards Primeira Liga players G.D. Fabril players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Vitória F.C. players Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers Portuguese football managers Primeira Liga managers Vitória F.C. managers C.F. Estrela da Amadora managers S.C. Campomaiorense managers C.D. Santa Clara managers Sporting Clube de Portugal managers U.D. Leiria managers Expatriate football managers in Angola 1948 births Living people Sportspeople from Sheffield Footballers from Sheffield English footballers Association football wingers Chesterfield F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Hartlepool United F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Aldershot F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players York City F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players The Football League players English football managers Gainsborough Trinity F.C. managers Burton Albion F.C. managers Scarborough F.C. managers Notts County F.C. managers Torquay United F.C. managers Huddersfield Town A.F.C. managers Plymouth Argyle F.C. managers Oldham Athletic A.F.C. managers Bury F.C. managers Sheffield United F.C. managers Crystal Palace F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers National League (English football) managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. non-playing staff French Open 16th arrondissement of Paris 1891 establishments in France Clay court tennis tournaments June sporting events May sporting events Recurring sporting events established in 1891 Tennis in Paris Tennis tournaments in France Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments Annual sporting events in France Ball games Summer Olympic sports Racquet sports Sports originating in England Tennis Novak Djokovic 1987 births Living people Australian Open (tennis) champions Eastern Orthodox Christians from Serbia Expatriate sportspeople in Monaco Grand Crosses of the Order of St. Sava Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Members of the Serbian Orthodox Church Olympic bronze medalists for Serbia Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic tennis players of Serbia People from Monte Carlo Serbia and Montenegro male tennis players Serbian expatriate sportspeople Serbian expatriates in Germany Serbian expatriates in Monaco Serbian male tennis players Sports world record holders Sportspeople from Belgrade Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics UNICEF people US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon champions World No. 1 tennis players Tennis shots Tennis shots Tennis shots Greetings Parting traditions Hand gestures  Majorca Islands of the Balearic Islands Physical exercise Self care Bathing Finnish culture Finnish inventions Finnish words and phrases Rooms Traditional medicine History of tennis Tennis terminology Sports originating in France French Open champions International Tennis Hall of Fame inductees Living people People from Monte Carlo People from Södertälje Sportspeople from Stockholm Swedish expatriates in Monaco Swedish male tennis players Wimbledon champions Wimbledon junior champions World No. 1 tennis players 1956 births Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles France Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Western Europe 1971 births Living people American male tennis players American people of Greek descent American people of Jewish descent Australian Open (tennis) champions Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles International Tennis Hall of Fame inductees Olympic tennis players of the United States People from Potomac, Maryland Sportspeople from Los Angeles County, California Sportspeople from Maryland Tennis people from California Tennis people from Washington, D.C. Tennis players at the 1992 Summer Olympics US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon champions World No. 1 tennis players Roger Federer 1981 births Living people Swiss male tennis players Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Australian Open (tennis) champions French Open champions Wimbledon champions US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon junior champions World No. 1 tennis players Olympic medalists in tennis Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Switzerland Olympic silver medalists for Switzerland Olympic tennis players of Switzerland Tennis players at the 2000 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Sports world record holders Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners People from Basel-Stadt People of Afrikaner descent Swiss people of Dutch descent Swiss people of French descent Swiss people of South African descent Swiss Roman Catholics UNICEF people Münchenstein Grammar Phonology Semantics Linguistic morphology 1967 births Australian Open (tennis) champions German expatriates in Monaco German expatriates in Switzerland German expatriates in the United Kingdom German expatriates in the United States German poker players German people convicted of tax crimes German male tennis players German Roman Catholics German tennis coaches Hopman Cup competitors International Tennis Hall of Fame inductees Living people Olympic gold medalists for Germany Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic tennis players of Germany People from Leimen (Baden) People from London Sportspeople from Miami, Florida People from Monte Carlo Sportspeople from Baden-Württemberg Sportspeople from Munich People from the canton of Schwyz Tennis commentators Tennis players at the 1992 Summer Olympics US Open (tennis) champions West German male tennis players Wimbledon champions World No. 1 tennis players Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf Medalists at the 1992 Summer Olympics Novak Djokovic Germany's Sports Hall of Fame inductees Near-Earth object tracking Discoveries by institution Jet Propulsion Laboratory Palomar Observatory Nerve plexus Nerves of the torso Vagus nerve French Open Tennis awards Silver objects Latvian male tennis players Sportspeople from Riga Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic tennis players of Latvia 1988 births Living people Latvian sportspeople Bomber aircraft Lunar science Hemispheres 2015 3D films 2015 computer-animated films 2015 films 2010s American animated films 2010s comedy films 2010s comedy-drama films 2010s drama films 2010s fantasy films American 3D films American animated films American children's fantasy films American comedy films American comedy-drama films American drama films American fantasy films American films Animated comedy films Annie Award winners Best Animated Feature Academy Award winners Best Animated Feature Annie Award winners Best Animated Feature BAFTA winners Best Animated Feature Broadcast Film Critics Association Award winners Best Animated Feature Film Golden Globe winners Dolby Atmos films Film scores by Michael Giacchino Films about emotions Films directed by Pete Docter Films featuring anthropomorphic characters Films set in Minnesota Films set in San Francisco, California IMAX films Personifications Pixar animated films Screenplays by Pete Docter Walt Disney Pictures films Arm wrestling Individual sports Combat sports Games of physical skill Ethical principles Spirituality Knowledge Virtue 1998 singles Mariah Carey songs Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles Music videos directed by Diane Martel Pop ballads Rhythm and blues ballads Music videos directed by Herb Ritts Songs written by Walter Afanasieff Songs written by Mariah Carey Song recordings produced by Walter Afanasieff 1997 songs Columbia Records singles Sony Music Entertainment singles 16th arrondissement of Paris 1928 establishments in France French Open Sports venues completed in 1928 Sports venues in Paris Tennis venues in France Tennis in Paris British monthly magazines Magazines established in 1993 Bauer Group (UK) Bauer Radio Defunct radio stations in the United Kingdom British music magazines 1993 establishments in the United Kingdom London magazines