 1947 births Living people A.F.C. Bournemouth managers A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football midfielders Brentford F.C. players English autobiographers English footballers English football managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players People from Poplar, London Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Seattle Sounders (1974–83) players Southampton F.C. managers Sportspeople from London The Football League managers The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. players Tax evasion Portsmouth F.C. Association football clubs established in 1898 Football clubs in England Sport in Portsmouth Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Southern Football League clubs Football clubs in Hampshire 1898 establishments in England Fan-owned English League football clubs 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Living people English chief executives West Ham United F.C. directors and chairmen Portsmouth F.C. directors and chairmen 1952 births Notts County F.C. non-playing staff English expatriates in Australia 1180 establishments Cities in South East England Local government districts of South East England Local government in Hampshire Populated coastal places in Hampshire Port cities and towns in England Ports and harbours of Hampshire Ports and harbours of the English Channel Portsmouth Towns in Hampshire Unitary authority districts of England Money Economic anthropology Monetary economics News Corporation subsidiaries Publications established in 1843 Publications disestablished in 2011 News of the World 1843 establishments in the United Kingdom Sunday newspapers published in the United Kingdom Defunct newspapers of the United Kingdom 2011 disestablishments in the United Kingdom Crimes English criminal law Common law offences in England and Wales 1983 establishments in England Buildings and structures in Southwark Courts in London Crown Courts Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs 1948 births 20th-century Swedish people 21st-century Swedish people Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup managers 2006 FIFA World Cup managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers ACF Fiorentina managers A.S. Roma managers Degerfors IF managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in China Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Mexico Expatriate football managers in Portugal Guangzhou R&F F.C. managers IFK Göteborg managers Ivory Coast national football team managers Manchester City F.C. managers Mexico national football team managers Notts County F.C. non-playing staff Örebro University alumni People from Sunne Municipality Premier League managers Serie A managers S.S. Lazio managers Swedish autobiographers Swedish expatriate football managers Swedish expatriates in England Swedish expatriates in Portugal Swedish football managers Swedish people of Finnish descent U.C. Sampdoria managers UEFA Cup winning managers UEFA Euro 2004 managers UEFA Pro Licence holders Västra Frölunda IF players Leicester City F.C. managers 1946 births Living people Italian footballers Italy international footballers SPAL 1907 players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players A.S. Roma players A.C. Milan players 1974 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.S. Roma managers Juventus F.C. managers La Liga managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers England national football team managers Russia national football team managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Spain People from San Canzian d'Isonzo People from the Province of Gorizia Italian Roman Catholics Italian expatriate football managers Bookmakers Gambling terminology Organized crime activity Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England 1947 births Living people English aviators English autobiographers English businesspeople English football chairmen and investors English people of Jewish descent English billionaires English writers English television personalities English atheists Jewish atheists British real estate businesspeople British billionaires Knights Bachelor People from Hackney The Apprentice (UK TV series) BBC people Labour Party (UK) life peers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. directors and chairmen Labour Party (UK) people 20th-century British businesspeople 21st-century British businesspeople BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom  2009 films Best British Film Empire Award winners British crime thriller films British films 2000s crime thriller films Elstree Studios films English-language films Films set in London Films shot in London Gang films Lions Gate Entertainment films Neo-noir Vigilante films Films directed by Daniel Barber Films about revenge Films set in the 21st century Films about old age Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Media in Sarajevo Media in Bosnia and Herzegovina Television stations in Bosnia and Herzegovina Television channels and stations established in 2012 Living people 1942 births English television presenters British reporters and correspondents ITV regional newsreaders and journalists Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Birmingham, West Midlands People educated at Portsmouth Grammar School Mergers and acquisitions Mobile telecommunication services Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1977 births Living people Sportspeople from Dakar Association football midfielders Senegalese footballers Senegal international footballers Senegalese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Étoile Fréjus Saint-Raphaël players AS Monaco FC players AJ Auxerre players Portsmouth F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Senegalese expatriates in England Scottish Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players Football clubs in France Yonne AJ Auxerre Association football clubs established in 1905 1905 establishments in France Sport in Burgundy 1922 establishments in the United Kingdom BBC News BBC television news programmes BBC World News programmes Multilingual news services Television news in the United Kingdom Operational Divisions BBC Peabody Award winners International Emmy Awards Current Affairs & News winners Monaco Capitals in Europe City-states Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Massalian colonies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Port cities of the Mediterranean Sea Principalities Romance countries and territories States and territories established in 1297 Western Europe Southern Europe Military Military terminology Defense Government occupations Local government Legal professions Prosecution Criminal law Prosecutors Law enforcement Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology PlayStation 3 2000s toys 2006 introductions 2010s toys Backward-compatible video game consoles Blu-ray Disc Cell BE architecture Home video game consoles PlayStation (brand) Regionless game consoles Seventh-generation video game consoles Sony consoles Association football executives Association football terminology Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Barristers and advocates Common law Law in the United Kingdom Legal professions English prosecutors Members of the Inner Temple British barristers Alumni of St Edmund Hall, Oxford 1953 births British Queen's Counsel Members of Matrix Chambers People educated at Bishop Wordsworth's School People from Salisbury People from Windsor, Berkshire Place of birth missing (living people) Liberal Democrat life peers Living people People educated at Prior Park College Wardens of Wadham College, Oxford 1988 births Living people People from Beccles English footballers England youth international footballers English people of Scottish descent Association football forwards Norwich City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scotland international footballers HM Revenue and Customs Customs services Government agencies established in 2005 National law enforcement agencies of the United Kingdom Non-ministerial departments of the United Kingdom Government Revenue services Taxation in the United Kingdom 2005 establishments in the United Kingdom Branches of sociology (interdisciplinary) Social psychology Criminology Victimology Sociology of law Crime Criminal law Criminology Morality Sin Vices 1998 singles Robbie Williams songs Pop ballads 1990s ballads Songs written by Guy Chambers 1998 songs Songs written by Robbie Williams Song recordings produced by Steve Power Song recordings produced by Guy Chambers Chrysalis Records singles Evidence law Philosophy of law 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories UEFA Euro 2016 2015–16 in UEFA football 2015–16 in French football UEFA European Championship tournaments Scheduled association football competitions International association football competitions hosted by France Iceland Countries in Europe Former Danish colonies Former Norwegian colonies Germanic countries and territories Island countries Islands of Iceland Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe Republics States and territories established in 1944 Western Europe Iceland national football team European national association football teams Football in Iceland National sports teams of Iceland Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Shrewsbury English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Wales Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union United Kingdom Great Britain Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams  2010 FIFA World Cup Daylight saving time in the United Kingdom 1950 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by Brazil North American national association football teams United States men's national soccer team United States Soccer Federation 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Reykjavík Icelandic footballers Icelandic expatriate footballers Iceland international footballers Fylkir players IFK Göteborg players Allsvenskan players Expatriate footballers in Sweden F.C. Copenhagen players Danish Superliga players Expatriate footballers in Denmark FC Krasnodar players Expatriate footballers in Russia Russian Football Premier League players Association football central defenders 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Reykjavík Icelandic footballers Iceland international footballers Icelandic expatriate footballers Association football forwards Knattspyrnufélagið Víkingur players AZ Alkmaar players AFC Ajax players Jong Ajax players FC Nantes players Eredivisie players Eerste Divisie players Ligue 1 players Icelandic expatriates in the Netherlands Icelandic expatriates in France Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in France Competition Sports terminology UEFA Euro 2012 UEFA European Championship Finals Spain national football team matches Italy national football team matches Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Sport in Kiev Italy–Spain relations 21st century in Kiev Stratovarius albums 1989 debut albums Columbia Records albums 1993 births Association football forwards English footballers English people of Irish descent England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Footballers from Greater London Leicester City F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Living people Millwall F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players People from Chingford Premier League players The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players 1996 births Living people People from Milton Keynes English people of Nigerian descent English footballers Black English sportspeople England youth international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena 1947 births Alumni of the University of York BBC executives English male journalists Living people Chancellors of the University of York Brentford F.C. directors and chairmen Manchester United F.C. directors and chairmen Labour Party (UK) people People from Hayes, Hillingdon International Emmy Directorate Award Sportspeople from Yorkshire France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries Association football terminology 1994 births Living people Sportspeople from Kingston, Jamaica People from Wembley England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English footballers Association football wingers Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent Jamaican emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People acquitted of assault Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1997 births Living people People from Wythenshawe Sportspeople from Manchester Footballers from Greater Manchester English footballers England youth international footballers Association football forwards Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Black English sportspeople 1989 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players English Christians Black British sportspeople Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Living people Nice Communes of Alpes-Maritimes Prefectures in France Massalian colonies Brazil Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Portuguese colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Portuguese-speaking countries and territories Romance countries and territories States and territories established in 1822 BRICS nations E7 nations Association football terminology Cricket terminology Sports terminology Tennis terminology Costa Rica Countries in the Caribbean Countries in Central America Former Spanish colonies Liberal democracies Republics Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1821 Member states of the United Nations Athletics (track and field) venues in France 1998 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup stadiums Football venues in France National stadiums Multi-purpose stadiums in France Rugby World Cup stadiums Rugby union stadiums in France Sports venues in Seine-Saint-Denis Sports venues in Paris Stade Français Paris France national football team UEFA Euro 2016 stadiums Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match Saint-Denis, Seine-Saint-Denis November 2015 Paris attacks Belgium national football team 1904 establishments in Belgium Articles containing video clips European national association football teams Football in Belgium National sports teams of Belgium Belgium at the Olympics 1936 establishments in the United Kingdom BBC television channels in the United Kingdom English-language television stations in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1936 Television channels in the United Kingdom Anti-aircraft warfare Military aviation Warfare by type Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions