 Venezuela Countries in the Caribbean Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations Member states of OPEC Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1811 International baseball Governing bodies of baseball International sports federations World Baseball Classic International sports bodies based in Switzerland IOC-recognised international federations Sports organisations established in 1938 Organisations based in Lausanne Articles containing video clips Netherlands Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Kingdom of the Netherlands Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Western Europe Hong Kong Cities in China Special administrative regions of China Chinese-speaking countries and territories English-speaking countries and territories Former colonies in Asia Former British colonies Independent cities Metropolitan areas of China Pearl River Delta Populated coastal places in Hong Kong Populated places established in 1842 Port cities and towns in China South China South China Sea States and territories established in 1997 Articles containing video clips City-states Women's Baseball World Cup International baseball competitions Recurring sporting events established in 2004 Military vehicles of Venezuela Military trucks Military light utility vehicles Sport utility vehicles Full-size sport utility vehicles Baseball positions Baseball terminology Baseball rules Softball 1920 births 2003 deaths Alijadores de Tampico players Azules de Veracruz players Caribbean Baseball Hall of Fame inductees Caribbean Series players Chicago White Sox players Diablos Rojos del México players Major League Baseball third basemen Major League Baseball players from Cuba Mexican League baseball players Minor league baseball managers Montreal Royals players Negro league baseball players New York Cubans players Piratas de Campeche players Plataneros de Tabasco players San Diego Padres (minor league) players Syracuse Chiefs players Toronto Maple Leafs (International League) players Tuneros de San Luis Potosí players Crime Gun politics Violence Conflict in society Ethics Crime Dispute resolution Violence Human behavior Latin America Country classifications Cultural spheres of influence Latin American studies Regions of the Americas World Digital Library related Australia Member states of the United Nations G20 nations English-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Canada 1867 establishments in Canada English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies Federal monarchies Former French colonies French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1867 Taiwan Chinese-speaking countries and territories East Asian countries Island countries Liberal democracies Northeast Asian countries Republic of China States and territories established in 1912 Unrecognized or largely unrecognized states Taiwan placenames originating from Formosan languages Articles containing video clips Republics Cuba Communist states Countries in the Caribbean Eastern Bloc Former Spanish colonies Greater Antilles Gulf of Mexico Island countries Latin America Member states of the United Nations Republics One-party states Socialist states Spanish Caribbean Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1902 Small Island Developing States East Asian countries G20 nations G8 nations G7 nations Island countries Japan Liberal democracies Member states of the United Nations Northeast Asian countries States and territories established in the 7th century BC 660 BC Puerto Rico Caribbean islands of the United States Dependent territories in North America English-speaking countries and territories Former colonies in North America Former Spanish colonies Greater Antilles Insular areas of the United States Associated states Islands of Puerto Rico Latin America New Spain Spanish Caribbean Spanish colonization of the Americas Spanish-speaking countries and territories Spanish West Indies States and territories established in 1898 Articles containing video clips 1493 establishments in the Spanish West Indies 1898 disestablishments in the Spanish West Indies Small Island Developing States Korea South Korea East Asian countries G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the United Nations Northeast Asian countries Republics Korean-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1948 United States 1776 establishments in the United States English-speaking countries and territories Federal constitutional republics Former British colonies Former confederations G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1776 Superpowers FIVB Volleyball World League 2010 in volleyball International volleyball competitions hosted by Argentina Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange 1983 establishments in the United States AT&T Bell System Companies based in Dallas, Texas Companies established in 1983 Internet service providers of the United States Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Tier 1 networks Telecommunications companies of the United States American brands Scottish Football Association Football governing bodies in Scotland UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1873 1873 establishments in Scotland Organisations based in Glasgow Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1985 births Living people People from Ballymena Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland youth international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Aston Villa F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Premier League players Scottish Premier League players People educated at Ballymena Academy 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Association football goalkeepers Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Hull City A.F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players Süper Lig players Premier League players Scottish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Turkey Scottish expatriates in Turkey People educated at Forrester High School 1987 births Living people Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Expatriate association footballers from Northern Ireland Burnley F.C. players Darlington F.C. players Rangers F.C. players FC Sion players U.S. Città di Palermo players Norwich City F.C. players Çaykur Rizespor footballers The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Swiss Super League players Serie B players Süper Lig players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Switzerland Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Turkey Association football forwards People educated at Devenish College People from Enniskillen British expatriates in Switzerland British expatriates in Italy British expatriates in Turkey 1991 births Living people Scottish footballers Association football midfielders Rangers F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish Premier League players The Football League players People educated at Marr College People from Troon Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Bankruptcy Corporate law Insolvency Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff 1986 births Association football forwards Kilmarnock F.C. players Living people People from East Ayrshire Rangers F.C. players Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish people of Welsh descent Scottish people of English descent Everton F.C. players Premier League players Norwich City F.C. players 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Association football defenders Association football utility players Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Hibernian F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scottish Premier League players People educated at Lasswade High School Centre Norwich City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Lothian Thistle Hutchison Vale F.C. players 1989 births Living people People from Hounslow Sportspeople from London English footballers England youth international footballers Nigerian footballers Nigeria international footballers Association football wingers Birmingham City F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Premier League players English people of Nigerian descent Black English sportspeople 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from West Lothian Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Rangers F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Credit Debt Judicial remedies Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Association football fullbacks Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players Scottish Professional Football League players Heart of Midlothian F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland youth international footballers Scotland B international footballers People educated at Forrester High School English-speaking countries and territories History of Ireland Home rule in the United Kingdom Island countries Northern Ireland NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United Kingdom States and territories established in 1921 United Kingdom Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1985 births Living people Cowdenbeath F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players Scottish Football League players Scottish Premier League players Arniston Rangers F.C. players Scottish Junior Football Association players Sportspeople from Edinburgh Association football defenders Scottish footballers Scottish Professional Football League players Rangers F.C. players Hibernian F.C. players 1907 establishments in the United Kingdom Association football trade unions English football organisations Trade unions established in 1907 Trade unions in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Manchester Rangers F.C. Football leagues in Scotland Football league systems in Europe Raith Rovers F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Kirkcaldy 1883 establishments in Scotland Sport in Fife Scottish Football League teams Association football clubs established in 1883 Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish League Cup winners Falkirk F.C. Sport in Falkirk Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1876 1876 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Employment compensation Labor economics National accounts Occupations Management Employment Personal development Labour law Labour relations Social programs Employment compensation Working conditions Working time United Kingdom labour law Statutory Instruments of the United Kingdom 2006 in British law 2006 in labour relations FIFA Association football governing bodies International sports federations IOC-recognised international federations International sports bodies based in Switzerland Organisations based in Zürich Sports organisations established in 1904 Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England R.S.C. Anderlecht Association football clubs established in 1908 1908 establishments in Belgium Multi-sport clubs in Belgium Football clubs in Belgium Anderlecht 1948 births 2010 deaths English football chairmen and investors German expatriates in Switzerland Southampton F.C. directors and chairmen Swiss businesspeople People from Biberach (district) Canadian Hockey League trophies and awards Ice hockey tournaments in Canada Memorial Cup 1919 establishments in Canada Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Glasgow Council areas of Scotland Districts of Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Populated places established in the 6th century Port cities and towns in Scotland Forms of government Government Government institutions Political terminology Taxation Basic financial concepts Finance Public finance Insolvency law of the United Kingdom Business law United Kingdom company law