 Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1963 births Association football defenders Bristol City F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Drumchapel Amateur F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Hamilton Academical F.C. players La Liga managers Labour Party (UK) people Living people Manchester United F.C. managers Premier League managers Real Sociedad managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Scottish Christians Scottish expatriate football managers Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players UEFA Pro Licence holders 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues  1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1963 births Living people People from Setúbal Portuguese footballers Association football midfielders Primeira Liga players Rio Ave F.C. players C.F. Os Belenenses players Portuguese football managers Primeira Liga managers S.L. Benfica managers U.D. Leiria managers FC Porto managers Premier League managers Chelsea F.C. managers Serie A managers Inter Milan managers La Liga managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Golden Globes (Portugal) winners UEFA Cup winning managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Technical University of Lisbon alumni Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Spain Portuguese expatriate football managers Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Italy Portuguese expatriates in Spain Portuguese Roman Catholics Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology English footballers English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain England international footballers England B international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Liverpool F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers FIFA 100 European Footballer of the Year winners World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners La Liga players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners English Football Hall of Fame inductees People from Flintshire Sportspeople from Chester 1979 births Living people England youth international footballers English expatriates in Spain FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Moscow Moscow Governorate 1147 establishments in Russia Capitals in Europe Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners A-League Football Federation Australia Top level football leagues in Asia Summer association football leagues Fox Sports (Australia) Soccer leagues in Australia Professional sports leagues in Australia 2004 establishments in Australia Sports leagues established in 2004 UEFA Cup Winners' Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1960 Recurring events disestablished in 1999 Defunct UEFA club competitions FA Cup Finals FA Cup Everton F.C. 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Football League venues Premier League venues Defunct baseball venues Sports venues in Liverpool Visitor attractions in Liverpool Sports venues completed in 1892 Hierarchy Patterns Structure Political culture BBC Year of birth missing (living people) Living people Alumni of King's College London British sports journalists BBC sports presenters and reporters English public relations people British Prime Minister's Office Ministerial offices in the United Kingdom Political history of the United Kingdom Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom United Kingdom nuclear command and control 1966 births 20th-century Protestants 21st-century Protestants Alumni of Brasenose College, Oxford British monarchists Carlton Television Christians of Jewish descent Conservative Party (UK) MPs Conservative Party Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom David Cameron English Anglicans English people of German descent English people of German-Jewish descent English people of Scottish descent English people of Welsh descent ITV people Leaders of the Conservative Party (UK) Leaders of the Opposition (United Kingdom) Living people Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for English constituencies Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom People educated at Eton College People educated at Heatherdown School People from West Berkshire (district) Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom Recipients of the Order of Abdulaziz al Saud UK MPs 2001–05 UK MPs 2005–10 UK MPs 2010–15 UK MPs 2015–20 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 2009 singles 2010 singles Drake (rapper) songs Lil Wayne songs Lloyd (singer) songs Nicki Minaj songs Billboard Rap Songs number-one singles Cash Money Records singles Tyga songs Song recordings produced by Kane Beatz Songs written by Nicki Minaj Songs written by Lil Wayne Songs written by Drake (rapper) Songs written by Sean Garrett Dirty rap songs Songs written by Tyga 2001 singles Steps (group) songs Pop ballads Jive Records singles 1937 births Living people People educated at Bedlingtonshire Community High School People from Ashington Royal Army Ordnance Corps soldiers English footballers England international footballers England under-23 international footballers Manchester United F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players English expatriate footballers Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Waterford United F.C. players English football managers Preston North End F.C. managers Expatriate soccer players in Australia Expatriate soccer players in South Africa Arcadia Shepherds F.C. players Bangor City F.C. players Newcastle KB United players Blacktown City FC players The Football League players League of Ireland players European Footballer of the Year winners FIFA Century Club English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 Laureus World Sports Awards winners 1958 FIFA World Cup players 1962 FIFA World Cup players 1966 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA Euro 1968 players 1970 FIFA World Cup players Football players and officials awarded knighthoods Knights Bachelor Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Recipients of the Order of the Rising Sun, 4th class Survivors of aviation accidents or incidents English autobiographers Wigan Athletic F.C. managers The Football League representative players Manchester United F.C. F.C. United of Manchester 1957 births Living people English chief executives People from Reading, Berkshire Manchester United F.C. directors and chairmen Alumni of the University of Birmingham Members of the UEFA Executive Committee FIFA officials Year of birth missing (living people) Living people American businesspeople American Jews American people of Lithuanian-Jewish descent American soccer chairmen and investors American University alumni Jewish American sportspeople Manchester United F.C. directors and chairmen People from Rochester, New York Tampa Bay Buccaneers executives Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Manchester United F.C. Sport in Manchester Sport in Trafford Association football training grounds Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Cricket terminology First-class cricket Sources of knowledge Philosophy of science Concepts in metaphysics Perception Consciousness Honor Ethics Social status Warrior code Virtue Scottish essayists Scottish historians Scottish librarians Scottish philosophers Scottish clergy British people of the War of the Austrian Succession Scottish soldiers Alumni of the University of St Andrews Academics of the University of Edinburgh People from Perth and Kinross 1723 births 1816 deaths Members of the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh Ministers of the Church of Scotland Alumni of the University of Edinburgh Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences Scottish military chaplains Queen's Park F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1867 Football clubs in Glasgow 1867 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football Association founder members Scottish Professional Football League teams Amateur sport in the United Kingdom Amateur association football teams Apprenticeship Beginners and newcomers Clyde F.C. Cumbernauld Association football clubs established in 1877 Football clubs in Scotland Football clubs in Glasgow Sport in North Lanarkshire Sport in South Lanarkshire 1877 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Ayr United F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Sport in Ayr Association football clubs established in 1910 1910 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams South of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams East Stirlingshire F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Sport in Falkirk Association football clubs established in 1881 1881 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Association football clubs established in 1877 Football clubs in Scotland St Mirren F.C. Scottish Premier League teams 1877 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Paisley Sport in Renfrewshire Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Scottish Football League First Division Scottish Football League Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1975 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Aberdeen F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1903 Sport in Aberdeen United Soccer Association imported teams Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish Premier League teams Former Highland Football League teams 1903 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Scottish Football Association Football governing bodies in Scotland UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1873 1873 establishments in Scotland Organisations based in Glasgow Scottish Football League Scottish League Cup Football cup competitions in Scotland National association football league cups Scottish Professional Football League 1946 establishments in Scotland Aberdeen F.C. Football venues in Scotland Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. Sports venues in Aberdeen Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Scottish Professional Football League venues Scotland national football team venues Sports venues completed in 1899 1899 establishments in Scotland British association football commentators English footballers Aston Villa F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players English football managers Kettering Town F.C. managers Cambridge United F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Manchester United F.C. managers Atlético Madrid managers Aston Villa F.C. managers Coventry City F.C. managers Sheffield Wednesday F.C. managers Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Premier League managers The Guardian journalists The Football League players Sportspeople from Liverpool Celebrity Big Brother (UK) contestants 1939 births Living people Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Scotland national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Scotland 1872 establishments in Scotland FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries North American national association football teams Mexico national football team National sports teams of Mexico 2002 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by South Korea International association football competitions hosted by Japan Japan–South Korea relations 2002 in South Korean sport 2002 in Japanese football 2002 in South Korean football 1922 births 1982 FIFA World Cup managers 1985 deaths Albion Rovers F.C. players Blantyre Victoria F.C. players Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. players Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Dunfermline Athletic F.C. managers Hibernian F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers Llanelli A.F.C. players Scotland national football team managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Sportspeople from Hamilton, South Lanarkshire Dundee United F.C. wartime guest players Nigeria national football team African national association football teams National sports teams of Nigeria 2009–10 UEFA Champions League UEFA Champions League group stages Blackpool F.C. Football clubs in England Sport in Blackpool Association football clubs established in 1887 The Football League clubs Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners 1887 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire 1967 births Living people People from Ilford Black English sportspeople Association football midfielders English footballers English people of Barbadian descent English people of Trinidad and Tobago descent England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Inter Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Macclesfield Town F.C. players The Football League players The Football League managers Premier League players Serie A players Macclesfield Town F.C. managers Milton Keynes Dons F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Notts County F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players Blackpool F.C. managers Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1966 FIFA World Cup 1966–67 in English football FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by England Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 Swansea Cities in Wales Counties of Wales Glamorgan Populated coastal places in Wales Populated places established in the 12th century Port cities and towns in Wales Principal areas of Wales Seaside resorts in Wales Swansea Bay Rugby league competitions in the United Kingdom Rugby Football League 1964 births Living people Association football midfielders Dutch football managers UEFA Pro Licence holders Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Al Sadd SC managers Al-Gharafa Sports Club managers FC Anzhi Makhachkala managers Fulham F.C. non-playing staff Fulham F.C. managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Qatar Expatriate football managers in Russia Expatriate football managers in England People from Boxmeer 1999 American television series debuts 2012 American television series endings 1990s American television series 2000s American television series 2010s American television series American news television series CBS News CBS network shows English-language television programming Television series by CBS Television Studios Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1947 births Living people A.F.C. Bournemouth managers A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football midfielders Brentford F.C. players English autobiographers English footballers English football managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players People from Poplar, London Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Seattle Sounders (1974–83) players Southampton F.C. managers Sportspeople from London The Football League managers The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. players Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Tax evasion Living people 1962 births English Jews English businesspeople Tottenham Hotspur F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham  Fictional characters introduced in 1981 Action figures Comics characters introduced in 1981 Extraterrestrial superheroes Film superheroes Fictional characters with superhuman strength Fictional martial artists Fictional princes Fictional twins Masters of the Universe Heroic Warriors 1980s toys Fictional swordsmen Fictional shapeshifters The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 1970 births Living people People from Schaffhausen Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers S.S. Lazio players Chelsea F.C. players Premier League players Italian football managers Milton Keynes Dons F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate footballers in England FC Schalke 04 managers Bundesliga managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FC Schaffhausen players FC Zürich players FC Aarau players Serie A players Swiss Super League players Swiss people of Italian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League winning managers Italian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Italian expatriates in Germany Association football positions Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 Golf Precision sports Ball and bat games Sports originating in Scotland Leisure activities Summer Olympic sports Scottish games 2014 albums Hip hop albums by American artists Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips  UEFA Cup winning managers 1954 births Living people Spanish footballers Elche CF footballers CD Eldense footballers Alicante CF footballers CD Alcoyano footballers Spanish football managers Elche CF Ilicitano managers CD Alcoyano managers Levante UD managers CD Logroñés managers FC Barcelona B managers Málaga CF managers Rayo Vallecano managers Real Betis managers RCD Espanyol managers Sevilla FC managers UE Lleida managers La Liga managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Premier League managers Real Madrid C.F. managers PFC CSKA Moscow managers Russian Football Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Russia FC Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk managers Ukrainian Premier League managers Linares CF players Spanish expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Ukraine Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England Portsmouth F.C. Association football clubs established in 1898 Football clubs in England Sport in Portsmouth Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Southern Football League clubs Football clubs in Hampshire 1898 establishments in England Fan-owned English League football clubs  2003–04 in English football Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology 1994–95 in European football UEFA Cup Winners' Cup Football League Fourth Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe English football trophies and awards Football managers in England Coaching awards Annual events in England Annual sporting events in the United Kingdom London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports FA Cup Finals FA Cup FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners Bookmakers Gambling terminology Organized crime activity 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1963 births Association football defenders Bristol City F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Drumchapel Amateur F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Hamilton Academical F.C. players La Liga managers Labour Party (UK) people Living people Manchester United F.C. managers Premier League managers Real Sociedad managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Scottish Christians Scottish expatriate football managers Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players UEFA Pro Licence holders Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs 1973 births Living people Association football midfielders Catalan footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate football managers in England People from Noguera (comarca) Spanish footballers Spanish football managers Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom CF Balaguer footballers Real Zaragoza players Motherwell F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Walsall F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. managers Everton F.C. managers La Liga players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Spanish expatriate football managers Expatriate footballers in Wales Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Scotland Spanish expatriates in Wales Expatriate football managers in Wales 1985 births Living people Croatian footballers Croatia under-21 international footballers Croatia international footballers GNK Dinamo Zagreb players NK Inter Zaprešić players HŠK Zrinjski Mostar players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Croatian Roman Catholics Sportspeople from Zadar Croatian First Football League players Premier League players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Croatian expatriate footballers Croatian expatriates in the United Kingdom Croatian expatriates in Spain Croatia youth international footballers 1989 births Living people Footballers from Cardiff Welsh expatriate footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Association football utility players Southampton F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Premier League players The Football League players La Liga players BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year People educated at Whitchurch High School 1948 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues Sport in Haringey Football venues in London Tottenham Hotspur F.C. Premier League venues Sports venues completed in 1898 Football League venues