 Ukraine 1991 establishments in Ukraine Areas of traditional spread of Ukrainians and Ukrainian language Countries in Europe Eastern Europe Kievan Rus' Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Ukrainian-speaking countries and territories Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1975 births Living people Hungarian football referees 2010 FIFA World Cup referees UEFA Champions League referees People from Tatabánya Association football equipment Sports technology UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Germany Central Europe Countries in Europe Federal republics G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1871 Western Europe Articles containing video clips Portugal Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Portuguese-speaking countries and territories Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe Western Europe Southwestern Europe Croatia Balkans Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Croatian-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Member states of NATO Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Southeastern Europe Central Europe FIFA Association football governing bodies International sports federations IOC-recognised international federations International sports bodies based in Switzerland Organisations based in Zürich Sports organisations established in 1904 1936 births Living people Presidents of FIFA Commanders Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany English Football Hall of Fame inductees International Olympic Committee members People from Visp (district) Recipients of the Olympic Order Recipients of the Order of Francisco de Miranda Recipients of the Order of the Companions of O. R. Tambo Recipients of the Order of the Rising Sun, 1st class Swiss public relations people University of Lausanne alumni Swiss sportspeople Swiss Roman Catholics Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Laws of association football Association football terminology Poland Central Europe Eastern Europe Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1918 Capitals in Europe Cities and towns in Masovian Voivodeship City counties of Poland Silver Crosses of the Virtuti Militari Warsaw Governorate Warsaw World Heritage Sites in Poland UEFA Euro 2012 England at UEFA Euro 2012 France at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Ukrainian football 2012 in Swedish football Donetsk Cities in Donetsk Oblast Special economic zones Populated places established in 1869 Mining cities and regions in Ukraine Articles containing video clips Cities of regional significance in Ukraine Cities and towns of Ukraine built in the Russian Empire 1869 establishments in Russia Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Ukraine national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Ukraine 1983 births Living people Association football forwards Association football midfielders Expatriate footballers in Ukraine Expatriate footballers in Russia Naturalized citizens of Ukraine Sportspeople from Belgrade Serbian emigrants to Ukraine Serbian footballers Ukrainian footballers Ukraine international footballers Ukrainian expatriate footballers FK Zvezdara players FK Železnik players FK Radnički Beograd players FK Voždovac players FC Metalist Kharkiv players FC Volyn Lutsk players FC Shakhtar Donetsk players FC Rubin Kazan players Ukrainian Premier League players Russian Football Premier League players Serbian SuperLiga players Expatriate footballers in Qatar Ukrainian expatriates in Russia Ukrainian expatriates in Qatar Al Rayyan SC players UEFA Euro 2012 players Ukrainian Premier League top scorers 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Shrewsbury English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1980 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football central defenders Chelsea F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Living people Nottingham Forest F.C. players People acquitted of crimes People from Barking Premier League players Senrab F.C. players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Hungary Countries in Europe Republics Member states of the European Union Member states of the Council of Europe Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of NATO Member states of the United Nations Central Europe Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Tournament systems Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners Newspapers published in Russia Russian-language newspapers Sports newspapers Publications established in 1991 Sports media in Russia 1991 establishments in Russia Graphical control elements World Wide Web Hypertext Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Sports governing bodies 1955 births 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players AS Nancy players AS Saint-Étienne players Association football midfielders Dual internationalists (football) English Football Hall of Fame inductees European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Italy FIFA 100 Footballers at the 1976 Summer Olympics France international footballers France national football team managers France under-21 international footballers French expatriate footballers French footballers French football managers French people of Italian descent French sports executives and administrators Juventus F.C. players Kuwait international footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Living people Officiers of the Légion d'honneur Officiers of the Ordre national du Mérite Olympic footballers of France Olympic cauldron lighters People from Meurthe-et-Moselle People of Piedmontese descent Presidents of UEFA Recipients of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin Serie A players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA Euro 1984 players UEFA Euro 1992 managers World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Spain national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Spain UEFA European Championship-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries 1985 births Living people People from the Province of Seville Spanish Romani people People of Spanish-Romani descent Romani sportspeople Spanish footballers Andalusian footballers Association football wingers La Liga players Segunda División B players Sevilla Atlético players Sevilla FC players Premier League players Manchester City F.C. players Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England 1985 births Living people People from Funchal Portuguese footballers Madeiran footballers Association football forwards Association football wingers Primeira Liga players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Portugal youth international footballers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers Portuguese Roman Catholics UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Portugal Golden Globes (Portugal) winners Grand Officers of the Order of Prince Henry First Division/Premier League top scorers Pichichi Trophy winners European Footballer of the Year winners FIFA World Player of the Year winners World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners FIFA Century Club Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Portuguese male models Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Spain Netherlands Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Kingdom of the Netherlands Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Western Europe Greece Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Southeastern Europe States and territories established in 1821 Czech Republic Countries in Europe Czech-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1993 Central Europe British inventions Companies based in Hampshire Cricket equipment Cricket terminology Gaelic games terminology Sony subsidiaries Sports technology Tennis equipment Association football equipment Sports technology Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe 1982 births Living people People from Bari Italian footballers Association football forwards Serie A players F.C. Bari 1908 players A.S. Roma players U.C. Sampdoria players A.C. Milan players Inter Milan players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Parma F.C. players 1979 births Association football midfielders Brescia Calcio players Inter Milan players Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Living people A.C. Milan players Juventus F.C. players New York City FC players Reggina Calcio players Olympic footballers of Italy Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Olympic medalists in football People from the Province of Brescia Serie A players Serie B players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Officers of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Italian expatriates in the United States Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italian Roman Catholics Parma F.C. players Juventus F.C. players FIFA 100 Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players Association football goalkeepers Serie A players Serie B players FIFA World Cup-winning players People from Carrara 1978 births Living people FIFA Century Club 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1939 births Living people 1962 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.C. Milan players ACF Fiorentina managers A.S. Varese 1910 players Association football defenders Cagliari Calcio managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Inter Milan managers FC Bayern Munich managers Expatriate football managers in Austria FC Red Bull Salzburg managers Footballers at the 1960 Summer Olympics Bundesliga managers Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers Italy national football team managers Juventus F.C. managers Olympic footballers of Italy People from the Province of Milan Expatriate football managers in Portugal S.L. Benfica managers Primeira Liga managers Expatriate football managers in the Republic of Ireland Republic of Ireland national football team managers Serie A players Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 2004 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers VfB Stuttgart managers Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in Ireland UEFA Cup winning managers Italian Roman Catholics 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 1979 births Living people Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Irish expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in Australia Irish expatriates in Australia Melbourne City FC players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players A-League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club Leicester Celtic A.F.C. players 1977 births Living people A.S. Varese 1910 players Empoli F.C. players Association football forwards Italian footballers Italy international footballers Sportspeople from Naples Serie A players Serie B players Udinese Calcio players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Watford F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Irish expatriates in England Stella Maris F.C. players 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) 2012–13 in European football 2013–14 in European football Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams Croatia Balkans Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Croatian-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Member states of NATO Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Southeastern Europe Central Europe UEFA Euro 2012 Republic of Ireland at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Croatian football England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 2013 albums Basshunter albums 1976 births Living people People from Lifford Sportspeople from County Donegal Association football goalkeepers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland FIFA Century Club Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Celtic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players 1979 births Living people People from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Home Farm F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1994 FIFA World Cup 1994 in association football FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by the United States 1994 in American soccer Sports in Stanford, California 1984 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Bury F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Cherry Orchard F.C. players Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Peterborough United F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Orlando City SC players Colorado Rapids players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Slang English-language idioms Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills