 S.S.C. Napoli Association football clubs established in 1926 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Campania Football clubs in Italy Italian football First Division clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Naples 1926 establishments in Italy 1977 births Living people Italian footballers F.C. Casertana players Ternana Calcio players U.S. Catanzaro 1929 players S.S.C. Napoli players Serie A players Serie B players Match fixing Organized crime activity Sports law Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin 1981 births Living people Sportspeople from Naples Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Serie A players Serie B players S.S.C. Napoli players Parma F.C. players Hellas Verona F.C. players U.S. Sassuolo Calcio players Association football central defenders 1976 births Living people People from Bovolone Italian footballers A.C. Chievo Verona players Hellas Verona F.C. players U.C. Sampdoria players A.C. Siena players S.S.C. Napoli players Serie A players Serie B players 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from Naples Italian footballers Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in the United Arab Emirates Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Association football central defenders Serie A players La Liga players S.S.C. Napoli players Parma F.C. players Inter Milan players Juventus F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Al Ahli Club (Dubai) players Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning captains FIFA World Cup-winning players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players European Footballer of the Year winners FIFA World Player of the Year winners FIFA Century Club World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners Italian football managers Italian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Expatriate football managers in China Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao F.C. managers UAE Arabian Gulf League players Expatriate football managers in Saudi Arabia Al-Nassr FC managers Italian expatriates in China Italian expatriates in the United Arab Emirates Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Football venues in Italy Sport in Naples S.S.C. Napoli 1990 FIFA World Cup stadiums Sports venues completed in 1959 1960 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues Multi-purpose stadiums in Italy UEFA Euro 1968 stadiums Sports venues in Naples UEFA Euro 1980 stadiums 2010–11 in Italian football 2011–12 in Italian football History of football in Italy Sports betting scandals Association football controversies Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology U.C. Sampdoria 1946 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1946 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Liguria Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Sport in Genoa S.S. Lazio Football clubs in Italy Sports clubs established in 1900 Association football clubs established in 1900 Publicly traded sports companies Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Sport in Rome Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners Multi-sport clubs in Italy 1900 establishments in Italy Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology 2010 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup squads 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1978 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers FIFA Century Club Manchester City F.C. players People educated at Brentwood School (Essex) People from Romford Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players West Ham United F.C. players Conservative Party (UK) people Members of the Order of the British Empire New York City FC players English expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players 1989 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players English Christians Black British sportspeople Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Living people 1979 births Living people People from Galway (city) Association football players from County Galway Association football goalkeepers Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Galway United F.C. (1937–2011) players Barry Town F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Derry City F.C. players Barnet F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Millwall F.C. players League of Ireland players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Belvedere F.C. players 1989 births Living people People from Stanmore English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Southampton F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players English children's writers 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1980 births Living people People from Stepney English footballers Association football fullbacks 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players A.S. Roma players LA Galaxy players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriates in Italy Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English people of Barbadian descent Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team 1988 births Association football defenders Blackpool F.C. players Everton F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Gaelic football backs Gaelic footballers who switched code Killybegs Gaelic footballers League of Ireland players Living people Premier League players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Sligo Rovers F.C. players Sportspeople from County Donegal The Football League players 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football terminology Rugby World Cup stadiums Ballsbridge Buildings and structures demolished in 2007 Ireland national football team (1882–1950) Republic of Ireland national football team home stadiums Ireland national rugby union team Leinster Rugby Defunct association football venues in the Republic of Ireland Lansdowne Football Club Wanderers F.C. (rugby union) Sports venues in Dublin (city) Sports venues completed in 1872 Association football venues in County Dublin 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from County Tipperary Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football forwards Cork City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Southampton F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Tipperary hurlers Gortnahoe-Glengoole hurlers UEFA Euro 2012 players 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Football venues in England Exeter City F.C. Buildings and structures in Exeter Sports venues in Devon Sports venues completed in 1904 Visitor attractions in Exeter Football League venues 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1993 births Living people Arsenal F.C. players Association football wingers Black English sportspeople England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers English people of Jamaican descent People educated at St John's College (Portsmouth) Sportspeople from Portsmouth Premier League players Southampton F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams Headlands of Dorset Hills of Dorset National Trust properties in Dorset Nature reserves in Dorset Jurassic Coast Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology  1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Shrewsbury English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Nigeria national football team African national association football teams National sports teams of Nigeria Near-Earth object tracking Discoveries by institution Jet Propulsion Laboratory Palomar Observatory 1984 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Bury F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Cherry Orchard F.C. players Football venues in England Sports venues in West Sussex Buildings and structures in Crawley Multi-purpose stadiums in the United Kingdom Crawley Town F.C. Sports venues completed in 1997 Football League venues 1983 births Living people English footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Birmingham City F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Kidderminster Harriers F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players People from Royal Leamington Spa Premier League players Racing Club Warwick F.C. players Southern Football League players Stafford Rangers F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players The Football League players Tiverton Town F.C. players Watford F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Wrexham F.C. players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps 1992 births Living people Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers Footballers from Greater Manchester Manchester United F.C. players People from Chorley People from Clayton-le-Woods Sportspeople from Preston, Lancashire Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports Laws of association football Sports rules and regulations Sports venues by type Association football terminology 1984 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Peterborough United F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Orlando City SC players Colorado Rapids players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate soccer players in the United States 1984 births Living people People from Kirkby English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Wigan Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club