 Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips  Association football terminology Sports terminology    Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles Luton Town F.C. Football clubs in England Association football clubs established in 1885 Football clubs in Bedfordshire Football clubs in Luton The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs 1885 establishments in England National League (English football) 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Association football clubs established in 1879 Football clubs in England Fulham F.C. Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1879 establishments in England Fulham The Football League clubs Articles with hAudio microformats Norwich City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1902 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Norwich Premier League clubs 1902 establishments in England Football clubs in Norfolk Association football clubs established in 1865 Bandy clubs established in 1865 Football clubs in England Nottingham Forest F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football clubs in Nottinghamshire Football League Championship clubs Sport in Nottingham 1865 establishments in England Football clubs in England Leeds United F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1919 Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Championship clubs 1919 establishments in England Sport in Leeds Phoenix clubs (association football) Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. The Football League founder members Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Association football clubs established in 1877 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners United Soccer Association imported teams Sport in Wolverhampton 1877 establishments in England 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Cardiff British capitals Capitals in Europe Cities in Wales Populated coastal places in Wales Counties of Wales Glamorgan Port cities and towns in Wales Principal areas of Wales Welsh county towns Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Articles including recorded pronunciations (Welsh) Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe  Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1962 births Living people People from Hammersmith English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English football managers Wealdstone F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players Player-coaches Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Premier League managers 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Pro Licence holders Members of the Order of the British Empire English Football Hall of Fame inductees People from Harrow, London People from Kenton People from Kingsbury Sportspeople from London Olympic managers of Great Britain England national under-21 football team managers 1957 births Living people People from Sedgefield English footballers Association football wingers Billingham Synthonia F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Cirencester Town F.C. players The Football League players Watford F.C. non-playing staff Southampton F.C. non-playing staff Cheltenham Town F.C. non-playing staff English football managers Forest Green Rovers F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers Kidderminster Harriers F.C. managers National League (English football) managers The Football League managers Association football clubs established in 1885 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Millwall F.C. Southern Football League clubs 1885 establishments in England 1996–97 in English football Chesterfield F.C. Association football clubs established in 1866 The Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners Midland Football League (1889) Football clubs in Derbyshire 1866 establishments in England Leyton Orient F.C. Football clubs in England The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1881 Southern Football League clubs Sport in Waltham Forest 1881 establishments in England Football clubs in London Leyton 1979 establishments in England National League (English football) Football leagues in England Sports leagues established in 1979 Fifth level football leagues in Europe The Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs Peterborough United F.C. Association football clubs established in 1934 1934 establishments in England Football clubs in Cambridgeshire Bury F.C. Association football clubs established in 1885 Football clubs in England The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bury Borough 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England Sport in Shrewsbury Football clubs in Shropshire Shrewsbury Town F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 The Football League clubs 1886 establishments in England 2013–14 in English football National League (English football) Football leagues in England Sports leagues established in 1979 1979 establishments in England 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Association football forwards Rangers F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata Football clubs in England Watford F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1881 Southern Football League clubs 1881 establishments in England Football clubs in Hertfordshire Watford Association football clubs established in 1875 Football clubs in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. Sport in Blackburn The Football League founder members Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1875 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire La Liga seasons 2014–15 La Liga 2014–15 in Spanish football leagues 2014–15 in European association football leagues Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England St Johnstone F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Perth, Scotland Association football clubs established in 1884 Sport in Perth and Kinross Scottish Premier League teams 1884 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Football League Fourth Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe La Liga seasons 2013–14 in Spanish football leagues 2013–14 in European association football leagues Cardiff City F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Football clubs in Cardiff Football clubs in Wales Association football clubs established in 1899 FA Cup winners Welsh Cup winners Southern Football League clubs 1899 establishments in Wales Welsh football clubs in English leagues Blackpool F.C. Football clubs in England Sport in Blackpool Association football clubs established in 1887 The Football League clubs Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners 1887 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps Daylight saving time in the United Kingdom Carlisle United F.C. Football clubs in Cumbria The Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners Association football clubs established in 1904 1904 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Carlisle, Cumbria BBC Sport Sports radio in the United Kingdom Sports television in the United Kingdom BBC Local Radio BBC Radio BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom BBC Television Peabody Award winners Commercial-free television networks Television production companies of the United Kingdom Companies established in 1932 1932 establishments in the United Kingdom Operational Divisions BBC 2009 British television programme debuts 2000s British television series 2010s British television series British sports television series The Football League on television BBC Television programmes BBC Sport UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Derby County F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in England The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1884 Football clubs in Derbyshire FA Cup winners Football League Championship clubs Sport in Derby 1884 establishments in England Bookmakers Gambling terminology Organized crime activity FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Football clubs in England Sheffield United F.C. Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Sheffield Association football clubs established in 1889 Football clubs in South Yorkshire FA Cup winners Sports clubs established in 1889 Football League Championship clubs 1889 establishments in England 1966 births Living people Sportspeople from Sunderland, Tyne and Wear Sportspeople from Derby English footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Nottingham Forest F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Burton Albion F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Southern Football League players Northern Premier League players National League (English football) players UEFA Euro 1992 players English football managers Burton Albion F.C. managers Derby County F.C. managers Sheffield United F.C. managers National League (English football) managers The Football League managers Northern Premier League managers Southern Football League managers Brian Clough English footballers A.F.C. Bournemouth players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Burton Albion F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Wimbledon F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English football managers Burnley F.C. managers Cheltenham Town F.C. managers Sligo Rovers F.C. managers Stoke City F.C. managers Notts County F.C. managers Portsmouth F.C. managers Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Bristol City F.C. managers League of Ireland managers UEFA Pro Licence holders 1964 births Living people Alvechurch F.C. players The Football League managers Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Queens Park Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Hereford United F.C. players National League (English football) players People from Cheltenham Sportspeople from Gloucestershire Bristol City F.C. Football clubs in England The Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs Football clubs in Bristol Association football clubs established in 1897 Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1897 establishments in England Preston North End F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Sport in Preston 1880 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire Portsmouth F.C. Association football clubs established in 1898 Football clubs in England Sport in Portsmouth Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Southern Football League clubs Football clubs in Hampshire 1898 establishments in England Fan-owned English League football clubs 2014–15 in English football European national under-21 association football teams England national youth football team England national under-21 football team Association football clubs established in 1889 National League (English football) Football clubs in Gloucestershire Southern Football League clubs 1889 establishments in England Forest Green Rovers F.C. Veganism 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1973 births Living people People from Porvoo Finnish footballers Finland under-21 international footballers Finland international footballers Finnish football managers Association football central defenders MyPa players Willem II Tilburg players Liverpool F.C. players Bayer 04 Leverkusen players Veikkausliiga players Eredivisie players Premier League players Finnish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Finnish expatriates in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands FIFA Century Club Bundesliga players Bundesliga managers The Football League managers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate football managers in Germany Expatriate football managers in England Finnish expatriates in the United Kingdom Finnish expatriates in Germany Bayer 04 Leverkusen managers Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Finnish expatriates in Switzerland FC Zürich managers Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. The Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs Sport in Brighton and Hove Association football clubs established in 1901 Southern Football League clubs 1901 establishments in England Football clubs in East Sussex Top level football leagues in Europe Bundesliga Professional sports leagues 1963 establishments in West Germany Sports leagues established in 1963 Association football leagues in Germany Football clubs in Germany Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in North Rhine-Westphalia Bayer 04 Leverkusen G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Germany 1904 establishments in Germany Association football terminology Association football transfers Association football terminology Association football transfers 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Kinshasa Association football wingers Association football forwards Watford F.C. players Wealdstone F.C. players Braintree Town F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Isthmian League players Democratic Republic of the Congo emigrants to the United Kingdom Crawley Town F.C. National League (English football) Football clubs in West Sussex Crawley Southern Football League clubs Metropolitan League The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1896 1896 establishments in England Association football transfers 1978 births Living people Sportspeople from Liverpool English footballers Association football forwards Burscough F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Bury F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Waterloo Dock A.F.C. players 1992 births Living people People from Chotěboř Czech footballers Czech Republic international footballers Czech Republic under-21 international footballers Czech Republic youth international footballers Association football forwards FC Vysočina Jihlava players FC Baník Ostrava players Udinese Calcio players Club Brugge KV players Watford F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Czech First League players Serie A players Belgian Pro League players The Football League players Czech expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in England Premier League players 1983 births Living people People from Chatham, Kent English footballers Association football midfielders Sittingbourne F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Lewes F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Crawley Town F.C. players Eastleigh F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Derby Local government in Derbyshire Railway towns in England Unitary authority districts of England County towns in England Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in the East Midlands Local government districts of the East Midlands The Five Boroughs 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English footballers Association football forwards Walsall F.C. players Halesowen Town F.C. players Watford F.C. players Northern Premier League players The Football League players Premier League players Black English sportspeople English criminals English prisoners and detainees English people of Jamaican descent  1989 births English footballers English people of Dominica descent English people of Jamaican descent Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Arsenal F.C. players Everton F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players Kilmarnock F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Association football forwards Black English sportspeople Sportspeople from London Living people Football clubs in England Sport in Rotherham Rotherham United F.C. Association football clubs established in 1925 Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1925 establishments in England Halifax, West Yorkshire Geography of Calderdale Market towns in West Yorkshire Towns in West Yorkshire 1988 births Living people English footballers Footballers from Sheffield Association football forwards Mansfield Town F.C. players Glapwell F.C. players Harrogate Town F.C. players F.C. Halifax Town players Millwall F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Wolverhampton English footballers England semi-pro international footballers Association football forwards Shrewsbury Town F.C. players A.F.C. Telford United players Hinckley United F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Burnley F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Black English sportspeople 1889 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1889 Brentford F.C. Brentford, London Football clubs in England Football clubs in London The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Sport in Hounslow English football club seasons Port Vale F.C. Port Vale F.C. seasons Association football clubs established in 1899 Football clubs in England The Football League clubs Scunthorpe Scunthorpe United F.C. Football clubs in Lincolnshire 1899 establishments in England 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Wolverhampton English footballers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Burton Albion F.C. players Hereford United F.C. players Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Association football forwards 1907–08 in English football Association football clubs established in 1887 Barnsley F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in South Yorkshire Sport in Barnsley FA Cup winners 1887 establishments in England Midland Football League (1889) 1955 births 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players AS Nancy players AS Saint-Étienne players Association football midfielders Dual internationalists (football) English Football Hall of Fame inductees European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Italy FIFA 100 Footballers at the 1976 Summer Olympics France international footballers France national football team managers France under-21 international footballers French expatriate footballers French footballers French football managers French people of Italian descent French sports executives and administrators Juventus F.C. players Kuwait international footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Living people Officiers of the Légion d'honneur Officiers of the Ordre national du Mérite Olympic footballers of France Olympic cauldron lighters People from Meurthe-et-Moselle People of Piedmontese descent Presidents of UEFA Recipients of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin Serie A players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA Euro 1984 players UEFA Euro 1992 managers World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners 1957 births Living people People from the Province of Brescia Italian footballers Italian football managers Atalanta B.C. players Juventus F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Lega Pro players Atalanta B.C. managers Hellas Verona F.C. managers Parma F.C. managers A.S. Roma managers ACF Fiorentina managers Serie A managers U.S. Cremonese players Italy national football team managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers Croatia Balkans Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Croatian-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Member states of NATO Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Southeastern Europe Central Europe 1982 births Living people People from Bari Italian footballers Association football forwards Serie A players F.C. Bari 1908 players A.S. Roma players U.C. Sampdoria players A.C. Milan players Inter Milan players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Parma F.C. players 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy UEFA Euro 2012 Republic of Ireland at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Croatian football UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying 2010–11 in French football France at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Bosnia and Herzegovina football 2010–11 in Bosnia and Herzegovina football 2010–11 in Luxembourgian football 2011–12 in Luxembourgian football 2010–11 in Romanian football 2011–12 in Romanian football 2010–11 in Albanian football 2011–12 in Albanian football 2010 in Belarusian football 2011 in Belarusian football UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations Kiev Capitals in Europe Cities with special status in Ukraine Hero Cities of the Soviet Union Holy cities Kiev Governorate Cossack Hetmanate Kiev Voivodeship Populated places established in the 5th century Rus' settlements Magdeburg rights Places of the Euromaidan 1979 births Association football midfielders Brescia Calcio players Inter Milan players Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Living people A.C. Milan players Juventus F.C. players New York City FC players Reggina Calcio players Olympic footballers of Italy Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Olympic medalists in football People from the Province of Brescia Serie A players Serie B players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Officers of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Italian expatriates in the United States Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Ice hockey rules Ice hockey terminology Rugby league terminology Rugby union terminology 1976 births Living people People from Lifford Sportspeople from County Donegal Association football goalkeepers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland FIFA Century Club Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Celtic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Religion in Italy Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe