 1980 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football central defenders Chelsea F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Living people Nottingham Forest F.C. players People acquitted of crimes People from Barking Premier League players Senrab F.C. players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Association football controversies 2011 controversies Racism in England Racism in sport 2011–12 Premier League Liverpool F.C. 1985 births Living people People from Peckham English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers English Christians Association football central defenders West Ham United F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Saint Lucian descent English people of Irish descent Black English sportspeople Bursaspor footballers Expatriate footballers in Turkey English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Turkey Süper Lig players Race and law Antalyaspor footballers Reading F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom People acquitted of assault Germany national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries National sports teams of Germany Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips 1981 births Living people People from Waterford (city) Sportspeople from County Waterford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Royal Antwerp F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Belgian Pro League players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Belgium Irish expatriates in England Irish expatriates in Belgium UEFA Euro 2012 players Turkish Cup seasons 2014–15 European domestic association football cups UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying 2014–15 in UEFA football 2015–16 in UEFA football UEFA European Championship qualifying UEFA Euro 2016 European national association football teams Poland national football team National sports teams of Poland 1921 establishments in Poland Capitals in Europe Cities and towns in Masovian Voivodeship City counties of Poland Silver Crosses of the Virtuti Militari Warsaw Governorate Warsaw World Heritage Sites in Poland 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe 1990 births Living people Association football midfielders People from Greifswald German footballers German expatriate footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players Bayer 04 Leverkusen players Real Madrid C.F. players Bundesliga players 3. Liga players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in Spain German expatriates in Spain Oil Campaign of World War II Gelsenkirchen Cities in North Rhine-Westphalia Terminology used in multiple sports