 Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy A.C. Siena Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Tuscany Association football clubs established in 1904 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs 1904 establishments in Italy Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin Siena Populated places established in the 1st millennium BC Roman sites of Tuscany World Heritage Sites in Italy 1964 births Living people People from Ascoli Piceno Italian footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1988 Summer Olympics Association football midfielders Italian football managers Serie A players Serie B players U.S. Città di Palermo players ACF Fiorentina players Ascoli Calcio 1898 players Hellas Verona F.C. players Ravenna Calcio players U.S. Alessandria Calcio 1912 players F.B.C. Unione Venezia players F.B.C. Unione Venezia managers A.C. Cesena managers Vicenza Calcio managers Piacenza Calcio 1919 managers A.C. Chievo Verona managers Brescia Calcio managers U.C. Sampdoria managers UEFA Pro Licence holders A.C. Siena managers Serie A managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers U.C. Sampdoria 1946 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1946 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Liguria Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Sport in Genoa 1958 births Living people People from Perugia Italian footballers Italian football managers A.C. Perugia Calcio managers Genoa C.F.C. managers Udinese Calcio managers U.S. Arezzo managers Brescia Calcio managers A.S. Livorno Calcio managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers U.S. Lecce managers A.C. Siena managers Delfino Pescara 1936 managers Serie A managers Sportspeople from Umbria Tuscany NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union Regions of Italy Wine regions of Italy ACF Fiorentina Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Tuscany Association football clubs established in 1926 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners 1926 establishments in Italy 1971 births Living people People from the Province of Frosinone Italian footballers Italian football managers Serie A players Ternana Calcio players A.C. Perugia Calcio players Reggina Calcio players Ravenna Calcio players Empoli F.C. players U.S. Città di Palermo players Ravenna Calcio managers Calcio Catania managers Reggina Calcio managers U.C. Sampdoria managers Serie A managers Ligures 1967 births Living people Sportspeople from Naples Association football central defenders Italian footballers Italy international footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1988 Summer Olympics Juventus F.C. players S.S.C. Napoli players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players Italian football managers Juventus F.C. managers U.C. Sampdoria managers Serie A managers Florence Former capitals of Italy Former national capitals 50s BC establishments 59 BC Religious terminology Salvation Theology S.S.C. Napoli Association football clubs established in 1926 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Campania Football clubs in Italy Italian football First Division clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Naples 1926 establishments in Italy Football venues in Italy 1934 FIFA World Cup stadiums 1990 FIFA World Cup stadiums 1960 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues ACF Fiorentina Rugby union stadiums in Italy UEFA Euro 1968 stadiums Sports venues in Florence Populated coastal places in Italy Mediterranean port cities and towns in Italy Municipalities of the Province of Palermo Palermo Phoenician colonies in Sicily Populated places established in the 8th century BC Capitals of former nations UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England UEFA member associations Football governing bodies in Serbia Futsal in Serbia Sports governing bodies in Serbia Sports organisations established in 2006 2006 establishments in Serbia Kruševac Populated places in Rasina District Municipalities and cities of Šumadija and Western Serbia The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena European national association football teams Serbia national football team National sports teams of Serbia 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Doncaster Footballers from South Yorkshire English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Watford F.C. players Peterborough United F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Black English sportspeople Racism Discrimination Hatred Politics and race Sports venues Stadiums Sports venues by type Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Largest cities of Europe templates Serbia templates Serbia Balkans Countries in Europe Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Republics Serbian-speaking countries and territories Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 2006 Southeastern Europe 2013 UEFA European Under-21 Championship UEFA European Under-21 Championship 2012–13 in European football 2012–13 in Israeli football International association football competitions hosted by Israel  Football venues in Serbia Football venues in Serbia and Montenegro Football venues in Yugoslavia Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct History of association football 1875–76 in Scottish football 1876 in Wales 1876 in association football Scotland national football team matches Wales national football team matches 19th century in Glasgow Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football terminology Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group  Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1978 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football central defenders Black English sportspeople Doping cases in association football English autobiographers English film producers English footballers England international footballers English people of Irish descent English people of Saint Lucian descent English sportspeople in doping cases English television personalities England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players People from Peckham Premier League players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Sportspeople from London The Football League players West Ham United F.C. players