 1964 births Living people People from Iesi Italian Roman Catholics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Bologna F.C. 1909 players U.C. Sampdoria players S.S. Lazio players Leicester City F.C. players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers S.S. Lazio managers ACF Fiorentina managers Inter Milan managers Serie A managers Premier League players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Manchester City F.C. managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers 1984 births Living people People from Buenos Aires Province Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers 2004 Copa América players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Olympic footballers of Argentina Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine Primera División players Boca Juniors footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Brazil Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Serie A players Sport Club Corinthians Paulista players Expatriate footballers in England Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Association football forwards Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Brazil Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom South American Footballer of the Year winners Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Expatriate footballers in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriates in England 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1984 births Living people Footballers from Amsterdam Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Dutch footballers Dutch people of Surinamese descent Dutch people of Moluccan descent Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Indo people Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England AFC Ajax players Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players LA Galaxy players Eredivisie players Bundesliga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Expatriate footballers in Italy Stoke City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1863 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Football clubs in Staffordshire Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners The Football League founder members Sport in Stoke-on-Trent United Soccer Association imported teams Southern Football League clubs 1863 establishments in England 1983 births Living people People from Bouaké Ivorian footballers Ivorian expatriate footballers Ivory Coast international footballers Association football midfielders Association football central defenders ASEC Mimosas players AS Monaco FC players K.S.K. Beveren players FC Metalurh Donetsk players Olympiacos F.C. players FC Barcelona players Manchester City F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Belgian Pro League players Ligue 1 players La Liga players Ukrainian Premier League players Superleague Greece players Premier League players Ivorian emigrants to the United Kingdom Ivorian expatriates in Belgium Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Monaco Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Greece Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in Ukraine Ivorian expatriates in Spain Ivorian expatriates in Greece Ivorian expatriates in Ukraine Ivorian expatriates in France African Footballer of the Year winners Africa Cup of Nations-winning players Ivorian Muslims 2007 establishments in England 2012 Summer Olympic venues American football venues in the United Kingdom Buildings and structures in Brent England national football team FA Cup Final venues Football venues in London Music venues completed in 2007 Music venues in London National stadiums National Football League venues Olympic football venues European retractable-roof stadiums Rugby league stadiums in London Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues completed in 2007 Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Retractable-roof stadiums UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Neo-futurism architecture Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Sino Group Residential buildings completed in 2007 Skyscrapers between 150 and 199 meters Residential skyscrapers in Hong Kong Conceptions of self Psychoanalysis Poznań Cities and towns in Greater Poland Voivodeship City counties of Poland Former capitals of Poland Populated places established in the 8th century Poznań Voivodeship (1921–39) Province of Posen Magdeburg rights 1934 songs 1949 singles 1956 singles 1961 singles Songs with music by Richard Rodgers Songs with lyrics by Lorenz Hart 1930s jazz standards Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs number-one singles UK Singles Chart number-one singles Elvis Presley songs Jo Stafford songs Mel Tormé songs The Mavericks songs Jan and Dean songs Bobby Vinton songs Bob Dylan songs Sam Cooke songs Billie Holiday songs Dean Martin songs Gene Summers songs Football songs and chants Crewe Alexandra F.C. Manchester City F.C. Doo-wop songs RCA Records singles Heavy metal musical groups from California American alternative metal musical groups American gothic metal musical groups American hard rock musical groups American industrial metal musical groups American metalcore musical groups American nu metal musical groups Century Media Records artists Musical quintets Gothic metal musical groups Musical groups established in 2005 Musical groups from Los Angeles, California 1952 births Living people People from Buenos Aires Province Argentine footballers Association football midfielders Quilmes footballers Atlético Tucumán footballers San Martín de Tucumán footballers Racing Club de Avellaneda footballers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players The Football League players Deportivo Cali footballers Defensa y Justicia footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Colombia 1978 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Argentina international footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United States Fort Lauderdale Strikers (1977–83) players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Belief Religious belief and doctrine Seven virtues BDSM terminology FA Community Shield National association football supercups Football competitions in England Recurring sporting events established in 1908 Symptoms and signs: Cognition, perception, emotional state and behaviour Fear Obsolete medical terms History of psychology Historical and obsolete mental and behavioural disorders House types in the United Kingdom English architecture House styles House types Country houses in England 1942 births Living people Sportspeople from Preston, Lancashire English footballers England international footballers England under-23 international footballers UEFA Euro 1968 players Swindon Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players English football managers Stockport County F.C. managers The Football League players English Football Hall of Fame inductees The Football League representative players English footballers English football managers Association football fullbacks Manchester City F.C. players Plymouth Argyle F.C. players Manchester City F.C. managers Premier League managers Southern Football League players The Football League players People from Bath, Somerset 1934 births Living people Eastern Canada Professional Soccer League players Toronto City players Frome Town F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. non-playing staff 1923 births 2013 deaths Association football goalkeepers English Football Hall of Fame inductees Expatriate footballers in England German footballers German expatriates in the United Kingdom St Helens Town A.F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Honorary Officers of the Order of the British Empire World War II prisoners of war held by the United Kingdom The Football League players Expatriate football managers in Myanmar Myanmar national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Tanzania Tanzania national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Liberia Liberia national football team managers Pakistan national football team managers Fallschirmjäger of World War II Recipients of the Iron Cross (1939), 1st class People from Bremen The Football League representative players Expatriate football managers in Pakistan German expatriates in Pakistan German football managers Germany's Sports Hall of Fame inductees Business and financial operations occupations Corporate governance Management occupations Chief executive officers Corporate executives Living people Businesspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Manchester City F.C. directors and chairmen British chief executives 1914 births People from Ellesmere Port English footballers England international footballers England wartime international footballers English Football Hall of Fame inductees Ellesmere Port Town F.C. players Everton F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Chester City F.C. wartime guest players Reading F.C. wartime guest players Aldershot F.C. wartime guest players English football managers England national football team managers Sheffield United F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Coventry City F.C. managers The Football League players Royal Army Physical Training Corps soldiers British Army personnel of World War II Officers of the Order of the British Empire 1990 deaths The Football League representative players Sportspeople from Cheshire 1944 births 2011 deaths People from Fallowfield English footballers Association football forwards Manchester City F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players The Football League players 1960 births Arsenal F.C. players Barnet F.C. players England international footballers English footballers Association football wingers Hull City A.F.C. players Living people Middlesbrough F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players People from Seaham Manchester City F.C. directors and chairmen Emirati chief executives Tufts University alumni English football chairmen and investors Manchester City F.C. directors and chairmen Living people Emirati Muslims Emirati urban planners Year of birth uncertain Concert tours Hip hop music festivals Heavy metal festivals in Australia Music festivals in Australia Recurring events established in 1992 Recurring events disestablished in 2014 Rock festivals in Australia Rock festivals in New Zealand Summer festivals Festivals in Auckland Electronic music festivals in Australia Electronic music festivals in New Zealand Music festivals established in 1992 Music festivals in New Zealand 2009–10 in European football UEFA Champions League seasons 2009–10 UEFA Champions League 1980 births Living people Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Brazil under-20 international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers 2004 Copa América players Clube Atlético Mineiro players Associação Portuguesa de Desportos players Associação Desportiva São Caetano players F.B.C. Unione Venezia players A.S. Roma players Inter Milan players A.C. Milan players Esporte Clube Bahia players Villa Nova Atlético Clube players América Futebol Clube (MG) players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Serie A players Serie B players Expatriate footballers in Italy Citizens of Italy through descent Brazilian people of Italian descent Copa América-winning players Coronation Street 1960s British television series 1970s British television series 1980s British television series 1990s British television series 2000s British television series 2010s British television series 1960 British television programme debuts English-language television programming British television soap operas Black-and-white television programs British LGBT-related television programmes Lesbian-related television programmes Transgender-related television programs Fictional streets and roads Television shows set in Manchester History of Manchester BAFTA winners (television series) CBC Television shows ITV soap operas Television series by ITV Studios Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1986 births Living people People from Uccle Belgian people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgian expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Association football central defenders Association football utility players R.S.C. Anderlecht players Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players Premier League players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Belgium Belgian expatriates in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1976 births Living people Danish footballers Danish expatriate footballers Denmark youth international footballers Denmark under-21 international footballers Denmark international footballers Association football goalkeepers Odense Boldklub players Vejle Boldklub players Sunderland A.F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Danish Superliga players Premier League players The Football League players A-League players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate soccer players in Australia Danish expatriates in England Danish expatriates in Australia UEFA Euro 2000 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club FC Svendborg players 1986 births Living people People from Mogán, Las Palmas Spanish footballers Canarian footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Valencia CF Mestalla footballers Valencia CF players SD Eibar footballers Celta de Vigo players Premier League players Manchester City F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish people of Japanese descent Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Spanish expatriates in England Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Berlin Association football defenders German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany international footballers German expatriate footballers German expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England 1. FC Union Berlin players Chelsea F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Association football terminology Football positions Unincorporated communities in Alabama Unincorporated communities in Marengo County, Alabama Sports terminology Association football terminology Cricket terminology Cricket awards and rankings Australian rules football terminology Rugby league terminology Rugby union terminology 1981 births Living people People from Tolosa Spanish footballers Basque footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Tercera División players Premier League players Bundesliga players Real Sociedad B footballers Real Sociedad footballers SD Eibar footballers Liverpool F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players FC Bayern Munich footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers FIFA Century Club UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in Germany Villages in Greater Manchester Civil parishes in Greater Manchester Geography of Trafford 1983 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Notts County F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Watford F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Real Zaragoza players FC Pune City players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Tampines Rovers FC players Premier League players The Football League players La Liga players Indian Super League players English expatriate footballers English expatriates in India Expatriate footballers in India English expatriates in Spain Association football wingers Black English sportspeople English prisoners and detainees Sportspeople from Nottingham Living people Expatriate footballers in Singapore British expatriates in Singapore Roger Federer 1981 births Living people Swiss male tennis players Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Australian Open (tennis) champions French Open champions Wimbledon champions US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon junior champions World No. 1 tennis players Olympic medalists in tennis Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Switzerland Olympic silver medalists for Switzerland Olympic tennis players of Switzerland Tennis players at the 2000 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Sports world record holders Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners People from Basel-Stadt People of Afrikaner descent Swiss people of Dutch descent Swiss people of French descent Swiss people of South African descent Swiss Roman Catholics UNICEF people Münchenstein Andy Murray 1987 births BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Clan Murray Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Officers of the Order of the British Empire Olympic gold medallists for Great Britain Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic silver medallists for Great Britain Olympic tennis players of Great Britain Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish male tennis players Scottish Olympic medallists Sportspeople from Glasgow Sportspeople from Dunblane Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics US Open (tennis) champions US Open (tennis) junior champions Wimbledon champions Tennis shots Ball games Summer Olympic sports Racquet sports Sports originating in England Tennis Tennis shots Switzerland Countries in Europe Central Europe Western Europe Federal republics French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Italian-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Australian Open (tennis) 1905 establishments in Australia Annual sporting events in Australia Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments Hard court tennis tournaments Recurring sporting events established in 1905 Seven Sport Sport in Melbourne Tennis tournaments in Australia Tennis terminology Grand Slam (tennis) Tennis tournaments Novak Djokovic 1987 births Living people Australian Open (tennis) champions Eastern Orthodox Christians from Serbia Expatriate sportspeople in Monaco Grand Crosses of the Order of St. Sava Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Members of the Serbian Orthodox Church Olympic bronze medalists for Serbia Olympic medalists in tennis Olympic tennis players of Serbia People from Monte Carlo Serbia and Montenegro male tennis players Serbian expatriate sportspeople Serbian expatriates in Germany Serbian expatriates in Monaco Serbian male tennis players Sports world record holders Sportspeople from Belgrade Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics UNICEF people US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon champions World No. 1 tennis players Buildings and structures completed in 1988 Indoor arenas in Australia Sports venues in Melbourne Tennis venues in Australia Music venues in Melbourne Retractable-roof stadiums 2006 Commonwealth Games venues Multi-purpose stadiums in Australia Sports venues completed in 1988 Basketball venues in Australia Boxing venues in Australia Melbourne United South East Melbourne Magic Annual sporting events in the United States US Open (tennis) Recurring sporting events established in 1881 Sports venues in Queens, New York Grand Slam (tennis) tournaments National championships in the United States US Open Series Hard court tennis tournaments in the United States 1881 establishments in the United States 1939 births 2012 deaths Australian male swimmers Male freestyle swimmers Olympic swimmers of Australia Olympic medalists in swimming Swimmers at the 1956 Summer Olympics Swimmers at the 1960 Summer Olympics Olympic silver medalists for Australia Olympic bronze medalists for Australia International Swimming Hall of Fame inductees Former world record holders in swimming USC Trojans men's swimmers Members of the Order of Australia Recipients of the Centenary Medal Recipients of the Australian Sports Medal University of Southern California alumni Australian male actors English emigrants to Australia People from Birmingham, West Midlands Sportspeople from Highland (council area) People educated at Cranbrook School, Sydney Deaths from leukemia Deaths from cancer in New South Wales 1985 births Living people People from Le Mans People of French descent French people of Republic of the Congo descent French male tennis players Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Chevaliers of the Ordre national du Mérite US Open (tennis) junior champions French expatriates in Switzerland Tennis shots Melbourne Australian capital cities Coastal cities in Australia Former national capitals Metropolitan areas of Australia Populated places established in 1835 Populated places established in the 19th century Port cities in Australia 1835 establishments in Australia Regions of Victoria (Australia)