 1914 books 20th-century history books History books about wars Serbian books Political books History books about Serbia History books about Albania Albania–Serbia relations Kingdom of Serbia 1914 in Serbia Albania Albanian-speaking countries and territories Balkans Countries in Europe Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Muslim-majority countries Republics States and territories established in 1912 World Digital Library related UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying 2014–15 in UEFA football 2015–16 in UEFA football UEFA European Championship qualifying UEFA Euro 2016 Albania–Greece relations Albania–Montenegro relations Albania–Republic of Macedonia relations Albania–Serbia relations Albanian separatism Political history of Albania Irredentism Pan-nationalism Political movements Albanian nationalism Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Largest cities of Europe templates Serbia templates Serbia Balkans Countries in Europe Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Republics Serbian-speaking countries and territories Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 2006 Southeastern Europe Serbian language Languages of Bosnia and Herzegovina Languages of Montenegro Languages of Serbia Languages of Croatia Languages of Slovenia Languages of the Republic of Macedonia Languages of Bulgaria Languages of Vojvodina Subject–verb–object languages Languages of Kosovo Languages of Romania Languages of Hungary Serb people Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina Ethnic groups in Croatia Ethnic groups in Europe Ethnic groups in Hungary Ethnic groups in Montenegro Ethnic groups in Romania Ethnic groups in Serbia Ethnic groups in Slovenia Ethnic groups in the Republic of Macedonia Serbian people Serbian society Slavic ethnic groups South Slavs Ethnoreligious groups in Europe Albanian language Indo-European languages Languages of Albania Languages of Greece Languages of Italy Languages of Kosovo Languages of Montenegro Languages of Serbia Languages of the Republic of Macedonia Languages of Turkey Subject–verb–object languages Languages of Bulgaria Balkans Southeastern Europe Peninsulas of Europe Regions of Europe Turkish words and phrases Albanian people Ethnic groups in Albania Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina Ethnic groups in Europe Ethnic groups in Greece Ethnic groups in Italy Ethnic groups in Kosovo Ethnic groups in Montenegro Ethnic groups in Serbia Ethnic groups in the Balkans Ethnic groups in the Republic of Macedonia Ethnic groups in Turkey Muslim communities in Europe History of the Albanians Unmanned aerial vehicles Wireless Avionics Embedded systems Robotics Emerging technologies Crowd control and riot control techniques Law enforcement units Association football culture Australian rules football culture Baseball culture Basketball culture Cricket culture Gaelic games culture Rugby football culture Association football terminology Sports culture England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Bradford Sportspeople from Leeds English football referees UEFA Champions League referees FA Cup Final referees National League (English football) referees The Football League referees Premier League referees 1984 births Living people People from Sremska Mitrovica Association football defenders Association football utility players Serbian footballers Serbia and Montenegro international footballers Serbia international footballers Serbian expatriate footballers Serbian expatriates in Russia Serbian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in England FK Srem players OFK Beograd players FC Lokomotiv Moscow players Chelsea F.C. players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Serbia under-21 international footballers Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Kosovo Disputed territories in Europe Unrecognized or largely unrecognized states States and territories established in 2008 Countries in Europe Southeastern Europe Independence of Kosovo Declarations of independence 2008 in Kosovo History of the Republic of Kosovo 1949 in military history 20th-century military alliances 21st-century military alliances Anti-communist organizations Cold War organizations Cold War treaties Foreign relations of the Soviet Union International military organizations Military alliances involving Belgium Military alliances involving Bulgaria Military alliances involving Canada Military alliances involving Estonia Military alliances involving France Military alliances involving Greece Military alliances involving Hungary Military alliances involving Italy Military alliances involving Latvia Military alliances involving Lithuania Military alliances involving Luxembourg Military alliances involving Poland Military alliances involving Portugal Military alliances involving Romania Military alliances involving Spain Military alliances involving Turkey Military alliances involving the Netherlands Military alliances involving the United Kingdom Military alliances involving the United States Multiregional international organizations NATO Organisations based in Brussels Organizations established in 1949 Supraorganizations Forced migration Demography Population Ethnic groups in Kosovo Kosovo Albanians Muslim communities in Europe Military doctrines Guerrilla warfare Terrorism Insurgencies Irregular military Insurgency Rebellions by type 1949 births Living people People from Coevorden Dutch businesspeople 1846 novels Russian novels Novels set in Russia Works originally published in Russian magazines Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Association football terminology Sports terminology Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1962 births Living people English football managers Brentford F.C. managers Watford F.C. non-playing staff Enfield F.C. players Boreham Wood F.C. players Isthmian League players National League (English football) players English expatriates in the United States The Football League managers Association football defenders Association football fullbacks Leicester City F.C. players Rangers F.C. managers Scottish Professional Football League managers Hibernian F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1875 Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Edinburgh United Soccer Association imported teams Leith Scottish Premier League teams 1875 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Dumbarton Dumbarton F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Sport in West Dunbartonshire Association football clubs established in 1872 Scottish Football League teams Scottish Football League founder members 1872 establishments in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Football League Third Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe Scottish Professional Football League Scottish Premiership Top level football leagues in Europe Football leagues in Scotland 2013 establishments in Scotland Sports leagues established in 2013 Football leagues in England Football league systems in Europe 1962 births 1990 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Kilmarnock F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Rangers F.C. dispute articles Rangers F.C. managers Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish association football commentators Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Professional Football League managers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Bellshill St Johnstone F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players Scottish league football top scorers Heart of Midlothian F.C. Football clubs in Edinburgh Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1874 Scottish Premier League teams 1874 establishments in Scotland Gorgie Scottish Football League teams Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League Second level football leagues in Europe Football leagues in Scotland 2013 establishments in Scotland Sports leagues established in 2013 Scottish Championship 2008–09 in English football 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Bradford English footballers Association football defenders Farsley Celtic A.F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Gateshead F.C. players Carlisle United F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Scottish Professional Football League players Sports venues completed in 1899 Category B listed buildings in Glasgow Football venues in Scotland Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Govan Listed sports venues in Scotland Rangers F.C. Sports venues in Glasgow 1899 establishments in Scotland 2014 Commonwealth Games venues Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Scottish Professional Football League venues Scotland national football team venues Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Sports museums in Scotland Credit Debt Personal financial problems Social problems Economic problems 1971 births Scottish businesspeople People from Motherwell Living people British venture capitalists Scottish football chairmen and investors Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Rangers F.C. chairmen People educated at Kelvinside Academy Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff   2005–06 in English football Dunfermline Athletic F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1885 Scottish Premier League teams 1885 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scotland football derbies Heart of Midlothian F.C. Hibernian F.C. Sport in Edinburgh 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons 1964 births Living people Footballers from Leeds English people of Scottish descent Scottish footballers Scottish football managers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Bradford City A.F.C. players Everton F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Farsley Celtic A.F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. non-playing staff Bradford City A.F.C. managers Motherwell F.C. managers The Football League players Premier League players Scottish Football League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Professional Football League managers 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players Football managers from Leeds Rangers F.C. managers Football League Championship play-off Finals 2012 Football League play-offs 2011–12 Football League Championship West Ham United F.C. matches Blackpool F.C. matches 2012 in London Events at Wembley Stadium Association football clubs established in 1886 Football clubs in Scotland Motherwell F.C. Sport in North Lanarkshire Scottish Premier League teams 1886 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners South Africa national soccer team 1955 births Scottish businesspeople Living people People from Glasgow Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Rangers F.C. chairmen Scottish football chairmen and investors British emigrants to South Africa 1889 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1889 Brentford F.C. Brentford, London Football clubs in England Football clubs in London The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Sport in Hounslow Falkirk F.C. Sport in Falkirk Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1876 1876 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams