 English football referees 1985 births People from Coventry Living people FIFA Women's World Cup referees Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Crewe Alexandra F.C. Crewe The Football League clubs Football clubs in Cheshire Association football clubs established in 1877 1877 establishments in England Bradford City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1903 Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners 1903 establishments in England Sport in Bradford Chauvinism Discrimination Hatred Prejudices Sexism Sexuality and gender-related prejudices Social problems Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP Sports venues in Cheshire Football venues in England Buildings and structures in Crewe Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1906 Crewe Alexandra F.C. 1977 births Living people People from Harrogate People educated at Ashville College English people of Scottish descent English footballers Scottish footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Bury F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Management occupations Hospitality occupations 1953 births Living people American football cornerbacks American football quarterbacks Alabama Crimson Tide football players Linfield Wildcats football coaches Northern Colorado Bears football coaches Oregon State Beavers football coaches Nebraska Cornhuskers football coaches San Diego Chargers head coaches USC Trojans football coaches Whitworth Pirates football coaches Winnipeg Blue Bombers coaches NFL Europe (WLAF) coaches Grey Cup champions Sportspeople from Corvallis, Oregon People from Wallace, Idaho Players of American football from Oregon Corvallis High School (Oregon) alumni 1869 introductions American football Ball games Football codes Sports originating in the United States Gridiron football Skills Learning Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Racehorses bred in New Zealand 2009 racehorse births Thoroughbred family 9-e Melbourne Cup winners Melbourne Cup Horse races in Australia Visitor attractions in Melbourne Public holidays in Australia Group 1 stakes races in Australia Open long distance horse races Flemington Racecourse Recurring sporting events established in 1861 1861 establishments in Australia Sport in Melbourne Australian culture Articles containing video clips Emirates (airline) Explosives Swedish inventions 1866 introductions  2015 in English sport 2015 in rowing The Boat Race Flemington Racecourse 1840 establishments in Australia Australian National Heritage List Horse racing venues in Australia Sports venues in Melbourne Victorian Heritage Register Visitor attractions in Melbourne Sports venues completed in 1840 Chauvinism Gender Men and feminism Nationalism Prejudices Horse racing Horse-related professions and professionals 2006 racehorse births 2015 racehorse deaths British racehorses Thoroughbred family 9-e 1927 births 2015 deaths Horse trainers from Melbourne Australian horse trainers Australian racehorse owners and breeders Australian Thoroughbred Racing Hall of Fame inductees Sport Australia Hall of Fame inductees Members of the Order of Australia Recipients of the Australian Sports Medal Australian Living Treasures Saddles Horse racing Fairfax family Companies listed on the Australian Securities Exchange Media in Sydney Australian news websites Fairfax Media Real estate in Australia Companies based in Australia Companies based in Sydney Newspaper companies of Australia 2011 albums Charlie Winston albums Penzance Towns in Cornwall Civil parishes in Cornwall Port cities and towns in England Ports and harbours of Cornwall Cornish Killas