 Towns in Lancashire West Pennine Moors Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom Blackburn Oldham Athletic A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England Sport in Oldham Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Greater Manchester Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs 1967 births Living people People from Cumbernauld Scottish footballers Association football wingers Celtic F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Alloa Athletic F.C. players Associação Académica de Coimbra – O.A.F. players Bath City F.C. players Newbury Town F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Football League players Scottish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Portugal Scottish expatriates in Portugal Scottish football managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Premier League managers Fulham F.C. non-playing staff Coventry City F.C. non-playing staff Expatriate football managers in Brunei Brunei national football team managers S.League head coaches Food companies of India Companies based in Pune Companies established in 1971 Indian companies established in 1971 Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams 1979 births Living people People from Aylesbury Black English sportspeople English people of Barbadian descent English footballers Barbadian footballers Barbados international footballers Association football defenders Luton Town F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players  2008–09 in English football 1982 births Living people Paraguayan footballers Association football defenders Racing Club de Avellaneda footballers ACF Fiorentina players Primeira Liga players Segunda Liga players S.C. Beira-Mar players Belgian Pro League players Club Brugge KV players Premier League players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. players La Liga players UD Las Palmas players Club Libertad footballers Paraguay international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players Paraguayan expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Argentina Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Paraguayan expatriates in Argentina Paraguayan expatriates in Italy Paraguayan expatriates in Portugal Paraguayan expatriates in the United Kingdom Paraguayan expatriates in Spain Blackburn Rovers F.C. Premier League venues Football venues in England Buildings and structures in Blackburn Sports venues completed in 1882 Football League venues Poultry Domesticated birds Meat Livestock 1981 births Living people People from Muscat, Oman Omani footballers Omani expatriate footballers Oman international footballers Omani Muslims Association football goalkeepers Al-Nasr S.C.S.C. players Lyn Fotball players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Reading F.C. players Tippeligaen players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Norway 2004 AFC Asian Cup players 2007 AFC Asian Cup players 2015 AFC Asian Cup players Kniksen award winners FIFA Century Club Footballers at the 2002 Asian Games 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Derby English footballers Association football goalkeepers Derby County F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Hartlepool United F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players England youth international footballers 1982 births Living people Nigerian footballers Association football forwards Olympic footballers of Nigeria Nigeria international footballers Israeli Premier League players Premier League players The Football League players Chinese Super League players Qatar Stars League players Süper Lig players Everton F.C. players Guangzhou R&F F.C. players Gil Vicente F.C. players Hapoel Kfar Saba F.C. players Maccabi Haifa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Gateway F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Al Rayyan SC players Reading F.C. players Kayserispor footballers Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2004 African Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Nigerian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in China Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Israel Expatriate footballers in Qatar Expatriate footballers in Turkey Nigerian expatriates in Israel Nigerian expatriates in the United Kingdom Nigerian expatriates in China Nigerian expatriates in Qatar Sportspeople from Benin City Yoruba sportspeople 1990 births Canadian soccer players Canadian people of Jamaican descent Canadian expatriate soccer players Canadian expatriate sportspeople in Germany Canadian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Association football wingers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Blackburn Rovers F.C. players SC Paderborn 07 players FC St. Pauli players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players 2. Bundesliga players The Football League players Sportspeople from Ottawa Soccer people from Ontario Black Canadian sportspeople Living people Canada men's international soccer players Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1975 births Living people People from Consett English football referees English people of Canadian descent National League (English football) referees The Football League referees Premier League referees UEFA Champions League referees Olympic football referees Football referees at the 2012 Summer Olympics Sports venues in Bedfordshire Luton Town F.C. Football venues in England Sport in Luton Buildings and structures in Luton Sports venues completed in 1905 Football League venues  Wigan Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester 1969 births Living people German football referees UEFA Champions League referees 2010 FIFA World Cup referees Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League 1973 births Living people Association football midfielders Catalan footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate football managers in England People from Noguera (comarca) Spanish footballers Spanish football managers Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom CF Balaguer footballers Real Zaragoza players Motherwell F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Walsall F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. managers Everton F.C. managers La Liga players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Spanish expatriate football managers Expatriate footballers in Wales Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Scotland Spanish expatriates in Wales Expatriate football managers in Wales 1936 births Living people English footballers Blackburn Rovers F.C. players English football chairmen and investors Chairmen of Wigan Athletic F.C. Sportspeople from Bradford Crewe Alexandra F.C. players The Football League players English people of Irish descent Association football fullbacks Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Conservative Party (UK) people Sportspeople from Wigan Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 1989 births Living people People from Mendoza, Argentina Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentina international footballers Association football forwards Audax Italiano players Chelsea F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players SV Werder Bremen players Campeonato Nacional (Chile) players Premier League players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in Chile Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Argentine expatriates in Chile Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy Argentine emigrants to Italy Argentine expatriates in Germany 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Lagos Nigerian footballers Nigeria international footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football wingers Crystal Palace F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players English people of Nigerian descent Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Africa Cup of Nations-winning players People educated at Whitgift School 1983 births Living people Celtic F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Chicago Fire Soccer Club players Hull City A.F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Designated Players (MLS) Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scottish footballers Scottish expatriate footballers People from Sarawak People educated at Cults Academy Expatriate soccer players in the United States Scottish expatriates in the United States People associated with Aberdeen Cricket administration in England Cricket administration in Wales Sports governing bodies in Wales 1997 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports governing bodies in England Private companies limited by guarantee of England Organisations based in the City of Westminster Cricket administration Sports organisations established in 1909 International Cricket Council Cricket Organisations based in Dubai 1978 births Living people Auckland cricketers Lancashire cricketers Worcestershire cricketers Suffolk cricketers New Zealand One Day International cricketers New Zealand Test cricketers Cricketers who made a century on Test debut New Zealand cricketers New Zealand Twenty20 International cricketers Chandigarh cricketers Twenty20 Cup centurions People educated at Westlake Boys High School Sussex cricketers Khulna Royal Bengals cricketers People from Warkworth, New Zealand Cricket in New Zealand National cricket teams National sports teams of New Zealand New Zealand in international cricket Batting (cricket) Cricket terminology Articles containing video clips Cricket New Zealand Archipelagoes of the Pacific Ocean Countries in Oceania English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the United Nations Polynesia States and territories established in 1840 Zealandia (continent) Psychology Abnormal psychology Emotions Neuropsychology Depression (psychology) Psychiatric diagnosis 1877 establishments in the United Kingdom Cricket in England Cricket in Wales England and Wales England in international cricket National cricket teams National sports teams of England National sports teams of Wales Sports organisations of England Wales in international cricket 1955 births Living people Chief Executives of the England and Wales Cricket Board English cricket administrators English businesspeople People educated at Loughborough Grammar School Alumni of Loughborough University Officers of the Order of the British Empire New Zealand first-class cricket teams Auckland cricketers Sports clubs established in 1873 Professional sports leagues Sports leagues established in 2008 Champions League Twenty20 Twenty20 cricket leagues Defunct sports leagues Recurring sporting events established in 2008 Recurring sporting events disestablished in 2014 Cricket administration Cricket administration in Bangladesh Sport in Bangladesh Cricket in Bangladesh Cricket in Asia Sports organisations established in 1972 Bangladesh Premier League teams Sports clubs in Bangladesh Sports clubs established in 2012 Sports clubs disestablished in 2013 2012 establishments in Bangladesh Cricket in Khulna Sport in Khulna Cricket in Bangladesh Cricket teams in Bangladesh Former major cricket clubs of Bangladesh Bangladesh Premier League Bangladeshi domestic cricket competitions Twenty20 cricket leagues Recurring sporting events established in 2012 2003 songs 2004 singles Hilary Duff songs Music videos directed by Dave Meyers (director) Song recordings produced by John Shanks Songs written by Kara DioGuardi Songs written by John Shanks Hollywood Records singles Television theme songs Amphetamine Reptile Records artists Heavy metal musical groups from Tennessee American experimental musical groups American noise rock music groups Relapse Records artists Musical groups from Nashville, Tennessee 2010s American television series 2011 American television series debuts 2011 American television series endings American Broadcasting Company network shows American television sitcoms Single-camera television sitcoms English-language television programming Television series by ABC Studios Television shows set in Columbus, Ohio Crickets Ensifera Extant Triassic first appearances Insect rearing