 Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football clubs in England Doncaster Rovers F.C. Sport in Doncaster Association football clubs established in 1879 Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1879 establishments in England Scottish Football Association Football governing bodies in Scotland UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1873 1873 establishments in Scotland Organisations based in Glasgow Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners 1970 births Living people Alumni of the University of East Anglia British businesspeople Association football executives Norwich City F.C. non-playing staff People from Devon Scottish Premier League Scottish Professional Football League 1903 establishments in Scotland 2012 Summer Olympic venues 2014 Commonwealth Games venues American football venues in Scotland Athletics (track and field) venues in Scotland Sports venues completed in 1903 Buildings and structures in Glasgow Defunct speedway venues in Scotland Football venues in Scotland Music venues in Glasgow National stadiums Olympic football venues Queen's Park F.C. Rugby World Cup stadiums Rugby union in Glasgow Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Scotland national football team venues Scottish Football League venues Sports venues in Glasgow Scottish Professional Football League venues UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Free compilers and interpreters Procedural programming languages Object-oriented programming languages Text-oriented programming languages PHP PHP software Scripting languages Dynamically typed programming languages Cross-platform software Internet terminology Filename extensions High-level programming languages Programming languages created in 1995 Class-based programming languages Software using the PHP license Articles with example code Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions 1950s births Living people Scottish football chairmen and investors Heart of Midlothian F.C. non-playing staff Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Scottish Football Association Scottish Football League Religious fundamentalism Southern Football League 1894 establishments in England Football leagues in England Sports leagues established in 1894 Bankruptcy Corporate law Insolvency Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange 1983 establishments in the United States AT&T Bell System Companies based in Dallas, Texas Companies established in 1983 Internet service providers of the United States Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Tier 1 networks Telecommunications companies of the United States American brands Association football clubs established in 1877 Football clubs in Scotland St Mirren F.C. Scottish Premier League teams 1877 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Paisley Sport in Renfrewshire Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Living people 1954 births Scottish football chairmen and investors St Mirren F.C. Scottish Football League Third Division Scottish Football League 1994 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe 1889 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1889 Brentford F.C. Brentford, London Football clubs in England Football clubs in London The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Sport in Hounslow Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham