Margaret Thatcher funeral timetable: Times, route, guests and travel
London will come to a standstill today for the funeral of former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher, who died from a stroke last week aged 87.
Baroness Thatcher has been granted a ceremonial funeral with full military honours by the Queen having rejected the idea of a state funeral before her death.
A memorial for Lady Thatcher was held for at the Parliament’s Chapel of St Mary Undercroft yesterday evening and this morning her coffin will be carried on a horse-drawn gun carriage down the Strand to St Paul’s Cathedral.
CLICK TO ENLARGE THE BELOW IMAGE
Here’s everything you need to know about the timetable of events before Big Ben is silenced in honour of Britain’s first and, so far only, female prime minister.
Where is the funeral?
The funeral will be held at London’s St Paul’s Cathedral and is an invite-only event.
Where can I watch the procession?
The coffin will travel by hearse from the Palace of Westminster to the Church of St Clement Danes on the Strand before the funeral.
From here it will be drawn by the King’s Troop Royal Horse Artillery down the Strand and along the entire length of Fleet Street before arriving at St Paul’s Cathedral.
Over 700 members of the armed services will be involved.
10am – The coffin, dressed in a Union Flag, will leave the Palace of Westminster and will travel by hearse to the Church of St Clement Danes, the RAF Chapel, on the Strand in central London.
10:30am The coffin will then will be transferred to a Gun Carriage drawn by the King’s Troop Royal Horse Artillery to St Paul’s Cathedral. The route will be lined by tri-service military personnel.
11am – The coffin will arrive at St Paul’s Cathedral when the funeral service will begin, it will last just under an hour.
Following the service the coffin will travel by hearse to the Royal Hospital Chelsea. There will be two receptions following the Baroness Thatcher’s funeral service.
A private cremation at Mortlake Crematorium will take place later in the evening.
1210 – At Guildhall there will be a reception for friends and family of Lady Thatcher and representatives of UK institutions.
1315 –  The foreign secretary will host a reception at the Mansion House for representatives from foreign states and other distinguished foreign VIPs.
Parliament’s Big Ben bell will be silenced for the funeral while all UK government departments will fly flags on their buildings at half-mast.
Who will be there?
More than 2,000 invites have been sent out for the funeral with the Queen and all surviving prime ministers receiving an invite, plus a number of former US presidents and a smattering of celebrities.
Surviving UK prime ministers: Sir John Major, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown are invited along with their wives.
US presidents: Jimmy Carter, George HW Bush, George Bush and Barack Obama, as well as a representative of the Reagan family after former first lady Nancy said she would not attend.
No-shows: Former US president Bill Clinton, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, Argentinian ambassador Alicia Castro and German chancellor Angela Merkel.
Who will carry the coffin?
An eight-strong team of servicemen  has been selected to carry Baroness Thatcher’s coffin.
They are drawn from ships, squadrons and regiments particularly associated with the 1982 Falkland Islands conflict and will be commanded on the day by a soldier who served in it.
The bearer party will consist of:
– Sergeant Jason Buffham, 30, of Grantham, Lincolnshire – where Lady Thatcher was born – representing 4th Regiment Royal Artillery;
– Lance Sergeant Paul Quayle, 31, of East Kilbride, Lanarkshire, representing F Company Scots Guards. His father served in the Falklands with the 2nd Battalion Scots Guards;
Lady Thatcher had requested for Britain’s serving prime minister to deliver a reading at her funeral with David Cameron set to read a lesson from the Gospel.
Her choice of reading was John 14.1, which says: ‘Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father’s house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you.
‘I go to prepare a place for you.’
She also specified a number of hymns to be sung, among them the patriotic I Vow to Thee, My Country.
From 7:30am road closures are implemented along the route from Whitehall to St Paul’s Cathedral.
Roads west of Aldwych are expected to reopen by midday, Aldwych and roads to the east are expected to reopen by 3pm
Waterloo Bridge will be closed for buses and other large vehicles, but will remain open for cars and smaller vans.
Transport for London has advised drivers to avoid the area and everyone else to plan their travel in advance.
Some bus routes through central London will be on diversion or will finish before their usual destination because of road closures.
All Tube, Docklands Light Railway and London Overground lines will be running normally, but some stations along the route may get busy at certain times.