Austria election: Alexander Van der Bellen defeats far-right candidate
(CNN)Austria's presidential election ushered in a profound change in the country's political landscape, dominated by two centrist parties since the end of World War II.
The win placed Austria at the head of a populist groundswell sweeping Europe amid rising frustration over the European Union's failure to deal with the ongoing economic and migrant crises.
The victory held off Hofer, of Austria's Freedom Party, from becoming the European Union's first far-right head of state.
Austrian Interior Minister Wolfgang Sobotka announced the results Monday in Vienna, revealing that Van der Bellen had won 50.3% of the ballot (2,254,484 votes) to Hofer's 49.7% (2,223,458 votes).
When Germany opened its borders to migrants in September last year, Austria followed suit and was applauded internationally for the welcome it gave thousands of migrants who had been trapped in their attempts to transit through Hungary, which was widely criticized for its hard-line stance in defending its borders.
"I am not, because you will see," he said when a reporter asked him how he felt about being called a Nazi. "You have to take a look at me, where I am in one or two years. I have to work and then everybody will see I am really OK. I am not a dangerous person, of course."
Now he has been catapulted into the spotlight and Austrian voters will be watching to see if his party's populist momentum can carry through to the next parliamentary elections due within the next two years.
The rest of Europe, meanwhile, will also be paying attention as nationalist parties within their own borders try to capitalize off what the Austrian presidential election result has delivered -- hope that they, too, can emerge from the fringes.
The Sunday poll was so close that Austrians had to wait until all the postal votes were counted on Monday before Hofer conceded defeat on his Facebook page.
"Of course I'm sad today," he wrote. "The effort that went into this campaign isn't lost but is an investment in the future."
In the end, the Freedom Party had lost by just over 61,000 votes and Austria had come nail-bitingly close to electing the European Union's first far right head of state.
Van der Bellen, who fared better with urban voters, had been expected to secure more of the mail-in votes than his 45-year-old rival, a trained aeronautical engineer, who drew strong support in rural areas. Hofer had won 35% in the first round of voting last month to Van der Bellen's 21%.
In a Facebook post conceding to Van der Bellen on Monday, Hofer said he was thankful for the opportunity given, urged voters not to despair and said he would have been happy to take care of the country.
Candidates backed by the two centrist parties who had dominated Austrian politics since World War II -- the left-leaning Social Democratic Party and conservative People's Party -- had been eliminated in the first round of voting, resulting in a situation where the center was "really nowhere to be seen."
This was due to public disillusionment with the centrist parties -- seen as too "cozy" and "complacent" -- combined with the migrant crisis, which had been a key issue on the campaign trail, over which Van der Bellen and Hofer had clashed.
Cliffe said the role of president in Austria has traditionally been largely ceremonial, a head of state with formal constitutional powers that by convention aren't used.
Hofer had indicated he wanted to change this, he said. The incumbent president, Heinz Fischer, was unable to run again after two terms in office.