Funding axed for Toronto immigrant agencies
At least 10 Greater Toronto immigrant service agencies have been told by Citizenship and Immigration Canada that their program funding will not be renewed next year, with up to 35 others across Ontario also facing “significant” cuts. The settlement agencies, which offer language classes, help in finding jobs and other integration programs for thousands of newcomers each year, stand to lose tens of millions in funding. In all likelihood, most of them face closing next year, as the bulk of their funding comes from Ottawa.
Hundreds of jobs are also on the line in the sector, where settlement workers and administrators are now living in “a climate of fear,” sources told the Star. Among the agencies losing their federal funding are the South Asian Women’s Centre, established in 1982, and Tropicana Community Services, founded in 1980 to serve disadvantaged Caribbean families and youth. “We’ll have to shut down without their funding,” said South Asian Women’s Centre executive director Kripa Sekhar, whose agency received $570,000 or 67 per cent of overall funding it from Ottawa. It served 14,000 clients last year, mostly South Asian women. “There will be a vacuum in servicing these women.”
Sekhar said she broke the news to the centre’s 13 staff and 140 volunteers last week. “Many of our staff are immigrant women themselves, just like our clients. Everyone is upset. It’s just hard to swallow.” Ontario Immigration Minister Eric Hoskins held an emergency meeting with the management of seven of the 10 agencies Wednesday and has asked to meet with his federal counterpart to demand the decisions be reversed. Hoskins noted the majority of the defunded organizations are ethnocultural agencies serving specific ethnic communities. “Their specialties can’t be replaced,” Hoskins said. “They are upset at what they called the ‘blunt’ and ‘brutal’ manner the news was delivered to them, in a letter, two weeks before the holiday. None understands the justification and rationale behind it.”
In total, $53 million is being cut from settlement programs across Canada, excluding Quebec. More than $43 million of that will come from Ontario, which will see its 2011 settlement funding down to $344 million. The impending cuts are on top of a 5 per cent across-the-board funding reduction of Immigration Canada’s budget for 2011.
Immigration Canada spokeswoman Tracie LeBlanc said the department put out a call for proposals last spring and received more than 600 applications for funding. “All the organizations had the opportunity to respond to the competition. These organizations were not being defunded. It’s just that their proposals were not being approved,” she said. LeBlanc said the department reviewed all submissions based on set criteria, such as relevance to need, value for money, cost effectiveness, organizational governance, as well as an agency’s track record in reporting and financial accountability. Transition plans will be in place to minimize the impact on the agencies’ clients, he added. Ottawa has suggested Ontario now receives 55 per cent of Canada’s 250,000 new arrivals each year but gets 63 per cent of settlement funding, but Hoskins argued that the province also gets a huge volume of “secondary migrants,” who move here after initially settling in other provinces. Federal Liberal MP Gerard Kennedy also weighed in, calling the Conservative government “the Grinch.” “This is political in nature and Toronto has been singled out.” The Ontario Council for Agencies Serving Immigrants, which represents 200 settlement organizations across the province, said more than half of the announced cuts have a direct impact on groups that have focused their work on racialized immigrant communities. “This is troubling,” it said in a statement to the Star. “The Council believes that Ontario has taken a financial hit that threatens . . . the long-term integration outcomes for immigrants.” In the last few years, CIC has terminated funding to at least five Ontario settlement agencies, citing financial mismanagement. They included the Brampton Neighbourhood Services and Inter-Cultural Neighbourhood Social Services in Peel, Riverdale Women’s Centre in Toronto, and most recently Hamilton’s Settlement and Integration Services Organization. Ethiopian Association in the Greater Toronto Area and Surrounding Regions