President returns Winston Churchill bust to Oval Office before dancing My Way at inaugural ball
He hopes his address will be both powerful and to the point.  Douglas Brinkley, a presidential historian said that Mr Trump has taken heed of his reminder that William Henry Harrison caught pneumonia after giving too long of an inaugural speech."
Like Mr Trump, the former Republican president's election came at a time when America's faith in Washington was especially low. 
In response, Mr Trump's transition team have laid out plans that would dramatically cut back the size and bureaucracy of government, by reducing federal spending by some $10.5 trillion over the coming decade.
The detailed proposal,  which has not yet been made public, but whose contents has been leaked to The Hill, a Washington based media company promises cuts to welfare programs across government agencies.
But critics of Mr Trump said last night that the size of the budget cuts are unrealistic, unless the new administration reduces military spending and healthcare, two areas that the new president has so far promised to protect.
The inauguration is expected to draw 800,000 spectators, according to officials. 
Even as many celebrities and musicians have turned down invitations to perform at the event, organisers have gone out of their way to make the event a memorable affair.
On Thursday it was reported that ten wild mustang horses, who had been tamed and trained in a Kansas prison, are to take part in the parade from the US capitol to the White House. 
Dexter Hedrick who leads the prison horse training program, said the inmates are "taking great pride in knowing that they contributed to something so meaningful". 
Mr Trump's election victory has inflamed the passions of American voters across the political spectrum. 
Thousands have descended on Washington to protest Mr Trump's election with an array of demonstrations.  
Some have vowed to "shut down" with inauguration, by attempting to close down 12 security checkpoints along the route of the inaugural parade. 
In a calmer protest, DCMJ, a local pro-marijuana advocacy group will be handing out 
 4,200 free joints (which is legal under Washington law).
The Women's March, on the day after the inauguration, is expected to attract 200,000 people, said the park service, which issues permits.
The Secret Service and FBI have responded by imposing a $100 million "ring of steel" around Washington. 