'SUPREME LEADER': Kim Jong-un's new title
NORTH Korea has made "an important announcement" - Kim Jong-un is the Supreme Leader.
North Korea tipped press agencies off to the announcement in a one-sentence dispatch from the state-run Korean Central News Agency.
It was titled "Important News to Be Reported", and sent Twitter into overdrive with rumours and speculation.
The important news was since confirmed; The Supreme Leader follows in his father's footsteps as the Dear Leader, and his grandfather - the Eternal Leader.
Speculation had been rife as to the nature of the announcement.
Some of the best Tweets included:
@NJFiorvento said: "Did you guys see that KONY 2012 video? #NorthKoreaAnnouncement"
@andyacr said: "North Korea is going to announce that they won every gold medal in the olympics aleady. #FakeNorthKoreaAnnouncements"
And @mpoppel Tweeted: "T-minus 10 minutes until 'important announcement' from North Korea < They've found ALF".
Kim Jong-un has also been granted the title of marshal, cementing his status as the nation's top military official.
The formal move to bestow the title of marshal to Kim comes seven months into his rule and follows several days of reshuffling at the highest levels of the military.
On Monday, North Korea announced the chief of the army, Ri Yong Ho, a high-ranking figure in both political and military circles, was dismissed from all posts, apparently due to illness.
The following day, a little-known general, Hyon Yong Chol, was promoted to vice marshal, one of four named to that position since Kim Jong Un took power.
The dismissal of Ri, who had been promoted to vice marshal in 2010 and had been seen as a mentor to Kim Jong Un, was a surprise to many outside observers.
Kim Jong Un took over as North Korea's leader following the death of his father, longtime leader Kim Jong Il, in December, and has continued to maintain his father's policy of "songun," or military first.
The position of marshal had been left vacant following the death of Kim Jong Il, who posthumously was made grand marshal - the nation's top military title - in February on what would have been his 70th birthday.