Saudi women do want to drive
In this image made from video released by Change.org, a Saudi Arabian woman drives a car as part of a campaign to defy Saudi Arabia's ban on women driving, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Friday, June 17, 2011. Picture for illustrative purposes only.
The deterioration of affairs in Syria, together with the regime's fierce crackdown and its repercussions on Lebanese and Israeli security and politics, has made its fate the most strategically significant. However, the famous quote of the neocons' much publicised strategy for the Middle East, "Iraq is the tactical pivot, Saudi Arabia the strategic pivot, Egypt the prize", has made pundits and cab drivers alike point to the Saudi government as the one whose fall could create the most holistically significant change after Hosni Mubarak's. But while it remains to be seen who will eventually win the prize that is Egypt, and Iraq continues to explore its tendencies for a zeitgeist that isn't strongly influenced by Iran, Saudi Arabia appears to be unscathed.
The Hunayn revolution, dated March 11, failed because it overplayed its hand calling for the fall of the regime. And while Saudi Arabia's liberals ‘sat this one out', Islamists denounced the revolution wholeheartedly and reminded their government's elders that they were their true allies with whom the kingdom was founded thrice; a huge tactical misstep for the liberals — who had painstakingly cultivated a presence over the last decade or so — to say the least.
But any friend of the Saudi people should not wish a full scale ‘Egyptian style' revolution upon them. It could lead to multiple partitions, terrorism and even a civil war. Having said that, Saudi Arabia is a great country and it deserves to be in a much more sustainable and progressive status than the one it is in now. What that status could look like is really a question of supply and demand.
But who could draw that demand curve? Women … the weakest link in Saudi. What Manal Al Sharif started, which 51 women carried on June 17, was a challenge not only to a random 20-year-old ban on women's right to drive but a protest against abuse in general.
Challenge the ban on driving and suddenly many parallels will emerge. The #Women2Drive campaign wasn't about women's driving rights only. It was a case in point of a much larger set of lines that intersect it. What's being called into question is not whether women should drive in Saudi Arabia, but rather how were they ever banned in the first place.
Of course, the Ministry of Interior and the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice will dig in their heels and provide justifications that primarily relate to customs and traditions. But the case against women driving in Saudi Arabia is so weak that its clergy can't even come up with a fatwa (edict) against it — a rarity.
Though there have been no reports of the arrest of any of the 51 women — apparently, two have been stopped and one was given a fine for not carrying a licence — the success of the #Women2Drive campaign is irrelevant. It is so because they've already succeeded in something far more important: they've drawn the curtain off the taboo of publicly questioning what had been thought conceded ground. By driving, what those 51 women were really saying is:
I drive though I am not a man
The worst thing that could happen now is for the debate to be reduced to liberal aspirations in a conservative context — a feminist rebellion that it is not.
Saudi Arabia does not need conservatives and liberals battling it out in clichéd stand-offs, but it needs to have a wide post-orthodox demographic, such as women, say: "This is not our religion … this is your superimposed definition of tradition."
The real capacity of this female-led campaign is to grow into a national movement to improve all things Saudi Arabian — economic, social, et al. Simply put, what I really hope for #Women2Drive is for it to transcend into #Saudi2Thrive.
Should women drive? Should women dive and fly? Or should they only care and cry?
Female is not an exotic adjective to be placed before a noun. A woman is an independent noun that needs no circumstantial dispositions to be on a par.
I don't care to celebrate women for their gender. Just like men, I celebrate them for their achievements and 51 Saudi women did just that on June 17.
Mishaal Al Gergawi is an Emirati current affairs commentator. You can follow him atwww.twitter.com/algergawi