Asylum plan on course despite Nauru power shift
But the Federal Opposition says Mr Stephen's resignation will not present a hurdle to Tony Abbott's plan to reopen the tiny island nation's immigration detention centre.
Nauru opposition MPs had accused Mr Stephen of seeking kickbacks on a phosphate deal, but the former president says the suggestions are "unwarranted and mischievous".
Mr Stephen will remain in parliament and has been replaced by Frederick Pitcher, who previously served as the minister for commerce, industry and environment.
Opposition MP Baron Waqa says the president stepped down to avoid being removed from office.
"The Opposition were supposed to be moving a vote of no confidence this morning, but I think he was pressured from within his own caucus to resign instead of face the article 24 in our constitution which is to remove the president and his cabinet," he said.
Mr Stephen had been a strong supporter of Mr Abbott's plan to reopen Nauru's detention centre.
The Coalition has made the reopening of the facility, along with the reintroduction of temporary protection visas and turning back of asylum seeker boats, one of the key planks of its border protection policy.
But it will need to open fresh talks to renew its policy as the nine members who elected Mr Pitcher were the same nine on the ruling side of the house in the Stephen government.
The new foreign minister replacing Kieren Keke is Mathew Batsiua, the former health minister.
Dr Keke travelled to Australia during the 2010 election campaign to back Mr Abbott's asylum-seeker policy.
Opposition immigration spokesman Scott Morrison said the Coalition's discussions about reopening the processing centre had been with all members of the Nauru parliament.
"These meetings have included discussions on previous occasions with the new president and foreign minister in their previous roles in the Stephen government," Mr Morrison said.
"There is no reason to believe at this stage, based on those discussions, why there would be any reason for a change in position."
The Federal Government has ruled out reopening the centre on Nauru despite its plans to send asylum seekers to Malaysia and Papua New Guinea falling through.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard briefly discussed the issue with Mr Stephen during the Pacific Islands Forum in September.
The Howard government established the detention centre on Nauru almost a decade ago as part of its so-called Pacific Solution.
Labor began dismantling the policy when it won power in 2007.
Mr Stephen, a former professional weightlifter and multiple Commonwealth Games medallist, had been president since December 2007.
He said his stepping down was a "commonsense" decision.
"It has been an honour to serve as president of Nauru for the past four years, during which time I have been proud of the vast number of reforms and lifestyle improvements we've achieved for our people during that time," he said in a statement.
"To resign was a commonsense decision based on the fact that while there were unwarranted and mischievous attacks being made against me by the opposition, the office of the president was being devalued.
"It was becoming a distraction and I strongly believe the best way to remove that distraction was to pass over the reins to another member of the governing group so we could get on with the job we are elected to do."