Reps. Kucinich, Schmidt fall in Ohio
Two incumbents were defeated in the dramatic opening night of the 2012 House campaign season.
Ohio Rep. Marcy Kaptur defeated fellow Democratic Rep. Dennis Kucinichin the 9th District, a loss that will likely bring the longtime liberalcongressman’s Capitol Hill career to an end.
And in southern Ohio, Brad Wenstrup, a surgeon and Iraq war veteran, scored an upset victory over GOP Rep. Jean Schmidt, a third-term lawmaker who has come under ethicalscrutiny in recent months.
With 99 percent of the vote counted, Wenstrup led Schmidt 48 to 42 percent. With 78 percent of the vote in, Kaptur held a commanding lead over Kucinich, 58 to 37 percent.
The Kaptur vs. Kucinich race marked the first member vs. member clash of the 2012 election season. After the Republican-led redistricting process came to a conclusion in Ohio, Kaptur and Kucinich, who for years were allies, found themselves drawn into the same northeast Ohio district.
The race pitted two veteran Ohio pols against each other. Kaptur, a 15-term member of the House Appropriations Committee, is the longest-serving female in the House. Kucinich, a former Cleveland mayor who was elected in 1996, has a political career that stretches back to 1969, when he was elected to the Cleveland City Council.
The contest turned nasty — and personal. Kaptur accused Kucinich, who waged two unsuccessful presidential bids, of focusing on building his national profile and ditching northeast Ohio. She also slammed Kucinich for making forays into Washington state, where last year he was reportedly considering whether to relocate and launch a 2012 reelection bid.
Kucinich, who has long opposed military spending, bashed Kaptur for voting to fund the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Kaptur had been widely considered the favorite in the race because she had previously represented more of the newly-drawn 9th District, which stretched from Toledo to Cleveland.
In waging her bid, Kaptur sought to make inroads in Kucinich’s Cleveland base, traveling from her Toledo home to campaign in the city that was the launching pad for the congressman’s political career.
During the final weeks of the race, Kucinich, who boasts a national following, attracted a series of celebrities and prominent liberals to campaign on his behalf. Hip-hop mogul Russell Simmons stumped with him in the new district. Former Florida Rep. Alan Grayson raised money for him. He won an endorsement from Robert F. Kennedy Jr.
It was apparent Tuesday evening that hard feelings from the race had lingered. In a statement following her win, Kaptur thanked Kucinich after first acknowledging Graham Vesey, a little-known Democratic candidate who barely registered in the primary.
“I would like to thank Graham Vesey for his energy and enthusiasm and Congressman Dennis Kucinich for his spirited debate,” Kaptur said in the statement. “We will need them, and their supporters help to work for the betterment of all of northern Ohio.”