Source: Jon Huntsman to drop out of presidential race
"Jon Huntsman made a basic calculation here, let's be honest. If you look at the polling, he's doing miserable in South Carolina. He's not going to win the state next Saturday and so if he wants to run in 2016 ... this is a chance ... to try to get a little bit of goodwill in the party, a little bit of leverage," said CNN Chief National Correspondent John King.
Debates on Monday in Myrtle Beach and Thursday in Charleston will almost certainly give voters their last chance to see all the remaining Republican candidates on one stage, as some are likely to drop out after Saturday's vote. CNN will broadcast the Charleston debate.
"If for some reason he's not derailed here and Mitt Romney wins South Carolina, no one's ever won all three, I think it should be over," Graham told NBC's "Meet the Press" program. "That would be quite a testament to his ability as a candidate and a campaigner."
After previously describing Romney's former company, Bain Capital, as corporate "vultures" who looted North Carolina companies, Perry used less combative language Sunday on CNN's "State of the Union" but reiterated his accusation that it "came in and basically shut down" a Georgetown steel mill, taking away "a lot of money in management fees."
On NBC, Gingrich also said he would release his tax return on Thursday and reiterated his challenge for Romney to do the same, continuing a campaign to get Romney to disclose details of his personal wealth.
"We're all going to do everything we can to defeat Barack Obama," Gingrich said, adding that Obama's re-election "would lead him to be so arrogant and so aggressive that it's hard to imagine what would come out of a second term."
"I was told that individual members are going to go out and do things with, you know, either endorsements or contacting people here in the state and across the states to support us and to help our cause," said Santorum, a former Pennsylvania senator who was virtually tied for fourth in New Hampshire with Gingrich.
"It would be helpful if everybody dropped out and I would win," Santorum said. "But, you know, the idea is, we're going to go through this process, people have the right to go out and make the case to the voters and then we'll see what happens."