ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The commander of the Australian Defence Force Academy (ADFA) has been told to take leave, as the Federal Government announces a series of inquiries into the culture of the Defence Force.
Sex Discrimination Commissioner Elizabeth Broderick will conduct a wide-ranging review into the way women are treated at ADFA and will also review strategies for encouraging women into Defence leadership.
The inquiry follows allegations that video of a consensual sexual encounter at the college was transmitted, without the female cadet's knowledge, to other cadets via Skype software.
The incident is the subject of a criminal investigation by the Federal Police.
Defence Minister Stephen Smith has been critical of the way the female cadet involved in the incident was treated by ADFA's commandant, Commodore Bruce Kafer.
Commodore Kafer was on the weekend directed by his superior officer to take leave from his posting until further notice.
Mr Smith says the inquiry will be the first step in bringing about cultural change at ADFA.
"The time has come for external review," he said.
"We need to drive home that inappropriate conduct in uniform or as a representative of the Defence Force brings with it serious adverse consequences.
"[This includes] the treatment of women, alcohol use and use of social media and representational behaviour more generally."
Mr Smith says there will also be a plan to allow women to participate in all roles in the Defence Force, including combat.
"I have asked the Chief to bring forward the implementation of a matter which I as Minister of Defence and Minister for Defence Personnel Warren Snowdon very strongly agree with in principle: when it comes to women, opportunity should be based on physical and intellectual capacity, not gender," he said.
The 'Skype incident' - which Mr Smith described as "the worst example of betrayal that one could contemplate" - will be the subject of a separate inquiry by Melbourne barrister Andrew Kirkham QC.
There have been several reviews of conduct in the services since the 1960s and an investigation into ADFA in 1998.
Asked why would this investigation be any different, Mr Smith said "we are seeking to drive cultural change" and he likened the conduct problems with those that emerge from football teams.
"Just like the AFL, just like the NRL, the Australian Defence Force will potentially, into the future, confront incidents of poor or adverse behaviour," he said.
"Culturally we need to ensure that members of the Defence Force understand that there will be no tolerance for that and we need to educate and effect cultural change."
Mr Smith repeated his criticism of Commander Kafer in that he chose to hear an unrelated disciplinary matter against the female cadet at the same time she was told of the Skype incident.
But he praised other aspects of Commodore Kafer's leadership of the Academy.
"This decision was made by the Vice-Chief of the Defence Force, who is effectively Commodore Kafer's commanding officer, in his best interests, in the best interests of ADFA and also in the best interests of Defence," Mr Smith said.
"It is appropriate that he, through his leave, stands aside from the Defence Force Academy at this time, but it is also appropriate if he is able to do so to contemplate with the Vice-Chief of the Defence Force other work in a different area.
"This is a difficult time for the woman concerned and also for Commander Kafer."
Chief of Defence Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston says it has been a "very stressful" time for Commander Kafer and his family.
"He has been subjected to abusive and offensive phone calls. The environment is such that it is best if he goes on leave," he said.
Air Chief Marshal Houston says the male cadet at centre of webcam claims is still at ADFA continuing with his studies.
He says the inquiry must proceed on the basis of facts and only then can judgment be passed.
"The circumstances - the Skype incident - are abhorrent. In terms of the circumstances of how it happened ... I will not undermine due process," he said.
"I will wait until we get all the facts before assigning blame to any individual."
Air Chief Marshal Houston says Defence has been working very hard to increase the participation of women in the workforce but admits the process is not perfect.
"Are we perfect? No, we're not, and I think the (HMAS) Success inquiry showed sometimes things don't go as they should," he said.
"We have pockets in the organisation where there are problems in some of these areas, particularly the misuse of alcohol.
"From time to time, unfortunately when you have about 50,000 people under the age of 25, there will be incidents. Now I think they are the exception rather than the rule."
"That seems to be a sensible way to go and let's hope any inquiry gets to the bottom of any problems in the culture of this institution," he said at a press conference in Sydney.
"As the father of three daughters I think it's vital that institutions like ADFA are the kind of places that people would be proud and confident to send their kids."