Top lawyer Malcolm McCusker announced as new WA governor
NEWLY appointed West Australian Governor Malcolm McCusker AO QC says he plans to donate his $422,678 salary to charities.
The philanthropist and respected barrister will officially take over the role on July 1.
Mr McCusker told reporters at Government House in Perth on Monday he was ``surprised, delighted and honoured'' when Premier Colin Barnett asked him to become the 31st governor of WA.
However, he said he also had some hesitation about it due to the ``daunting'' standard set by previous governors.
He said current Governor Dr Ken Michael and his wife Julie had set the bar ``very high'' and he hoped that he and his wife Tonya could ``follow in their footsteps''.
The 72-year-old said he intended to donate his $422,678 salary to charities including the Lions Eye Institute, Salvation Army and organisations devoted to indigenous health.
Mr McCusker said the role of governor was to lead by example in the community, particularly through charity work.
``We have in the past supported a wide range of charitable organisations from medical research, aged care, youth and education, suicide prevention with a youth focus, scholarships for indigenous people and students, as well as the arts,'' he said.
Mr McCusker said he hoped to continue that work and to do it even better as governor.
He said with a grandfather who was a miner and a father who left school at age 15, he was not ``born with the proverbial silver spoon'' and hoped that meant the community could identify with him.
Mr McCusker is currently a senior barrister but says he will not practise during his three-year term as governor.
However, he says he hopes to be a mentor to students.
Mr McCusker was born in Perth and has three adult children with his previous wife. He has one child with wife Tonya and is a stepfather to her two children.
Mr McCusker was appointed a Queens Counsel in 1982 and was made an Officer of the Order of Australia in 2005.
He was the WA Citizen of the Year (Professions) in 2005, WA Citizen of the Year (Community Service) in 2010, Philanthropist of the Year in 2010 and WA’s Australian of the Year in 2010.
He has been awarded Honorary Doctorates from Edith Cowan University and The University of Western Australia.
He may host his first royalty in October, when either the Queen or Prince Charles, or both, will attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM).
Mr Barnett said Mr McCusker was eminently suited to undertake the role due to the high esteem in which he is held in the community and his extensive knowledge of WA.
The premier said although there had been some speculation that he might appoint WA's first female governor, he said Mr McCusker had been the ``outstanding choice''.
Dr Michael's five-year term will end on April 30. The Lieutenant Governor, Justice Wayne Martin, will perform the duties of governor until Mr McCusker takes up his appointment.