Here is Denmark's new coalition government
The PM formally presented his new 22-member cabinet to the queen on Monday. Photo: Thomas Lekfeldt/Scanpix
bringing in the libertarian-leaning Liberal Alliance (LA) and the Conservative People's Party After announcing on Sunday that he had shored up his minority government by bringing in the libertarian-leaning Liberal Alliance (LA) and the Conservative People's Party , PM Lars Løkke Rasmussen presented his new team on Monday. 
Rasmussen presented a 22-member cabinet that includes six posts for LA and three for the Conservatives. Under the new constellation, a number of high profile politicians swapped portfolio and a handful of veteran politicians were left without a job. 
Rasmussen's centre-right Venstre party has held only 34 out of 179 seats in parliament since June 2015. Under the new coalition, the government remains in the minority, with 53 seats, and will depend on the support of the anti-immigration Danish People's Party (DF) in parliament to pass legislation.
The new team he presented on Monday represents Rasmussen’s third cabinet, as he also served as prime minister between 2009 and 2011.
Samuelsen replaces Kristian Jensen, who now becomes Finance Minister. The appointment is somewhat surprising, as many figured Samuelsen would be given a financial post. 
Poulsen replaces Søren Pind of Venstre, who moves over to become the minister for higher education and research.
By replacing veteran Venstre man Claus Hjort Frederiksen as one of the most important ministers on Rasmussen’s team, political analysts say that 45-year-old Jensen has all but shored up his position as the eventual next leader of Venstre. 
Tørnæs leaves her post as the higher education and research minister to be in charge of international development, an area that previously fell under the foreign minister’s role. 
No change here as the hardline and very popular Støjberg remains in charge of the nation’s immigration policies. 
Ellemann leaves her post as the minister for social affairs and the interior and instead takes over the equality portfolio, which has been separated out from under the Education Ministry. 
Nørby takes over for Sophie Løhde, who will now be the newly-created minister for public innovation.
A new position created by breaking out the responsibilities of the former minister for children, education and equality. 
Bock replaces Bertel Haarder, the veteran Venstre man who holds the record for the longest-serving minister in Danish history. Haarder is one of the four Venstre politicians to lose a ministerial position in the shake-up. 