ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
A protest by asylum seekers at Sydney's Villawood Immigration Detention Centre has ended, with all 11 men leaving the roof of the centre.
Nine Sri Lankan Tamils and two Iraqis had been on the roof since yesterday morning after the death of a Fijian man at the centre.
It is thought 36-year-old Josefa Rauluni killed himself after he was informed he was being deported.
The detainees climbed to the top of the roof to stage a protest about their own request for asylum.
Earlier on Tuesday afternoon, officials from the Department of Immigration managed to negotiate with three asylum seekers and brought them down. The rest then followed.
The asylum seekers wanted someone from the Immigration Department to visit them, setting a deadline of 5pm, but that deadline passed.
They were told they had to come down from the roof before their concerns could be addressed.
It is understood the department has not made any official promises to the detainees.
Earlier an Iranian detainee at the centre, who wanted to be known only as Ali, said about 150 fellow inmates had also gone on a hunger strike and several had been taken to hospital.
He said many of the detainees were still in shock after Mr Rauluni's death.
"After that tragedy happened here, that lovely fellow from Fiji, he killed himself in front of everyone, no-one can handle it, people can't sleep," he said.
Two of the rooftop protesters cut themselves and used their blood on a protest banner.
One asylum seeker lunged to jump off the building and had to be restrained by his fellow protesters.
The incident has prompted calls for an overhaul of mental health services for asylum seekers, but Immigration Department spokesman Sandi Logan says the current services for detainees are first class.
"There have certainly been major reforms to the way detention health services are delivered to detainees," he said.
"There are mental health nurses on all sites [and] there is trauma and torture counselling available for all detainees."
And Mr Logan has rejected claims that staff at the detention centre did not take Mr Rauluni's suicide threats seriously.
He told triple j's Hack program that such assumptions are being made on misinformation.
"I have no doubt whatsoever that whenever a client makes a threat about self-harm, about voluntary starvation, about anything to do with their mental health and their wellbeing, those threats are taken very seriously by the department and its service providers," he said.