Poland’s presidential election
THE presidential election on May 10th will set the tone for Poland’s general election this autumn. It has been dominated by the long-standing rivalry between the centre-right Civic Platform (PO), which has held power since 2007, and the conservative Law and Justice party (PiS) that it defeated. The PO-backed incumbent, Bronislaw Komorowski, is the most likely winner. But his ratings have dipped to 40%, making it more probable that he will need to win a second-round run-off in two weeks’ time against the PiS candidate, Andrzej Duda, who is below 30%.
This week Mr Komorowski was due to take centre stage at events to mark the 70th anniversary of the end of the war in Europe. Yet he has been treading cautiously. He was the only candidate to shun a televised presidential debate. Mr Duda was left to make himself heard among a gaggle of other candidates (there are 11 in all). Mr Komorowski’s team have released a clip reminding voters of Mr Duda’s conservative views on in-vitro fertilisation, to which the Catholic church is hostile, but which a majority of Poles support.
Yet again the left has failed to make much of a showing. The Democratic Left Alliance (SLD), descended from the former communists, took a gamble by nominating Magdalena Ogorek, a 36-year-old historian and television personality. But she has failed to appeal to voters, winning ratings as low as 3%. To add insult to injury, she has distanced herself from the SLD, calling herself “an independent”.
The dark horse is Pawel Kukiz, a 51-year-old former rock musician who courts voters fed up with the main parties. He is in third place, with one poll giving him 11% support. “Poland has the same problems as 90 years ago,” Mr Kukiz said in a campaign clip that opened with an old radio broadcasting a speech in 1924 by Jozef Pilsudski, Poland’s interwar leader. In place of lists he wants single-member constituencies, which he calls the “start of responsibility in politics”. In a recent interview Mr Kukiz said he would not endorse a second-round candidate “who reinforces PO’s omnipotence”.
Both PO and PiS have their minds on the forthcoming general election. The polls put PO ahead, but neither party looks likely to be able to govern alone. PO’s leader, Ewa Kopacz, who took over last autumn when Donald Tusk went to Brussels as European Council president, may need her current coalition partner, the agrarian Polish People’s Party. PiS has fewer choices: it may have to talk to anti-system figures such as Mr Kukiz or Janusz Korwin-Mikke, a 72-year-old radical and member of the European Parliament who is running for president. Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the veteran PiS leader, has called Mr Korwin-Mikke “a component of the pathology of Polish public life” and likened him to Vladimir Zhirinovsky, a far-right Russian politician.
For now, PiS is concentrating on getting Mr Duda into the second round. If it succeeds, the party’s spokesman predicts “two weeks that will shake Polish politics”. A televised confrontation, in which the president has said he would take part, could have a big impact. In the first round, disgruntled voters may hand Polish leaders a “yellow card” by picking outsiders, says Jaroslaw Flis, a sociologist at Krakow’s Jagiellonian University. In a second round, it will be up to Mr Komorowski and Mr Duda to win them over, “with hope or with fear”. Whoever wins may presage a victory for his party in the autumn.