Joseph Dunford, Joint Chiefs Nominee, Known to Maneuver Between Roles
The general also has strong support within the military ranks. Nicknamed “Fighting Joe” for his leadership of the Marine regiment that was the first to cross into Iraq and press toward Baghdad during the 2003 United States invasion, General Dunford rose quickly from a one-star general to a four-star.
Just weeks after taking over as Marine Corps commandant, he was photographed in December at Washington’s Navy Yard, taking the arduous physical fitness test Marines are subjected to before they are sent into combat. This included hoisting 30-pound ammunition cans and carrying another soldier on his shoulders.
At the same time, General Dunford rose to the top of the adrenaline-fueled service while maintaining a low-key demeanor that seems to match Mr. Obama’s.
“In this administration, a no-drama commander gets very high marks,” said Lt. Gen. David W. Barno, who commanded United States forces in Afghanistan from 2003 to 2005 and is now a distinguished practitioner in residence at American University’s School of International Service. “He is a very, very aggressive commander, and at the same time, he can effectively communicate very complex military choices and options from the military parlance into options and context that can be understood by the political leadership.”
General Dunford is regarded as a straight talker who managed security around last year’s Afghan presidential elections as the United States was ending its combat mission.
“He just impressed everybody tremendously with his demeanor, confidence, and his combination of military and diplomatic skills,” said James F. Dobbins, the director of the RAND International Security and Defense Policy Center, who served as Mr. Obama’s special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan during General Dunford’s tour in Kabul.
“He was able to clearly express his views in a way that commanded respect and, at the same time, also foster the view that he was a loyal soldier operating within a system and was quite capable of interacting effectively with not just the president but the rest of the National Security Council as a team player,” Mr. Dobbins said in an interview.