The University of Puerto Rico student strike, explained
The University of Puerto Rico has been on a systematic indefinite strike since April 5. On that day the strike was approved and since then ten out of eleven (with the Medical Science campus holding a72 hour strikein lieu) campuses have joined in this strike as a sign of unity.
Students have said that the strike will only be lifted until the following conditions are met:
These conditions are critical to understanding why the university student body has decided on an indefinite strike instead of the individual and shorter strikes that each campus has made.  The University of Puerto Rico has been threatened by a $450 million budget cut suggested by the Oversight Board andenforcedby the government. The students fear that the budget cuts will affect the university’s capacity to attend to student’s needs, to function at its full capacity and that it would mean theclosing of campuses. Interim President Nivia Fernandez’s resignation has been solicited by student leaders due toher positionin favoring the budget cuts. In February, then Interim President Celeste Freytes had asked as to how the Oversight Board had arrived at what was then a$300 million budget cut. Since then, there has been no answer as to what they are basing their budget cuts on.
There is also the matter of having tuition increased or having it exempted. 70% of the students are recipients of the Pell Grant, allowing them to attend the university at low or no cost. With Puerto Rico’s economy in crisis and apoverty rate of 46%it is important for many of these students, some being the first in their family, to attend a higher education institution as this will guarantee thema higher salaryand more employment opportunities in and outside the archipelago.
The auditing of the debt has been asked as a matter of transparency. As mentioned before, the budget cuts aren’t based on any study made by the Oversight Board. The government has insisted that the university do its part in paying the debt yet the students have asked that before doing so, they see where the borrowed money went.
The students of the University of Puerto Rico have decided to take a stance against the government’s attempt tocut educationand to pay anunauditeddebt as the people of Puerto Rico continue to live inpossibly worsening conditions.