Italy’s Berlusconi Narrowly Survives Confidence Vote
In his narrowest escape yet, Prime Minister barely survived a confidence vote on Friday, saving his government from collapse but leaving it all but incapable of legislating effectively.
With 316 votes for and 301 votes against, Mr. Berlusconi’s center-right coalition won the vote. But it failed to secure a solid majority, making it increasingly difficult for him to pass legislation aimed at protecting from ’s . Had he lost, Mr. Berlusconi would have had to resign, marking the end of an 18-year political era in which the billionaire businessman shaped Italian politics in his own image, entwining the country’s fate with his own.
In what the daily Corriere della Sera called “an atmosphere of interminable agony,” analysts said the Berlusconi government was now hanging by a thread and could fall at the next bump in the road — when enough disgruntled lawmakers from within Mr. Berlusconi’s coalition calculate that they would be safer jumping off a sinking ship rather than staying aboard and risking drowning.
Mr. Berlusconi called the confidence vote after failing to pass a routine measure this week. Addressing lawmakers on Thursday, the prime minister said he was the only “credible alternative” able to govern Italy through the economic crisis, and refused to step down.
Since 2009, the European debt crisis has felled governments in , and , led to early elections in and a cabinet reshuffle in . So far, Mr. Berlusconi has proven to be a tough outlier — not least because the in August agreed to buy Italian debt. But the bank did this in exchange for promised structural changes that the government has not yet carried out, a mix of increases and changes to the pension system. The results of Friday’s vote promise to make that even more difficult.
This week, opposition leaders — and the president of Italy, in an unusually strong statement — told Mr. Berlusconi that surviving a confidence vote was not the same as governing. In the statement, President Giorgio Napolitano said the prime minister had to show the “necessary cohesion” to tackle Italy’s budget deficits and to propose “adequate solutions to the urgent problems of the country, including in meeting its European obligations.”