Swaziland Pro-Democracy Protesters Rally Amid Arrests
Pro-democracy protesters rallied in Swaziland, Africa’s last absolute monarchy, a day after police detained almost 50 activists.
About 1,000 demonstrators gathered today in Manzini, the southern African nation’s second-biggest city, said Zakhele Mabuza, a spokesman for the Peoples’ United Democratic Front, or Pudemo. Police briefly detained Pudemo President Mario Masuku, while Deputy President Sikhumbuzo Pakhathi has been in custody since yesterday and the group’s lawyers are trying to find out whether he has been charged, Mabuza said by phone from Manzini.
Political parties are banned in the kingdom, which borders South Africa and is ruled by King Mswati III, 42. Another rally may be held tomorrow in the capital, Mbabane, Mabuza said. The arrests yesterday occurred at a meeting of groups campaigning for political change, London-based Amnesty International said.
Police spokesmen declined to give information on the size of the rally or the number of officers assigned to it. Pudemo alleged that protesters were initially outnumbered by the security forces as part of an attempt to suppress dissent.
Amnesty said late yesterday in a statement that a majority of those arrested in Manzini were released without charge. Most of the 16 remaining detainees were freed today, Wendy Hleta, a police spokeswoman, said by phone from the capital.
“The arbitrary arrest of these political activists, lawyers, trade unionists and journalists is nothing short of police harassment and intimidation,” Amnesty International’s southern Africa researcher, Mary Rayner, said in the statement.
Some of those detained were members of the Congress of South African Trade Unions, Hleta said.
“We didn’t think South Africans had a right to be involved in our domestic affairs,” Hleta said.
Cosatu condemned the arrests in a statement e-mailed today from Johannesburg.
“Every arrest brings closer the liberation of the people of Swaziland and we urge the people to stand firm in their demand for democracy; it is a painful, but worthy struggle,” Cosatu said.