Ivory Coast 'street general' calls off Golf Hotel assault
Mr Ble Goude, the Minister for Youth, said on state television that several parties had asked "us to postpone our plan" to attack the Golf Hotel, where Mr Gbagbo's presidential rival is staying.
He added that they had "decided to give a chance to the negotiations that are underway" in a bid to broker a solution to end the stand-off between the two rivals.
Mr Ble Goude warned however that if calls were repeated to use force to remove Mr Gbagbo from office, he would call once again for an assault on the hotel.
"But we warn those occupying the Golf Hotel that we are not prepared to accept any declaration whatsoever threatening to attack Ivorians, in which case - I make myself clear - we will come and get them, dislodge them, bare handed, from this hotel, whatever army is protecting them," Mr Ble Goude said.
The announcement came as the lawyer for Mr Gbagbo warned that troops participating in an international campaign to remove him by force would be going to their "grave".
Jacques Verges, who is nicknamed The Devil’s Advocate for defending clients including Slobodan Milosevic , the Serbian strongman, and Carlos the Jackal, the Venuzuelan terrorist, said that France was pursuing a “neo-colonialist” agenda in the cocoa rich nation.
France ruled Ivory Coast from the late 1880s until 1960 and is expected to be at the forefront of the military intervention that has been threatened by Ecowas, the 15-national West African bloc.
But Mr Verges warned that military action would be met by considerable resistance.
“We want to say to the French authorities - don’t forget Vietnam, you appeared to be stronger then and look at Dien Bien Phu (the site of the French defeat by the Viet Minh communist force),” he was quoted as saying by Notre Voie, pro-Gbagbo Ivorian newspaper.
“In Algeria, you were stronger and you were defeated. If you attack Ivory Coast as you want to, it will be your grave.”
His comments came as three West African leaders plus Raila Odinga, Kenya’s Prime Minister and the African Union-appointed mediator, are expected to arrive in Ivory Coast on Monday for a new round of talks aimed at persuading Mr Gbagbo to step down and go into exile.
Mr Verges was speaking after a meeting with Mr Gbagbo, who has steadfastly refused to cede power to Alassane Ouattara, who the UN certified as the winner in last month’s presidential election.
Since then, around 200 people have been killed and hundreds more are missing - the UN fears some have been buried in mass graves but says its attempts to investigate have been thwarted by armed supporters of Mr Gbagbo.
In a televised New Year’s address, Mr Gbagbo said he had no intention of leaving and said the pressure on him to leave amounted to “an attempted coup d’etat carried out under the banner of the international community”.