Jobs bill stalls in Senate
President Barack Obama’s jobs plan stalled in the Senate on Tuesday night, handing the White House a defeat on its signature economic initiative after two moderate Democrats joined a united GOP front to block the chamber from staging a debate.
The vote was held open for a couple hours to allow Sen. Jeanne Shaheen (D-N.H.) to return from an event in Boston and cast a vote that would effectively show that a simple majority of 51 senators — all Democrats — agreed to begin debate on the president’s measure.
But that was still nine votes shy of the 60 needed to break a Republican filibuster, forcing the White House and leaders from both parties to find a new way forward with millions out of work and the economy dominating the presidential election season. The final tally was actually 50-49, as Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) switched his vote to “no” so he could bring the bill up again without needing to file cloture.
“Tonight’s vote is by no means the end of this fight,” the president said in response.
“With each vote, members of Congress can either explain to their constituents why they’re against common-sense, bipartisan proposals to create jobs, or they can listen to the overwhelming majority of American people who are crying out for action.”
Further imperiling the Obama plan’s chances, several moderate members of the Democratic Caucus — Sens. Joe Lieberman of Connecticut, Jim Webb of Virginia and Joe Manchin of West Virginia — said they opposed the president’s plan and would vote against it on its merits. But they said in the spirit of holding a debate, they would vote to break the filibuster so the plan could be considered in the full Senate.
The biggest surprise was Manchin, who is up for reelection in a state where Obama is deeply unpopular and who has frequently sparred with the president on his policies.
“Get it before me, I’ll tell you if I’m for it or not,” Manchin told POLITICO after the vote. “I vote for the procedure … but I’m opposed to the spending that goes on … I’m truly in support of trying to create jobs, which is the infrastructure part of it. It was hard to say this was the finality - you vote not to move it on. And I’ve been very clear I would not vote for it in the president form if it moved forward without the chance to restructure it.”
After he voted for the plan, Manchin shook hands with Reid, who smiled and patted the freshman senator on the back. In so doing, the three senators helped save face for the president - ensuring that Democrats can argue that a majority in the Senate supports moving the plan forward.
Unlike Manchin, the two other in-cycle moderate Democrats who opposed the plan face tough paths to reelection: Sens. Ben Nelson of Nebraska and Jon Tester of Montana.
The final outcome was long expected - Democrats knew that staunch GOP opposition was expected to derail a plan that Obama unveiled in a September address before Congress and called for its immediate passage time and again on the campaign trail.