Diplomat and Military Commanders in Iraq Condemn Planned Koran Burning
The United States ambassador in Iraq and the commanding general of United States forces in Iraq joined Gen. David H. Petraeus, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. and the Vatican in condemning a Florida pastor’s plans to mark the ninth anniversary of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks with a bonfire of Korans.
James F. Jeffrey, the American ambassador in Iraq, and Lt. Gen. Lloyd J. Austin III, the commanding general of United States forces in Iraq, echoed Mrs. Clinton’s comments on Wednesday, calling the plans by Terry Jones, the pastor of the Dove World Outreach Center in Gainesville, Fla., “disrespectful, divisive and disgraceful.” [Read the full statement (pdf)]
General Petraeus said Tuesday that the Koran burning could endanger American troops in Afghanistan and the safety of Americans around the world by inciting violence among Islamic extremists. Mr. Holder, during a meeting with religious leaders on Tuesday, called the planned bonfire “idiotic and dangerous.” Mr. Jones said Tuesday that he and his church were taking General Petraeus’s concerns into consideration but planned to continue with the book burning. “We feel it is maybe the right time for America to stand up,” he told a Fox affiliate in Gainesville. “How long are we going to bow down? How long are we going to be controlled by the terrorists, by radical Islam?”
Reaction in Iraq to Mr. Jones’s plan came in the form of a threat to St. George’s Church in Baghdad. Canon Andrew White, the Anglican chaplain to Iraq, wrote in an e-mail statement that an Iraqi Army colonel had just visited him to tell him of a threat against his congregation. The colonel said, “There are plans to blow you up because of what the pastor in Florida has said about burning the holy Koran,” according to Canon White.
Canon White, who is head of The Foundation for Relief and Reconciliation in the Middle East, said, “There is nothing we can do to protect ourselves. The army is being sent to us in force to try and protect us, what they can do is also limited. Here we do not hate the Muslims, we love them. They are our colleagues that we work with to try and reduce violence, they are the majority of the patients at our clinic. Jesus even said to us ‘Love your enemies.’ We do have many here, but we try and love them all.”
Fellow Christian leaders had questions for Mr. Jones, too, wondering how he squared his Christian faith with the burning of another faith’s sacred text. And the Vatican’s Pontifical Council for Inter-Religious Dialogue said in a statement released Wednesday that the terrorist attacks “cannot be counteracted by an outrageous and grave gesture against a book considered sacred by a religious community.”
The Rev. C. Welton Gaddy, president of the Interfaith Alliance, told “The Rachel Maddow Show” on Tuesday, “I don’t have the vocabulary to denounce the intent or the action going on in that church. It is dangerous for our nation abroad, it is disrespectful of our Constitution, it certainly represents no religion I know — and particularly Christianity, it doesn’t represent. There is no way that should take place.”