Democrat Wins Special Election for Kerry’s Senate Seat
Mr. Markey’s election does not change the balance of power in the Senate, where Democrats have 54 votes and Republicans have 46. But Democratic control had already slipped by one this month after Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey died and was succeeded by an interim Republican.
Mr. Markey’s win came as a surprise to no one. Every poll in the state showed him leading Mr. Gomez, though by varying margins, since the primaries ended two months ago.
Mr. Markey’s biggest advantage was that his views were in line with those of most voters in deep blue Massachusetts. With a much bigger war chest, which he used to flood the airwaves with ads, he campaigned consistently on his support for abortion rights and a ban on assault weapons and reminded voters constantly that Mr. Gomez opposed both.
As the campaign went on, Mr. Markey added arguments that Democrats had used successfully in previous Senate races — that his opponent wanted to cut Medicare benefits, raise the eligibility age for Social Security and give special tax breaks to corporations.
For his part, Mr. Gomez repeatedly cast Mr. Markey, who was first elected to Congress in 1976, as a relic who had little to show for his decades in Washington. He cast himself as a “new kind of Republican” who supported same-sex marriage, expanded background checks for gun purchases and a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants. But he could not convince enough Massachusetts voters that he would vote independently of the national Republican Party.
While the Markey campaign feared that Mr. Gomez would attract millions of dollars in outside money from special interests, that backing did not materialize in a serious way.
Mr. Markey himself did not exactly set the electorate on fire. He was the consensus choice of the Democratic establishment, which wanted to focus on one candidate early in hopes of avoiding a repeat of 2010, when a Republican, Scott P. Brown, won the special Senate election to fill the seat of Edward M. Kennedy, who died in 2009.
Mr. Markey ran a cautious campaign that relied heavily on big Democratic stars, including President Obama, Michelle Obama, former President Bill Clinton, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Senator Elizabeth Warren.
“Democrats are getting the outcome they were supposed to get, but they had to put a lot of firepower into it,” said Jennifer Duffy, a senior editor at The Cook Political Report. She characterized the Democratic juggernaut, including an extensive field operation that made contact with three million voters over the last five days, as backup insurance that the loss of 2010 would not be repeated. On Tuesday alone, the party organized 7,200 volunteers to get out the vote.
“This victory has less to do with Ed Markey and more with the fact that he’s the Democrat,” she said. The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee took considerable credit for the victory Tuesday night.
“We recruited Ed Markey into the race, worked with him to build a campaign team with the best Senate talent from Massachusetts and around the country, and secured commitments early on from top Democratic leaders that they would actively support the Democratic nominee,” Guy Cecil, the committee’s executive director, said in a statement.
Looking ahead to other Senate races next year, he said that winning in Massachusetts “was an important first step in our efforts to preserve the Democratic majority.”
Senator Jerry Moran of Kansas, the chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, was upbeat, declaring that Mr. Gomez had forced the Democrats to spend millions to drag Mr. Markey “across the finish line in the most liberal state in the country.”
And he all but announced that Mr. Gomez would challenge Mr. Markey in November 2014, when Mr. Markey will have to defend the seat for a full six-year term. “Today marks the end of the first mile in the marathon to permanently fill the Massachusetts Senate seat,” Mr. Moran said. “Gabriel Gomez is well prepared to win that marathon over the next 16 months.”