ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Country Liberals MLA Adam Giles has led a leadership coup against Terry Mills and is the new Chief Minister of the Northern Territory.
Dave Tollner is reported to be the new Deputy Chief Minister.
Mr Giles becomes the first Indigenous head of government in Australian history.
Mr Mills is still in Japan and was told of the news of a leadership spill by phone earlier today.
It follows a marathon meeting of the Country Liberals' parliamentary wing last week, where Mr Tollner was sacked from Cabinet, Mr Giles was blocked from challenging for the top job, and Willem Westra van Holthe was elected Deputy Chief Minister.
Mr Mills says he was in Yokohama when Mr Westra Van Holthe rang him to say the numbers had shifted and he no longer had the support of the party as leader.
"Not having sufficient support, I then stepped aside," he said.
He cancelled all his scheduled meetings in Japan and is planning to fly home as soon as possible.
"I will stand aside... I will do the honourable thing by the Territory," he said.
Country Liberals president Ross Connolly says Mr Giles had planned to wait for Mr Mills to return to Darwin before announcing the news.
"It's unusual and disappointing, I would have to say, and I think it was ... Adam said it was his intention and he swore the members to secrecy, but there's been quite consistent leaking and what have you and it's quite disappointing that it was released," he said.
Mr Connolly says he hopes the change of leadership helps resolve tensions within the party.
He says the change has meant a "substantial" shift of interests within the parliamentary wing of the party.
There were reports on ABC radio news last night that Mr Giles had described Regional Development Minister Alison Anderson as a "good friend and colleague".
At last week's meeting, Ms Anderson and other bush MLAs vetoed his tilt for the top job
Last night's report was the first comment made by Mr Giles after he and Ms Anderson locked horns.
He described Ms Anderson as an "outstanding minister" and said he had always worked well with her.
He did not make comment on Ms Anderson's "little boy" jibe at him last week when scuttling his bid for the leadership.
"I think Alison Anderson does a fantastic job and I look forward to continuing that relationship," he said.
Mr Mills' dumping is the second such development in a week, coming after Ted Baillieu's replacement as Victorian Premier last Wednesday.