Andy Coulson: I may have seen top-secret state material
No 10 says it has no proof former NoW editor had unsupervised access to documents despite his evidence to Leveson inquiry
The former News of the World editor Andy Coulson has admitted that he may have had unsupervised access to top-secret material while he worked for David Cameron in Downing Street despite having only mid-level security clearance.
No 10 has insisted it no has evidence showing Coulson was sent information incorrectly or for which he was not authorised, but when Robert Jay, QC, counsel for the Leveson inquiry, asked if he had unsupervised access to top-secret material, he replied: "I may have done, yes."
Coulson told the inquiry that he had undergone vetting to "security check" level in order to work inside Downing Street, which is less rigorous than almost all of his predecessors and successors in a similar role.
Under government security rules, only officials who have undergone more stringent "developed vetting" are allowed regular unsupervised access to top-secret state papers. Security check clearance grants only "occasional, controlled access" to top-secret documents, according to government guidelines.
Coulson's admission undermines No 10's account of the former News International employee's access to the most sensitive government documents while he was Downing Street director of communications.
Cameron has faced tough questioning over Coulson's security vetting since it was made public last summer, because it fuelled suggestions the prime minister failed to take proper steps to check allegations that Coulson had been involved in illegal behaviour at the News of the World.
Senior police and military officials told the Guardian they were shocked by Coulson's evidence and said access to top-secret material by an unvetted official could even endanger counter-terror sources whose identities are sometimes contained in such documents.
The government's own criteria (pdf) for what constitutes top-secret material says it must "threaten directly the internal stability of the United Kingdom or friendly countries; lead directly to widespread loss of life; cause exceptionally grave damage to the effectiveness or security of United Kingdom or allied forces or to the continuing effectiveness of extremely valuable security or intelligence operations; cause exceptionally grave damage to relations with friendly governments; or cause severe long-term damage to the United Kingdom economy".
Developed vetting is undertaken by trained investigators who interview candidates for up to three hours, as well as their friends and family. "We have to look at your loyalty, honesty and reliability, and whether you could be particularly vulnerable to bribery or blackmail," government guidance to the process states.
In May 2010, the then permanent secretary at Downing Street, Jeremy Heywood (now the cabinet secretary), decided Coulson and some other senior officials would not undergo high-level vetting.
No 10 has maintained the decision was made partly because too many officials had unnecessary access to highly sensitive papers in the previous government and partly to keep down costs.
In questions put directly to the prime minister's spokesman and through freedom of information requests over the past nine months, the Guardian has asked if Coulson had at any time had "unsupervised access to information designated top secret or above?".
In July last year, Cameron's spokesman said "there is no suggestion that Andy Coulson, or anyone else, had access to the most secret papers", adding the government has "careful and rigorous procedures in place to handle top-secret material".
Following an internal review of its handling of the questions, the Cabinet Office replied in March: "No information is held that shows that Andy Coulson was sent information incorrectly or for which he was not authorised".
"This would be completely wrong," a senior police source said after Coulson gave his evidence. "Top-secret material could be sensitive in terms of sources or in other ways and if you are not trained or vetted you wouldn't understand the implications of what you were handling. The Americans would be particularly horrified. Lives are at risk if untrained people are not aware of the circumstances around the information."
A former senior military officer said: "Potentially, this makes a mockery of the vetting system. It is there for a purpose, to stop sensitive information being provided to people who don't have the right clearance. Without it, how do you have confidence that information about national security discussed at the meetings cannot be leveraged out of them, or sold?"
Downing Street said on Thursday night it had reviewed internal records and had not seen evidence to suggest Coulson had unsupervised access to top-secret papers.
"We have always made it expressly clear that Andy Coulson saw the information he was cleared to see," said a spokesman for the Cabinet Office.
"Security vetting is about access to information. 'Security check' level allows access to secret papers and occasional access to top secret. Developed vetting is required for those who need frequent access to the highest classification of material."
In July 2011, when Coulson's security status became public, the Cabinet Office said Coulson's job did not require him to have high-level security clearance. It said he did not attend cabinet meetings, the bi-weekly national security council (NSC) meetings, or Cobra, the government's emergency committee.
Under cross-examination, Coulson told the Leveson inquiry that he did attend NSC meetings while he worked in Downing Street. However, a source who has attended NSC meetings said: "The military is fairly religious about this".
"People who attend those meetings must have the proper clearance. It's pretty simple. If someone doesn't have the right clearance, they shouldn't be there, and they shouldn't have access to papers."
No 10 said it could not find a record of any NSC meetings attended by Coulson.
Counter-terrorist check: This is for people employed in posts with proximity to public figures, with access to information or material assessed to be of value to terrorists, or who have unescorted access to places at risk from terrorist attack. It does not allow access to protectively marked documents.
Security check: This is for people employed in posts which have substantial access to secret material or occasional controlled access to top-secret materials. It involves filling out an 18-page questionnaire which has to be endorsed by a sponsor.
Developed vetting: This is the highest vetting level and is needed for people with substantial unsupervised access to top-secret assets. It can take months to get clearance, involving long interviews with assessors. Government guidance states: "We have to look at your loyalty, honesty and reliability, and whether you could be particularly vulnerable to bribery or blackmail". It costs the state about £900 per candidate.