One by one, the Yes vote strongholds wavered
Scots appeared to have decisively rejected independence this morning after the nationalists failed to win a Yes vote in a series of their strongholds thanks to a huge turnout from the middle classes.
Better Together and Downing Street insiders were hopeful of winning by a larger margin than predicted by the pre-referendum opinion polls.
Speaking at 4.12am, John Curtice, professor of politics at Strathclyde University, said: “The evidence is that the No side is going to win.”
An early indication that all was not well for the nationalists came before midnight when Alex Salmond did not turn up at his local count in Aberdeenshire, which was expected to vote No. He is expected to stage a press conference on Friday.
This was a surprise as Mr Salmond had been widely expected to attend the count where he could have received regular updates from other parts of Scotland. His non-attendance suggested that he didn’t want to do the inevitable media interviews that would have accompanied those possibly disappointing results.
At 1.30am the first of Scotland’s 32 local authorities announced its result and set the tone for the night by announcing a surprise majority for No in an area where the separatists had been predicted to win well.
Better Together campaigners celebrated wildly after the local counting officer in Clackmannanshire announced 19,036 votes for No and 16,350 for Yes.
As expected, the Unionists overwhelmingly won Shetland and Orkney, where the separatists have traditionally struggled to garner much support.
But the nationalists received another nasty surprise when the Western Isles, which is represented by SNP politicians at Westminster and Holyrood, voted No.
The separatists then lost in two more of their target areas, Inverclyde and Renfrewshire, with the former proving a particular shock. After losing in the first six council areas to declare, a Yes victory appeared to be a remote prospect.
At just before 4am the nationalists won in Dundee, said to be the most pro-separatist city in Scotland, by a margin of 57 per cent to 43 per cent. But campaign insiders said they had to win by more to compensate for their lacklustre performance elsewhere.
The nationalists had pinned their hopes of victory on mobilising working class Scots, particularly in Dundee and Glasgow, conducting huge campaigns to encourage voter registration.
But turnout in the two cities was only 79 per cent and 75 per cent respectively, much lower than the national average of around 85 per cent.
Unionist campaigners reported that as many as 90 per cent of those eligible to vote did so in the more affluent areas around Glasgow, whereas turnout in more traditional Labour-voting areas was some ten per cent less.
The nationalists won the second council area in a row in West Dunbartonshire, but only by a margin of less than 5,000, before the No notched up victory in Midlothian.
In two bellwether results, the separatists were hammered in East Lothian by a margin of 62 per cent to 38 per cent then in Stirling – a seat held by the SNP in the Scottish Parliament – by 60 per cent to 40 per cent.
This was a particular blow for the nationalists as a major part of their pre-referendum strategy had been staging a festival commemorating the 700th anniversary of the Battle of Bannockburn, which was staged nearby.
Falkirk then rejected independence by a margin of 53 per cent to 47 per cent despite it having SNP MSPs and it being the base of Dennis Canavan, the chairman of the official Yes Scotland campaign.
In another disastrous result for the nationalists, Angus rejected independence by 56 per cent to 44 per cent despite it having an SNP MP and MSPs.
The Unionists won their stronghold of Dumfries by 66 per cent to 34 per cent and in East Renfrewshire by 63 per cent to 37 per cent.
Aberdeen – another city dominated by the SNP at Holyrood – then rejected separation by 59 per cent to 41 per cent.
At this point 17 out of 32 council areas had declared and Prof Curtice said the “only chance” the separatists had left was to win in Glasgow “stupendously.”
North Lanarkshire, one of Scotland’s largest local authority areas and a traditional Labour stronghold, backed independence but again only by a relatively narrow margin.
But the nationalists suffered another major setback after losing in Perth and Kinross by 60 per cent to 40 per cent despite it being represented by an SNP MP and at Holyrood by two of Mr Salmond’s most senior ministers, John Swinney and Roseanna Cunningham.
They enjoyed their best moment of the night when they convincingly won Glasgow by 53 per cent to 47 per cent, or 25,000 votes, but it was not enough to revive their independence dream.
Prof Curtice said the margin of victory was “not good enough given how bad the results have been elsewhere.” He said the No campaign was on course to “win it pretty comfortably and a bit more comfortably than the final opinion polls.”
The night had started on an optimistic note for the Better Together campaign when a YouGov survey in the Guardian showing an eight per cent lead – 54 per cent to 46 per cent – was published at 10.30pm.
What was seen as significant was the fact that this was a 'recall’ survey where 1800 people who had taken part in a previous YouGov survey this week were contacted again to find out how they’d actually voted.
Around the same time Liam Fox, the former Defence Secretary, predicted a 55 per cent-45 per cent vote split in favour of Scotland remaining part of the United Kingdom. This matched Downing Street predictions.
But Mr Canavan told STV that if a Yes vote was defeated there is every likelihood of further referendums on independence as future generations were perfectly entitled to seek constitutional change.
This appeared to contradict Alex Salmond’s view that a defeat in this referendum would mean no further votes on the issue for a generation.
After early returns Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Tory leader, predicted that 70% of voters in the Scottish Borders area would support staying in the United Kingdom.
But she said that the vote in North Lanarkshire was extremely tight with Yes probably winning by only a couple of percentage points – much less than expected.
At 1am the BBC reported that the Yes campaign was claiming that it had won the Glasgow count by something like 54 per cent to 46 per cent but, if correct, this majority was well down on what had been expected. And No campaigners were delighted that they had run the separatists so close.
Former Scottish Secretary Lord (Michael) Forsyth claimed that David Cameron had conceded control of the timing of the referendum, the question on the ballot paper and allowing 16 and 17 year olds to vote, adding: “ Nobody could say he didn’t give Alex Salmond every advantage.”
While Lord Forsyth told STV that the Better Together campaign had lacked “passion” he heaped praised on the leadership of Alistair Darling and said Scotland owed him a “great debt.” However, he also singled out the part played by Gordon Brown in the later stage of the campaign, praising his “great passion.”
Mr Snow who led a prominent campaign to get people to sign a pledge to save the Union said he could not understand the complacency among Westminster politicians in the months before Thursday’s vote.
Speaking to The Telegraph at the No Thanks campaign’s party in Glasgow he said: “This referendum campaign has been in the diary for years.
“The Westminster establishment was not taking it seriously. I was in London, I was looking around London and I could not understand why Ed Miliband was not living in Glasgow.
“This country had the potential to fall about and his Labour party was being eclipsed.
“If it is a narrow result I think our politicians have failed to sell the case for an amazing country. And a country that is self evidently flourishing and succeeding.”
He added that it was “tragic” that so many people appeared to have embraced nationalism in the Scottish referendum.
“It is heart breaking so I will find it quite hard to celebrate tomorrow,” he added.
If the No campaign wins with a 57 per cent margin, which was forecast by some in the early hours, it was not a success.
He also urged politicians to put a lid on more constitutional upheaval. “I am half Canadian and I know about 'Neverendums’,” he said.
“The idea that we are going to rip ourselves to pieces over the appropriate amount of power to give to our devolved regions and nations strikes me as a waste of our time.”