Carbon price to start July 2012
A CARBON price will start in Australia on July 1, 2012.
The Australian Greens made a joint announcement on the deal with Prime Minister Julia Gillard in Canberra today. A climate change committee - which involves the Government, Greens and independents Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott - has held four meetings since it was set up in September last year, in the aftermath of the election. The Government abandoned its previous emissions trading scheme last year after it failed to get it through the Senate. The Greens sided with the Coalition to vote against an emissions trading scheme, arguing the carbon reduction targets were too low and industry compensation was too high. The abandonment of the ETS breached a promise by former prime minister Kevin Rudd to tackle climate change and was blamed for his drop in opinion polls and eventual toppling by Ms Gillard. The Opposition has said it will block any new "carbon tax", so the Government will rely on the votes of the independents and Greens to secure the passage of its legislation. Ms Gillard said it was time to put a price on carbon emissions. "I'm determined to price carbon," she said. "History teaches us that the countries and the economies who prosper at times of historic change are those who get in and shape and manage the changes. "The time is right and the time is now." Ms Gillard said a fixed carbon price would start on July 1, 2012, before moving to a cap-and-trade emissions trading scheme within three to five years. Putting a price on carbon was the most efficient way to cut carbon pollution, she said. "If you put a price on something - people will use less of it." One year before the end of the fixed price period, a review would consider if there were any reasons to delay moving to a cap and trade scheme. "The hard-wired mechanism here is to move to cap and trade," Ms Gillard said. "But there would be a review one year in advance to assess whether there were any real reasons not to take that step." Agricultural emissions will not be included in the carbon pricing system. "The measures and mechanisms for counting agricultural emissions are simply too complex," Ms Gillard said. "But we do want to work with farmers with our agricultural community to make sure that they get the benefits of changing practices and changing carbon." Ms Gillard said the carbon price set by the Government would be fair. "Every cent raised from pricing carbon will go to assisting households, helping businesses manage the transition and funding climate change programs," she said. "And the Government will always support those who are in need of assistance with cost of living pressures." Carbon pollution threatened Australia's future prosperity, Ms Gillard said. "We need to ensure that Australia has a low-pollution economy for the future - we can't afford to be left behind." Ms Gillard said she wouldn't back down during what she predicted would be a tough fight ahead with Opposition Leader Tony Abbott. He would immediately be spruiking a fear campaign "and talking to Australians about a great big new tax on everything". "(But) can I make it very clear that in the debate that will ensue I am not intending to take a backwards step. "We are a confident nation and we are good at change. We've proved it in the past." Ms Gillard said more work needed to be done on the details of industry assistance and household compensation. The Government's failed carbon pollution reduction scheme had already achieved some good work in that area, she added. "It's not my intention to just put that work to one side," Ms Gillard said. "But there are discussions to come and there will be some difficult conversations to come." Matters of compensation would be worked through with the multi-party climate change committee. Greens leader Bob Brown said his party would be lobbying to get a good deal for householders. "It isn't just a matter of compensating industry - particularly polluters," he said. "What we want to do is compensate those people who are suffering the outcome of long term carbon pollution of the atmosphere." Greens climate change spokeswoman Christine Milne said there could only be a price on carbon because the Greens held the balance of power in the federal parliament. "It's exciting (and) it's happening because we have shared power in Australia," she said, adding majority government would not have delivered the outcome. "It is because the Greens are in balance of power working with the other parties to deliver not only the aspiration but the process to achieve it." However, Senator Milne sounded a note of caution, declaring a carbon price would only become a reality if all parties could reach agreement on the details. Climate Change Minister Greg Combet left the door open for fuel to be included in the ETS. The proposal from the multi-party climate change committee includes a list of sectors which could be included - one of which is the transport industry. Mr Combet said the committee would consider phasing in the ETS for different sections of the economy. "That (including fuel) is not a settled issue at this point in time, but it is an issue the committee will consider," he said. Independent MP Tony Windsor, a member of the multi-party climate change committee, would not commit to a scheme, saying all options were still on the table. "Please don't construe through my presence here that I'll be actually supporting any scheme," he said, adding he was more than happy to be involved in the framework process. "There's a whole range of unanswered questions that we all have to deal with until we reach a conclusion." Mr Windsor said there was a lot of discussion still to take place. "What we've established today is a framework to attempt to work within. Now that doesn't mean that the game is over," he said. "Obviously, there'd have to be agreement in both houses of parliament of a model that we all agree with. We haven't seen that model yet." Mr Windsor said he believed something should be done about climate change globally and indicated his vote would be influenced by what action was being taken outside Australia. Mr Combet and Senator Brown were both at pains to point out an ETS would be introduced eventually to replace the carbon tax. The climate change minister said the clear intent of the document was that "emissions trading commences". But first the Government would examine the "international environment". Senator Brown said there was no intention to not move to a trading system. "There's a general feeling that that's where we're headed," he said. "If there's a supposition here that there's some move to not have an emissions trading system, it's wrong." Ms Gillard promised during the 2010 election that she would not introduce a carbon tax. Asked whether the ETS was a breach of that promise, Ms Gillard said: "This is the parliament the Australian people voted for - you are seeing it on display in front of you. "And we have to get on with the job of pricing carbon." Ms Gillard said she intended to win the political debate on climate change. "The reality is, however this was designed, Tony Abbott would be out there trying to raise fear about it," she said. "The minute I say the two words 'climate change' he would say 'great big new tax on everything'." The Government wants a five per cent reduction in carbon emissions but while Senator Brown maintained the Greens preferred a cut of 25 per cent, he didn't rule out the possibility of a compromise. "There is no doubt all members on this committee have this nation's future wellbeing at the forefront in trying to decide on those very hard issues," he said. Mr Combet said the future shape of the scheme could depend on what happens at international negotiations. The review of the scheme 12 months before the start of an ETS with a flexible price would consider issues such as whether Australia had entered into binding international agreements on emissions. "At that point in time we would set the (emissions) target to be achieved by 2020," he said.