Donald Trump cancels Chicago campaign rally over security concerns, denies Ohio cancellation
Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has cancelled a campaign rally in Chicago after the event turned into a chaotic scene with clashes between thousands of supporters and protesters.
But he has denied media reports of the cancellation of an Ohio rally due to security issues at the venue, reportedly quoting a Trump campaign official on a local news website on Saturday.
"The rally in Cincinnati is ON. Media put out false reports that it was cancelled," he said in a tweet.
On Friday local time, media broadcast aerial images showing thousands of people outside the University of Illinois-Chicago Pavilion where the rally was due to be held.
CNN estimated there were between 8,500 to 10,000 people in the Chicago arena when tensions erupted into chaos.
A Trump campaign staffer took the stage about half an hour after the rally was slated to begin and said it would be postponed for safety reasons.
A campaign statement issued slightly later said the decision was made after meeting with law enforcement officials.
"For the safety of tens of thousands of people that (sic) have gathered in and around the arena, tonight's rally will be postponed to another date," a statement said.
"Thank you very much for your attendance and please go in peace."
Mr Trump said it was sad there was so much anger in the country.
"We have a country that is so divided ... I've never seen anything like it and this has been going on for years," he told MSNBC.
"On one side you have people who haven't had a pay increase in 10 years, frankly, and the businesses are moving out of the country and they're upset and they're angry.
"On the other side you have people who feel differently about other elements.
"You know it all comes together. There's a lot of anger in the country and it's very sad to see."
Mr Trump's opponent Senator Ted Cruz condemned the demonstrators but blamed Mr Trump's rhetoric for encouraging violence.
"This is a sad day. Political discourse should occur without a threat of violence, without anger, rage and hatred being directed at each other," he said.
"We need to learn to have disagreements without being disagreeable. To have disagreements while respecting human beings on the other side."
Following the announcement, the crowd began to chant and cheer.
Protesters inside the venue chanted "We dumped Trump" while supporters yelled "We want Trump".
News footage showed police wearing body armour escorting groups of people out of the building, as scuffles and angry confrontations broke out between Trump supporters and protesters.
Chicago activists had spent the week leading up to the rally planning how to disrupt it.
One group, Showing Up for Racial Justice, coordinated with minority student groups on local campuses, using group email chains and messaging so that protesters could stay in constant communication.
One of the organisers, Nathaniel Lewis, 25, a master's degree student in public health at the University of Illinois at Chicago, said he was shocked they succeeded in shutting the rally down.
"I'm happy, I'm at peace, because we came together as a collective," Mr Lewis said.
"This is the last thing we expected to happen. It shows the power of unity."
Mr Trump's rallies are known for being wild and critics have accused him of fuelling the toxic atmosphere.
On February 1, as protesters interrupted a rally in Iowa, he encouraged supporters to "knock the crap out of them," and pledged to pay their legal fees.
When a protester disrupted Mr Trump's speech in Las Vegas, the brash billionaire said he would like to "punch him in the face."
In North Carolina this week, a 78-year-old white man in a cowboy hat punched a black protester in the face.
Mr Trump dismissed the notion that he was responsible for whipping up tensions.