Jeremy Corbyn is new Labour leader with stunning 60 per cent of votes in first round
• Jeremy Corbyn wins with 60pc of first round vote • Tom Watson announced as deputy leader • Shadow ministers resign after Corbyn victory • Dan Hodges: The day the Labour Party died • Corbyn's ex-wife: I gave money to Yvette's campaign • Five pillars of Jeremy Corbyn's bid to run Britain
• Jeremy Corbyn has won the Labour leadership contest with almost 60 per cent in the first round of voting. The landslide victory saw him take 251,000 of the total 422,000 votes cast. He won the most support from members, registered supporters and affiliated members alike.
• In his victory speech, Mr Corbyn said: "During these amazing three months, our party has changed. We have grown enormously, because of the hopes of so many ordinary people for a different Britain, a better Britain, a more equal Britain, a more decent Britain. They are fed up with the inequality, the injustice, the unnecessary poverty. All those issues have brought people in in a spirit of hope and optimism."
• Mr Corbyn also revealed he is planning a shake-up of Prime Minister's Questions to allow other Labour MPs to ask questions in his place sometimes. He told the Huffington Post: "I want prime minister’s Question Time to be less theatre, more fact, less theatrical, more understandable. I think it’s very exciting for political obsessives, it’s utterly boring for most of the population, who think it’s an utter irrelevance. I will be trying to conduct my part in prime minister’s Question Time on the basis of the questions and also share out a lot more stuff in within the parliamentary Labour party. I’ll obviously be there and do all the things that I’m asked to do. But we’ve got a lot of very talented people within the parliamentary Labour party. They can call ask questions, they can all do things, let’s share it all out a bit. It won’t all be me everywhere all the time."
It’s a whole party, and a whole movement. We are about bringing people on, not stopping people.
• He reasserted his message that Britain does not need nuclear weapons – ahead of a plan to persuade his party to back his controversial stance.
• Thousands of people packed out Parliament Square for a pro-refugee rally at which Jeremy Corbyn received ecstatic screams and cheers as he defiantly proclaimed: "We are all humans. We must spend our resources on helping people, not hindering people. None of this is easy. But surely we have the principle that we are all human beings on the same planet and we all want the next generation to be better off than we are."
• Tom Watson won the deputy leadership contest. After the third round of voting, Mr Watson was announced as deputy leader with 198,962 votes. In his victory speech, he said: "Only Labour can speak for the real Britain. We can win in 2020."
• A number of existing shadow cabinet ministers said they will not take up their positions in Mr Corbyn's cabinet. Tristram Hunt, Yvette Cooper, Emma Reynolds, Angela Smith, Chris Leslie, Liz Kendall and Rachel Reeves are among those stepping down. Ed Miliband also said he was content on the backbenches. Mr Corbyn will spend Sunday appointing his shadow cabinet, with most decisions expected by Monday. He cancelled a planned interview on the Andrew Marr show on Sunday morning to clear space in his busy schedule for making the appointments. Those that have said they would serve in his cabinet if asked include Hilary Benn, Angela Eagle, Caroline Flint, Chris Bryant and Maria Eagle.
• The Conservatives launched an assault on Labour after Mr Corbyn's appointment, warning that they "pose a threat to our economy and national security" but some senior Tories warned the party not be "complacent" or "cocky" in their attacks on Mr Corbyn.
What does Jeremy Corbyn's election as Labour leader mean for British politics? Here are some of the questions being asked.
The party is set for a radical shift to the left, under a leader who won office on a wave of enthusiasm for his anti-austerity, anti-war programme. He has called for an end to benefit cuts, higher taxes on the richest, renationalisation of the railways and energy sector, rent controls, an end to zero-hours contracts, the abolition of student tuition fees and the scrapping of the Trident nuclear deterrent.
This is the big question for Labour. While a very large electorate by party standards, the 400,000 people who voted in the leadership poll represents only a small and unrepresentative minority of the population. Corbyn supporters point to the success of the Scottish National Party, as well as Syriza in Greece and Podemos in Spain, as indications that left-wing parties can win popular support. They argue that he can win back voters who defected to the SNP and Ukip by offering a clear alternative to the Conservatives. But critics including Tony Blair have warned that his "Alice in Wonderland" policies will be toxic for Labour at the ballot box.
  Photo: Andrew Crowley There is little doubt that Mr Corbyn's policy platform will be greeted with enthusiasm by large swathes of the grassroots, particularly the 370,000 who signed up as members or supporters following May's general election defeat. However, it remains to be seen whether the new leader can unite his MPs - only a handful of whom voted for him - behind his agenda. Some will feel little compunction in disobeying the whip of a man who rebelled more than 500 times under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown.
Corbyn has called for a new kind of politics, moving away from the "theatrical abuse" often seen in the chamber of the Commons. His polite and serious-minded approach and reluctance to indulge in personal attacks mean that Prime Minister's Questions can be expected to become a more sober and forensic event. He has even suggested he may invite colleagues to share PMQs duties with him. However, he is not the first new leader to declare an end to "Punch and Judy politics", and all of those before him found themselves swiftly sucked into the arcane rituals of the Commons.
  Photo: PA Although some senior MPs - including Ed Miliband, Yvette Cooper, Tristram Hunt, Chris Leslie and Rachel Reeves - have already made clear they will not join his frontbench, Mr Corbyn is certain to be able to recruit enough to fill the 27 shadow cabinet places. The larger issue is whether he succeeds in his goal of building an "inclusive" team reflecting broader opinion in the party, or is forced to rely on the tight circle of hard-left MPs like Diane Abbott and John McDonnell who he has worked with on the backbenches. He is expected to offer jobs to figures like Andy Burnham and Chuka Umunna, who have not ruled out serving under him. Angela Eagle has been tipped as a possible candidate for the key role of shadow chancellor.
An early test of Mr Corbyn's ability to command the loyalty of his party could come if the Government calls a vote on expanding RAF air strikes against Islamic State into Syria. While the new leader has set his face firmly against extending military action, many Labour MPs feel differently, and he could face a rebellion on a large scale. Conservatives can be expected to engineer a string of votes on key issues like deficit reduction, benefit cuts and Trident renewal to force Labour MPs to decide whether to pin their colours to the Corbyn mast.
Under Labour's rules, the leader is re-elected each year at party conference. Leaders are usually unopposed, but can face a challenge if 47 MPs unite behind a rival candidate to force a vote. Until the results were announced, there was speculation that a plot may be hatched to have an alternative leader ready in time for the 2016 conference, by which time his appeal to the electorate will have been tested in polls for Scottish and Welsh devolved assemblies, the London mayoralty and English councils. However, the scale of his victory will make it far more difficult for opponents to unseat him without sparking civil war in the party and could mean he is safe until the general election of 2020.
While other candidates openly warned of splits if Corbyn won, no plans for a breakaway party along the lines of the 1980s Social Democratic Party have yet emerged. The history of the SDP's brief flowering and failure to make an electoral breakthrough before being absorbed into the Liberal Democrats will give any potential splitters cause to think twice.
Defeated candidate Yvette Cooper, who came third, has tweeted a nice message to Jeremy Corbyn:
Channel 4's Jon Snow caught up with Jeremy Corbyn this afternoon and asked him about whether he will tackle the issue of campaigning against Trident. He said:
My views on Trident are very well known. There has to be a discussion about that, and I’m hoping that the party will come together around this issue. We don’t need nuclear weapons. We need to keep those people who make them in good jobs so we have defence diversification. But we need to fulfil our obligations under the non-proliferation treaty.
My colleague Tim Ross has this video of Mr Corbyn thanking the unions for their backing:
It has been quite a momentous day in the political world as Jeremy Corbyn gets to grips with being Labour leader. But what did the internet make of it all?
Arthur Kirby has a round-up of the funniest things said online on this day, which will (apparently) be forever known as #CorbynDay. Here are a couple of my favourites:
Donald Trump clearly not knowing who Jeremy Corbyn is...
...and the appointment of Jeremy and his deputy Tom has been billed as...
Thousands of people have packed out Parliament Square to take part in a 'Refugees Are Welcome' rally.
Jeremy Corbyn was met with ecstatic screams and cheers as he took to the stage to demand Britain "finds peaceful solutions to the problems of this world".
He defiantly said: "We are all humans. We all have a sense of humanity and reaching out to others.
He has thanked the people of Europe for "showing the way that should be followed" in being tolerant to refugees.
He said: "We must spend our resources on helping people, not hindering people. None of this is easy. But surely we have the principle that we are all human beings on the same planet and we all want the next generation to be better off than we are.
"Today, here, in parliament Square we ordinary people stand up and say to our government 'recognise your obligations in law', recognise your obligations to help people but above all open your heart, open your minds and open your attitudes."
Diane Abbott, MP for Hackney North and Stoke Newington, said human-rights causes "could not ask for a better supporter" than Mr Corbyn.
Catherine West, Labour MP for Hornsey and Wood Green, said: "Today we have a memory of a small boy on a beach which changed our focus and brought us to our senses.
"Unfortunately, our government didn't respond in a way we thought appropriate."
My colleague Ben Riley-Smith illustrates here just how busy Parliament Square is right now.
This is Telegraph cartoonist Christian Adams' take on today's events.
Jeremy Corbyn has revealed he wants to change the way Prime Minister's Questions works.
The weekly meeting usually sees a confrontation between the Prime Minister and the opposition leader, but it has often been criticised for putting people off politics.
He now wants to share the six questions usually asked by the opposition leader between MPs to create a more inclusive atmosphere.
According to the BBC, Mr Corbyn said: "We should share it out a bit. I've been in touch with the speaker's office to ask about this."
Today we celebrate an amazing victory of an amazing inclusive campaign.
"Lots of people, lots of backgrounds, lots of diversity, united together in wanting to achieve something better and something decent, a society based on socialist values.
"There are huge battles ahead. My job is going to be a complicated one, that I fully understand. It is going to be a campaigning one, that I understand and absolutely relish.
"And I will be campaigning all around the country all of the time."
Tens of thousands of people are marching through the streets in a rally supporting the rights of refugees.
Protesters will gather in London's Parliament Square where a number of politicians and pubic figures are due to give speeches.
Jeremy Corbyn, the new leader of the Labour Party, is expected to make an appearance.
Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron and Green Party leader Natalie Bennett are also due to speak.
Musician Billy Bragg, who is performing at the event, said he is "encouraged" by Mr Corbyn's success and added "hopefully this will mean a return to civic culture".
"People are beginning to understand that we do have a lot in common with one another and it's possible to create a society where people's needs are put first," he said.
It didn't take long before the Conservatives began their campaign of attack on Jeremy Corbyn's Labour.
But some Twitter users were left less than impressed by the remark:
Singer Charlotte Church had a thing or two to say about it too:
But Tory MP Nick Hurd issued this note of caution for his party:
Tory MEP Daniel Hannan also warned that "there is now a real danger of Tory cockiness and complacency".
Speaking at The Sanctuary pub this afternoon, Jeremy Corbyn held aloft a tea towel bearing left-wing icon Tony Benn's words:
Hope is the fuel of progress and fear is the prison in which you put yourself."
Veteran Labour supporter Harry Leslie Smith, author of Harry's Last Stand who moved a Labour conference to tears with his speech about the NHS, has said that even at his age of 92 he wants to help Jeremy Corbyn become Britain's Prime Minister at the 2020 general election:
Just before he headed into the pub to thank supporters, Mr Corbyn said: "There has been so many magic moments."
He admitted that he had been " a bit surprised" at the scale of his majority.
When questioned about his shadow cabinet he said: "There is going to be an inclusive and open process.
"I hope everyone will recognise the mandate we've received and that party members expect our party to deliver for them in Parliament."
Mr Corbyn's first task is to appoint his front bench team, but many key figures in the party have already ruled themselves out.
During the election contest, rival Liz Kendall made it clear she would not serve under the Islington North MP and after the result was announced, Yvette Cooper indicated she would not take a job.
Mr Corbyn's predecessor Ed Miliband has ruled himself out of returning to the front benches.
Shadow chancellor Chris Leslie, shadow education secretary Tristram Hunt, Emma Reynolds, shadow secretary of state for communities and local government, and shadow work and pensions secretary Rachel Reeves have all said they will return to the backbenches. Shadow health minister Jamie Reed has also quit.
Mr Corbyn will need to bring in modernisers to key positions to keep the party united and all eyes will be focused on who he appoints to the most crucial roles, particularly shadow chancellor.
As a seasoned rebel who defied the party whip more than 500 times, the new leader is likely to find it tough to impose discipline on the party and who he chooses as chief whip will prove telling about how he intends to lead it.
Mr Corbyn will have no time to ease himself into the job.
On Monday, the Government's Trade Union Bill goes before MPs and the new leader has made clear he will put up fierce opposition to the Conservatives' efforts "to shackle unions".
But more crucially will come his first appearance at the despatch box for Prime Minister's Questions on Wednesday.
Party leaders, including David Cameron, have admitted to finding the weekly exchanges in the brutal bear pit tough.
Mr Corbyn will be keen to avoid a weak start but after a parliamentary career served on the backbenches, his lack of experience may well show.
The first clash may also prove tricky for the Prime Minister, however. Mr Cameron has previously suffered from criticism that he can come across as a "Flashman" bully boy and he will be prepping careful with his team on the tone of his response.
One of the toughest challenges Mr Corbyn faces is leading his party's response to the crisis in Syria.
The chairman of the Stop the War Coalition has suggested he cannot see any circumstances in which he would back military action.
But the increasing numbers of Syrians dying while fleeing the twin terrors of Bashar Assad's regime and Islamic State has meant many Labour MPs are now believed to be keen for action.
Mr Cameron is keen to put intervention to a fresh vote in parliament and Mr Corbyn faces the prospect of a significant number of his party defying him by backing the Prime Minister's plans.
The first test of Mr Corbyn's popularity with UK voters will come at the ballot box next year.
Elections are being held for the Scottish Parliament, Welsh Assembly, mayor of London and English local councils and the results will give an insight into how he is viewed outside the Labour Party.
Jeremy Corbyn has left the pub in a taxi but not before standing on a chair to thank his supporters.
He is now heading to the pro-refugee rally in Parliament Square and is expected to speak to crowds at around 4pm.
After that he will head to Labour's headquarters down the road before spending the evening at home where he will have to sit down and start the difficult task of forming his shadow cabinet.
It seems Jeremy Corbyn has given the TV crews the slip by escaping the Queen Elizabeth II Centre through a side door. He apparently got into a taxi and is currently in a pub. Although, we ought to add, that he does not drink.
He is expected to speak later at a pro-refugee rally then it is down to business in sorting out his new shadow cabinet.
John McDonnell, the campaign manager for Jeremy Corbyn, has just told a rally in Central London: "You've changed the world today."
He has said he now wants to grow the Labour party to a base of one million supporters.
He added: "This is the greatest victory for the left in decades. I just wish Tony Benn was here to see it."
Mr McDonnell said that Mr Corbyn hoped to have his "shadow administration" appointments in place by Monday.
Jeremy Corbyn is expected to join a pro-refugee rally shortly. A march is currently passing through the streets of central London and many of Mr Corbyn's supporters have joined it.
This is what Mr Corbyn had to say on refugees during his acceptance speech:
Former deputy prime minister Lord Prescott urged high-profile figures to "get behind" Mr Corbyn, warning that the "real enemy is the Tories".
He told the BBC: "The party gave an overwhelming endorsement to this man. He got more votes that Tony Blair."
"The party has spoken in a very, very strong voice."
Told that shadow health minister Jamie Reed had quit, the peer said: "Who's Jamie Reed? Is he in our party?"
Shadow business secretary Chuka Umunna called on Labour to "come together" behind its new leader.
In a post on Facebook, Mr Umunna, who dropped out of the leadership contest, said: "Now the contest is over, we must respect the result, come together and focus on providing the most credible and effective opposition to the Tories.
"Some say there has to be a trade-off between principles and power, but our history tells us this isn't true.
"Following in the footsteps of Attlee, Wilson and other Labour legends, we must now also work to get Labour back into office because that is the ultimate way of putting our values in to action, and that was the original intention of Keir Hardie and the party's founders."
Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams passed on his "warmest congratulations" to the newly-elected leader.
He said: "I have known Jeremy for many years. He is a good friend of Ireland and of the Irish peace process. I wish him well in his new and challenging role as leader of the British Labour Party and look forward to working with him in the time ahead to ensure that the gains of the peace process are built upon."
Ms Cooper indicated she will not be part of Mr Corbyn's shadow cabinet, telling the BBC: "I've always worked with everybody in the Labour Party and I'm not taking my bat and ball home. I don't think that's the right approach.
"I've said I wouldn't expect to be part of Jeremy's shadow cabinet, but I will be part of working for the Labour Party because I always will. I want to particularly work on the Labour Yes campaign in Europe."
Ms Cooper said she was "really disappointed" not to win, but said it is now important for the party not to focus on internal differences, saying: "We've got to make sure that our focus in the Labour Party now is the country... We've got to focus now on the campaigning we need to do and the trust we need to rebuild with the public."
She added: "Congratulations to Jeremy because clearly it was a very strong win for him. I think obviously he and Tom and the new leadership team will now want to be reaching out across the country to the public."
Pablo Iglesias, head of Podemos, the leftwing party in Spain, has tweeted his support:
Rachel Reeves MP, shadow minister for work and pensions, has tweeted:
Meanwhile, Emma Reynolds MP, shadow minister for communities and local government, added:
It follows the resignation of shadow health minister Jamie Reed and shadow education secretary Tristram Hunt confirming he would not join a Corbyn-led shadow cabinet.
Mr Corbyn's victory has cost the bookmakers more than £1million after his odds went from 200/1 no-hoper to 1/20 red hot favourite.
William Hill spokesman Graham Sharpe said: "I am unaware of any betting market, let alone a political one, in which a contender has gone from 200/1 odds, at which price Ethan Parker staked £10 (stake £1 to win £200) to 1/20 odds (stake £20 to win £1). It is unprecedented. The gamble has cost William Hill alone a six figure sum, and with up to a million pounds gambled industry-wide it will be the biggest political betting payout ever."
Tristram Hunt has confirmed that he would not remain in the shadow cabinet under Mr Corbyn.
The shadow education secretary, who ruled out serving in the top team during the campaign, told the Press Association: "I will not seek to be part of the front bench. It is important to be honest about it - I have substantial political differences with Jeremy".
He said: "We need to congratulate Jeremy on his victory. He has won fair and square and within the rules.
"He has won handsomely. Now he needs the respect and the space as Labour leader to build his team and go forward."
Asked if he thought Mr Corbyn would find sufficient numbers of MPs willing to be part of his front bench, he said: "That's for his team to discover. I imagine they are working on that now."
It seems that US presidential hopeful Donald Trump does not recognise who Jeremy Corbyn is.
Newly-elected Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn had a "one world" message for his party, as he promised the "fightback" would now begin:
Simon Walker, director general at the Institute of Directors said:
It is no secret that business has not always seen eye-to-eye with the new leader of the Opposition. From renationalising the railways, to raising taxes on businesses and increasing government spending, Mr Corbyn has proposed some policies in the leadership campaign that we believe would undermine our open and competitive economy.
"Politicians and business leaders are never in perfect agreement on how the economy should be managed, irrespective of who is in Government, and who in Opposition. We will continue to engage with Labour honestly and directly on behalf our members, who represent businesses large and small across the UK, and hold a variety of political views."
Football-loving Andy Burnham, who came second, has turned his attentions to more pressing matters:
Any disaffected Burnham supporters could switch to our live coverage of the Everton vs Chelsea match to show him some support.
Liberal Democrat president Baroness Brinton said: "The Corbyn style of politics may generate a lot of noise but only one thing keeps Government in check - credible opposition.
"As Labour abdicates its responsibilities, the Liberal Democrats will offer the serious, responsible and economically-literate alternative this country badly needs."
Plaid Cymru leader Leanne Wood congratuled Mr Corbyn, adding: "We hope that he will now deliver the votes of his MPs to join Plaid Cymru MPs in opposing those Tory policies that are causing great harm to people in Wales and beyond.
"However, his election cannot alter Labour's dismal record in government in Wales. "Their legacy, especially since devolution is one of failure and managed decline."
Green Party leader Natalie Bennett said: "The selection of Jeremy Corbyn, combined with the remarkable Green surge of the past year, and the SNP's success at the general Election, shows how many people support an alternative to austerity economics, to the head-in-the-sand approach to our environmental crisis and to tired, business-as-usual politics.
"The Green Party shares Corbyn's opposition to austerity, Trident nuclear weapons, and the sell-off of public assets and we will be delighted to work with his Labour Party and others who share our views on these and other issues."
Defence Secretary Michael Fallon, from the Conservatives, said: "Labour are now a serious risk to our nation's security, our economy's security and your family's security.
"Whether it's weakening our defences, raising taxes on jobs and earnings, racking up more debt and welfare or driving up the cost of living by printing money - Jeremy Corbyn's Labour Party will hurt working people.
"This is a very serious moment for our country - the Conservatives will continue to deliver stability, security and opportunity for working people."
A little bit more from Jeremy Corbyn's victory speech.
Mr Corbyn said: "During these amazing three months, our party has changed. We have grown enormously, because of the hopes of so many ordinary people for a different Britain, a better Britain, a more equal Britain, a more decent Britain.
"They are fed up with the inequality, the injustice, the unnecessary poverty. All those issues have brought people in in a spirit of hope and optimism.
"I say to the new members of the party, or those who have joined as registered or affiliated supporters - welcome. Welcome to our party, welcome to our movement. Can I say to those returning to the party who were in it before and felt disillusioned and went away. Welcome back, welcome back to your party, welcome home."
He said his campaign had given the lie to claims that young Britons are apathetic about politics, showing instead that they are "a very political generation that were turned off by the way in which politics was being conducted". He said: "We have to and must change that."
Mr Corbyn said: "The fightback now of our party gathers speed and gathers pace."
Mr Corbyn has pulled out of a planned TV interview with the BBC's Andrew Marr programme tomorrow morning, it is being reported.
I’ll be offering Jeremy Corbyn my support. I hope also that Jeremy Corbyn reaches out to all parts of the party because he has a big job to do to unite the party. Jeremy has won a very clear victory in all sections. I believe we should respect that mandate.
"The task of the leader is to reach all parts of that movement and I believe that’s what Jeremy should do. It’s about the fact that right across our party they voted for Jeremy Corbyn. It’s a massive opportunity for our party."
He added that he does not regret resigning as leader and that he planned to remain a backbencher.
Today shows politics has changed. People are calling for radical change and straight talk. Jeremy's election shows that the party has listened to that call, and I look forward to working with him and meeting him to discuss his priorities later today.
"I have already said that I want people to take another look at the Labour Party. I want to say that again today. I hope that those who were lost to us in the past will start to listen again as both Jeremy and I put forward radical policies that we hope will win back support for Labour.
"We've now got the chance for a fresh start and new leadership in both Scotland and across the UK. I've said I want my leadership to be about shaking up the establishment in Scotland, and Jeremy wants to do the same across the UK. What people want is real change - not just in their politics, but in their lives. Today offers the chance for that change."
Nicola Sturgeon, leader of the SNP and Scotland's First Minister, said:
We congratulate Jeremy Corbyn on his victory and hope that we can work constructively with him in a progressive alliance against Tory austerity. We also call on him to give an early commitment that Labour MPs will join the SNP in voting against the £100 billion renewal of Trident.
“However, the reality today is that at a time when the country needs strong opposition to the Tories, Jeremy Corbyn leads a deeply, and very bitterly, divided party. Indeed, if Labour cannot quickly demonstrate that they have a credible chance of winning the next UK general election, many more people in Scotland are likely to conclude that independence is the only alternative to continued Tory government.
“In the meantime, it is clearer than ever that the only credible and united opposition to the Tories, north and south of the border, is the SNP."
Jeremy Corbyn has had strong support from many unions – and they have now come out in full praise of him.
Today people for the first time in a decade are hearing a message of hope.
"A clarion call that there is another way, an alternative message that it doesn't need to be like this.
"People see in Jeremy a politician who has created a wave, a vision of a better, kinder world that works for everyone, not just a self-serving few.
"Jeremy has ignited a spark of hope, a spark that had been dampened for decades.
"This is a chance to claim back the heart and the soul of the party and make it our Labour Party once more."
The general secretary of shopworkers' union Usdaw, John Hannett, said:
We congratulate Jeremy and Tom on their successful campaigns and look forward to working with them for a Labour victory in 2020.
"We must now build a broad-based manifesto to attract support from voters across the political spectrum and Usdaw will play a full role in developing winning policies."
Corbyn supporters chanted "Jez we did" as he took to the stage, putting on his glasses to deliver his acceptance speech.
Mr Corbyn said the campaign "showed our party and our movement, passionate, democratic, diverse, united and absolutely determined in our quest for a decent and better society that is possible for all."
Mr Corbyn paid tribute to interim leader Harriet Harman, his predecessor Mr Miliband and his three leadership rivals, making a point of praising Ms Cooper for her intervention in the migrant crisis when she was the first major politician to demand that Britain takes in 10,000 Syrian refugees.
He announced he will attend a "Refugees Welcome Here" rally in London once the leadership conference is over.
He said: "My first act as leader of the party will be to go to the demonstration this afternoon to show support for the way refugees should be treated and must be treated in this country."
Thanking a long list of unions and socialist societies which endorsed him as leader, Mr Corbyn said the Labour Party is "organically linked together" with the unions, adding: "That's where we get our strength from."
He made clear that his first day in Parliament as leader will see him oppose the Government's efforts "to shackle unions in the Trade Union Bill which they are bringing forward on Monday".
Just minutes after Jeremy Corbyn's victory, the shadow health minister Jamie Reed has resigned from the frontbench.
Jeremy Corbyn won the most support from members, registered supporters and affiliated members alike.
This is Jeremy Corbyn being announced as leader:
Jeremy Corbyn is the new Labour leader
More pictures from the moment:
Time for the main gig now... the leadership results coming next.
There was a standing ovation and huge cheers as Tom Watson was announced as the new deputy leader.
"Only Labour can speak for the real Britain," he told the conference.
He will back the new leader 100 per cent and says "only through unity comes the strength we need to fight the Tories".
He said: "We can win in 2020."
After the third round of voting, Tom Watson has been announced as deputy leader with 198,962 votes.
Mr Watson's share in this round is 50.7 per cent.
The Telegraph's James Kirkup explains why Tom Watson is a man to watch.
And those votes in full:
The leadership and deputy leadership candidates have entered the room.
The BBC are reporting that sources are saying Jeremy Corbyn HAS won the leadership in the first round.
Sadiq Khan MP has just been brought onto stage. Yesterday he was announced as Labour's London mayoral candidate.
He tells the hall that he is "deeply humbled by the faith you have shown me".
Speaking about the upcoming leadership result, he adds: "Whatever happens over the course of this morning, we must pull together."
Iain McNicoll, the general secretary of Labour, is now on stage. He will turn to the deputy leadership results first. He says:
This is an important moment in our party's journey. Hundreds of thousands of people who share our values have taken part in this election.
"I know there have been some attempts to skew the outcome but it hasn't worked. They cynically tried to subvert our democracy, but we have run a free and fair election.
"In the leader we place our trust and on their shoulders they carry the hopes of millions in Britain and beyond our borders. It is not to be taken lightly or without a due sense of responsibility.
"Friends, this Labour Party is bigger than any of us."
He also teased us by suggesting he was going to announce the winner straight away...
It is now being suggested that up to 90 per cent of the £3 registered supporters could have backed Jeremy Corbyn.
His campaign has clearly been able to tap into that desire for something different.
The conference is about to begin – and it is being reported that a senior aide to Liz Kendall says Mr Corbyn has won in the first round with over 60 per cent of the vote.
If that is the case, this is going to be a truly stunning victory for him.
This just in from my colleague Ben Riley-Smith:
We've got just a few minutes before the results begin to be announced. In the meantime, read our exclusive interview with Jane Chapman, the first ex-wife of Mr Corbyn. She reveals she donated to Yvette Cooper's campaign – but who got her vote at the end of the day? Read it here.
Each of the four candidates are learning their fate right now in a private room. They are accompanied by just one aid and mobile phones have been confiscated to prevent the result from being leaked.
They will be welcomed into the conference hall at 11am but they will have to wait until 11.30am for the result to be official announced.
We will be bringing you a clip to watch - can you see the result in any of the candidates' faces?
Back to now, and the audience has just been asked to take their seats. We've been enjoying some funky, upbeat music until now. Right now it's Wings by Little Mix.
Here Mr Corbyn is absolutely surrounded by supporters as he battles his way into the conference centre:
Andy Burnham has arrived at the conference centre.
There must be a certain sense of déjà vu for Mr Burnham since he also carried out a failed leadership bid in 2010. Here he was back then pictured alongside Ed Miliband, Ed Balls and Diane Abbott:
The BBC's Andrew Neil is reporting that senior Labour officials are now saying Jeremy Corbyn has won.
Meanwhile, the Beeb's political editor Laura Kuenssberg says:
Apparently bookies William Hill are offering the following on Jeremy Corbyn:
7/4 to take Labour into 2020
2/5 that he won't be
Our livestream from the Labour leadership results is now active. If you've been on this page for a while, refresh it and you will see it at the top. I'll be bringing you live coverage as events unfold.
In the next few minutes the four candidates will be privately told who has won before entering the conference hall at 11am.
This is where they will be sitting - on the front row:
Jeremy Corbyn has just arrived at the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre where he will find out if he is to be the next Labour leader in the next half an hour.
Supporters chanted "Jez we can!" as he arrived:
Then there was the chorus of The Red Flag:
This is how it looked from above:
Liz Kendall, arriving with her father, kept a brave smile as she arrived:
The turnout in the Labour leadership election was 76.3 per cent.
The total electorate was 553,954, which means some 423,000 people voted.
More interesting facts from the world of Google. This Google News Lab map shows which candidates are most searched for according to UK regions.
Jeremy Corbyn (red) is clearly the most sought after, while there is also a decent smattering for Andy Burnham (orange). Yvette Cooper (purple) and Liz Kendall (green) barely feature on the map.
We've delved into the photo archives to bring you this interesting gallery of Mr Corbyn's life and times. The collection includes this photo of him being hauled away from a picket line during an anti-racism march at the South African embassy in 1984.
Harriet Harman, the acting Labour leader and veteran MP, has told The Times that the party must now unite around Jeremy Corbyn if he wins.
You’ve got a commitment to the party whoever is the leader. I’ve served under Michael Foot to Tony Blair, my first boss was Michael Meacher. The point is, it’s a broad team and you don’t decide you’ve got abilities and energy and commitment by virtue of who the leader is."
Jeremy Corbyn, widely tipped to win the leadership this morning, has undoubtedly gripped the internet with his 'Corbynmania'. This chart shows the share of Google searches for each candidate:
The stage has been set for this morning's leadership announcement...
Former Mayor of London Ken Livingstone says Mr Corbyn is popular for two reasons:
He's nice and that connects with people. He's got economic policy. I was in key marginal seats and people were asking what did the last Labour government do for me? Jeremy has got a plan to create a better range of jobs and homes.
"The Germans never let the banks run their country. They've got a manufacturing base twice the size as ours.
"People like me were trying to persuade Ed Balls and Ed Miliband to adopt the kind of economic strategy that Jeremy has got but they thought it was too radical.
"I've had a good life, but will my kids ever be able to afford a home in this country?"
He's a lot fitter than I am. He doesn't drink, I do.
"Some 70 per cent of Ukip supporters want to see Jeremy as leader. He's a bit like Nigel Farage – Jeremy doesn't like me saying this – but he comes across as an ordinary guy and if he was having a pint in the pub, you'd want to have a drink with him."
Jeremy Corbyn raised eyebrows yesterday when he left his house sporting a polo shirt, shorts, Nike trainers and black socks.
Journalist Tim Walker has been on BBC News discussing the merits of his outfit, pointing out that while the Daily Mail compares the outfit to a grandad popping out to the garden centre, the Labour-supporter Daily Mirror praises the casual look.
In his verdict, Telegraph style editor Stephen Doig says Mr Corbyn's latest sartorial foray continues his verve towards casual attire. What do you think?
Two Labour MPs have just called for party unity if Jeremy Corbyn wins the leadership.
Neil Coyle MP says the party has won a lot of new supporters:
This is an exciting day for Labour. Whoever the leader is, they have to make sure the whole party is represented in the shadow cabinet. Whoever wins today, we have a very difficult journey.
We've had a really exciting debate. There's a lot of former Lib Dems who have come to us because they want to be part of the change. I hope they all stay active and make a difference."
We are a democratic party. We will accept [the decision] and get behind whoever it is. Unity is key and we can't go back to the old days of the 1980s. We've learnt from that."
Labour officials, members and media types are starting to arrive at the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre in London for this morning's Labour leadership election results.
Harriet Harman's political adviser Steph Driver even quipped that her driver looked like the man expected to win:
Jeremy Corbyn's team have taken the time to thank supporters this morning:
Jeremy Corbyn faces the resignation of up to a dozen shadow cabinet ministers on the first day of his leadership as senior Labour figures refused to serve under the hard-Left MP.
With Mr Corbyn expected to win the leadership contest today, Labour’s most experienced politicians will refuse to serve after deciding they cannot publicly support his policies.
Other cabinet ministers wavering will demand Mr Corbyn stops calling for Britain to leave Nato, quit the European Union and start printing money through quantitative easing if he wants their support.
A group of centrist MPs dubbed ‘The Resistance’ will also begin holding a series of public policy debates about Labour’s future in a move that will be seen as open defiance of his leadership.
The Telegraph understands a dozen members of the current shadow cabinet will reject any offer Mr Corbyn makes unless he ditches policies that were central in his campaign.
They are Tristram Hunt, Chris Leslie, Emma Reynolds, Vernon Coaker, Michael Dugher, Shabana Mahmood, Mary Creagh, Yvette Cooper, Chuka Umunna, Lucy Powell, Liz Kendall and a twelfth who asked not to be named.
My colleague Ben Riley-Smith has the full story here.
Professor Andrew Russell, head of politics at the University of Manchester, provides this analysis this morning:
Jeremy Corbyn has simply electrified the contest and those grassroots have taken hold of the organisation. It would be amazng if he didn't win actually."
He even compared Mr Corbyn's rise to that of Margaret Thatcher:
Margaret Thatcher was supposed to be the one who brought down the big guns and then someone credible would take over."
But he predicts new faces in both Mr Corbyn's shadow cabinet and within the wider party:
The type of people who are coming to Jeremy Corbyn's meetings look like the type of people who haven't been involved in politics or not for a very long time.
We've already seen the current shadow chancellor won't serve and you can imagine quite a few leading MPs will decide not to. There will be tremendous pressure within the party to try and get on with it."
And finally a note about the leftwinger:
Jeremy Corbyn has a record of rebellion. He's the most rebellious politician ever."
Good morning – and welcome to our live coverage of the Labour leadership election results.
It is a campaign that started 123 days ago when Labour headed for huge electoral defeat at the general election. Finally, the Labour leadership contest, which was sparked by Ed Miliband's resignation, will come to an end later this morning when the winner is revealed. It is widely expected that leftwinger Jeremy Corbyn, who entered the contest at the eleventh hour as a rank outsider, will win the leadership.
But how will the winner be announced?
Leadership contenders Andy Burnham, Yvette Cooper, Jeremy Corbyn and Liz Kendall will have an excruciating wait to find out who has won. What's more, they will have to endure the wait together as they are ushered into the "candidates' holding room" at the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre at 10am on Saturday. At 10.30am they and their campaign managers will hear the results but will be sworn to secrecy.
At 11am, Ian McNicol, the party's general secretary, will open the special conference. Each of the four candidates will take their seats at the front of the audience. All eyes (and cameras) will be on them in the hope that one of their faces will give the game away. But we shall have to wait a little longer before hearing that result.
Jim Kennedy, the chairman of the national executive committee, will point the audience to a big screen will show the results of the deputy leadership contest from the alternative voting system, round-by-round. It will show who received the most and fewest first preferences, before showing how second preferences unfold. The winner will be announced and they will make a short speech.
At 11.30am the process will be repeated all over again, this time for the leader.
By 11.45am, the winner will make their first speech as leader of the opposition.
A busy round of media interviews will take place shortly after the announcement has been made.
At 3pm a meeting with the senior management of the party will take place in order to lay the foundations of what happens next.