ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Harry Jenkins has declared himself in "self-imposed exile" from the Labor Party after being returned unopposed as the Speaker of the 43rd Parliament during its opening formalities in Canberra today.
His official election ends weeks of uncertainty over who would be speaker, but the issue of who will be his deputies still has to be resolved by a secret ballot later today.
This will be the second term in the chair for the widely respected Mr Jenkins, whose father also served as speaker during his time in Parliament.
No other name was put forward during nominations for the position.
Mr Jenkins emphatically accepted his re-election to the position today.
"May the record show, definitely yes," he said.
Under reforms agreed to by both sides, Mr Jenkins must now sit outside Labor's party room meetings.
"I have, as demanded by the parliamentary reform document, put myself in self-imposed exile from the federal parliamentary Labor Party," he said.
Mr Jenkins said the election result had set the stage for a "challenging" time ahead but said it was also an opportunity to improve the way it is run.
And he urged all 150 MPs to embrace long-term parliamentary reform.
"The reform document that has been spoken about up until today was, I felt in the ownership of a small number of people - it now is in the ownership of the whole House," he said.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard congratulated Mr Jenkins and praised his dedication to improving the workings of Parliament.
"I can think of no-one more worthy of holding this office at such a crucial time in our democracy," she said.
Opposition Leader Tony Abbott also congratulated Mr Jenkins and took the opportunity to have a dig at the Government for taking several weeks to endorse him.
"You are obviously the best suited for the office you now hold," he said.
"I never wavered in my faith that you were the best person for the job you hold - I was with you every step of the way."
With Mr Jenkins as Speaker, Labor loses a crucial vote in the finely-balanced Parliament.
While there was unanimous agreement over Mr Jenkins' election, disagreement still rages over other reforms to Parliament and who will fill the deputy speaker's position.
Informal agreements to pair absent MPs during votes are also under threat, with the Opposition refusing to guarantee the practice for anyone, including the Prime Minister.
The Government has accused the Opposition of trying to "wreck" the Parliament.
But Mr Abbott says MPs should be in Parliament when it sits unless they have a good excuse.
"It's got to be something which is clearly in the national interest," he said.
"[Not] leaving the Parliament to attend Labor Party fundraisers, leaving the Parliament to attend mere talkfests that are not in Australia's national interest."
A secret ballot will be held later today to fill the two deputy speaker positions available.
Nationals MP Bruce Scott says he has been officially nominated by the Coalition as a candidate but it is not yet known who else may step forward from either side.
Later today Governor-General Quentin Bryce will also address the new Parliament.