Appeals Court Rejects Bid to Quickly Restore Trump Travel Ban
A federal appeals court early Sunday denied the Justice Department's request to immediately reinstate President Donald Trump's order restricting refugees and travelers from seven majority Muslim countries from entering the United States.
The ruling came just hours after the department filed an emergency motion to stay the order by U.S. District Judge James L. Robartof Seattle that halted the implementation of restrictions that Trump's order imposed nationwide.
The denial means travelers restricted under the order can continue coming to the United States while the legal battles continue.
The 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco asked challengers of the ban to respond to the appeal and for the Justice Department to file a counter-response by Monday afternoon.
The Justice Department argues that Trump's Jan. 27 order — which suspended entry to the United States. from nationals of Iran, Sudan, Libya, Somalia, Syria, Iraq and Yemen — is a valid exercise of Trump's authority.
The brief says the federal court ruling "second-guesses the the President's national security judgment." It cites a 1982 Supreme Court ruling that said "the power to admit or exclude aliens is a sovereign prerogative."
"Unlike the President, courts do not have access to classified information about the threat posed by terrorist organizations operating in particular nations, the efforts of those organizations to infiltrate the United States, or gaps in the vetting process," the Justice Department brief argues.
It also argues that Washington state lacks legal standing in the case and that the constitutional challenges it brought were without merit. It goes on to say the federal court improperly issued a nationwide injunction that blocked Trump's order.
Trump criticized Robart on Twitter on Sunday after having called him a "so-called judge" early Saturday. "Just cannot believe a judge would put our country in such peril. If something happens blame him and court system," the president's tweet said in part.