Contrary to Hopes, Afghan Vote Disappoints
“Those who spent money to buy votes are traitors,” said Haji Abdul Majeed, a tribal elder from Kandahar Province. “And the fact is, everyone spent money, and we are not expecting them to work for the people and the country. In fact, we are afraid they will sell the country and its people.”
In most areas, the people’s voices have been lost in the din of candidates and power brokers who are now pressing presidential officials and the attorney general to overturn the results in key places, or even to invalidate the entire process.
For now, no one is sure what steps President Hamid Karzai will take, or whether the attorney general he appointed will be able to take cases of fraud before the Supreme Court. Behind the scenes the fight between the election commission, which stands by the results, and the government, which is challenging them, is in part about who has final say over the process.
“There is a very complex power play under way,” said one Western diplomat in Kabul, who did not want to be identified because of the delicacy of the issue. “We’re in a dangerous situation.”
As important, however, is the fact that there are 2,251 losers and the president cannot satisfy all of them. By recommending that they take their grievances to the courts, Mr. Karzai has offered them hope without promising to deliver it himself, draining off some of the anger and buying time to figure out what to do. There is, of course, always the possibility that the attorney general’s investigations will disqualify candidates the president did not want in Parliament to begin with.
But while Mr. Karzai may have bought himself some breathing space, he has also made his Western backers nervous since they badly wanted a successful election and view the job done by the Independent Election Commission as a quantum leap forward over last year. They are anxious not to undermine its work.
Regardless, the strife-filled process has battered the country’s fledgling democratic institutions. One possibility, said Western and Afghan election watchers, is that when the Parliament finally convenes, it will be so weakened by the many accusations of fraud that it will not be an effective counterbalance to the executive branch. Another possibility is that the fraud cases will delay the seating of the new Parliament, and with it important policy initiatives like those on peace and reconciliation.
The earliest the Parliament is likely to be inaugurated by Mr. Karzai and able to begin work is Jan. 21, according to parliamentary officials. The seven weeks between now and then leave ample time for competing interests to further muddle the results. Perhaps most dangerous is that the results did not yield a Parliament whose ethnic proportions match those of the country, and will therefore be perceived as unfair, whether the seats were won by fraud or not.
And while many fraud cases were weeded out, many others slipped through because the fraud and abuse were so pervasive, according to Afghan election officials and several international election experts.
“We worked very hard to make sure that the votes we counted were valid votes, but we had 86,000 employees and they did not come as angels from the sky,” said Fazal Ahmad Manawi, the chairman of the election commission, who has not shied from referring hundreds of his own employees for investigation.
The problem, said Thomas Ruttig, the co-director of the Afghan Analysts Network, a research group in Kabul, is the perception that the election officials acted arbitrarily. “Many people who stuffed ballot boxes got through, others were disqualified,” he said. “If we take the votes at face value, these people are now in Parliament and you have to make a decision about whether that is good enough.”
In other cases, the inability of people to safely reach the polls because of the Taliban insurgency disenfranchised important groups like the Pashtuns in several provinces, reflecting less the failure of election officials than of Afghan and coalition forces to secure broad parts of the country.
Ghazni is one example of a province where the results, which were announced Wednesday after a delay, met the letter of the law, but will almost certainly be seen as unfair. The province has the fifth-largest population in Afghanistan and is mixed ethnically, with a Pashtun majority and a minority of Hazaras.
However, the Pashtun areas are heavily infiltrated by Taliban insurgents, and many Pashtuns could not safely vote. While voting places opened, in some places as few as three people turned out.
That means that in this Parliament there will be 11 Hazara representatives, leaving the Pashtuns completely disenfranchised. The Independent Election Commission considered declaring the result invalid, but decided it could not. “The fact that the I.E.C. was able to open polling centers so that people could cast their ballots, even if some of them couldn’t come out, made the election legally acceptable,” said Abdullah Ahmadzai, the head of the commission’s secretariat.
The inequities in Ghazni reflected the outcome in several mixed provinces, including Kunduz, Badghis and Herat, all areas where Pashtuns previously had more representatives in the last Parliament than they will have in the new one.
According to policy advisers to Mr. Karzai, the number of Pashtuns dropped by more than 30 seats; Western diplomats estimate the drop between 12 and 20 seats. The worry, said Daoud Sultanzoi, a Pashtun member of Parliament from Ghazni who did not win re-election, is that when people feel unrepresented, they turn to the insurgency. “I am afraid people are being driven into the arms of the Taliban,” he said.
“This was happening, but the election exacerbated this,” he said, adding that he was urging Mr. Karzai to declare the results invalid nationwide because so many people could not vote because of the insecurity. “We were not ready for the election,” he said.