Quebec election 2014: campaign in home stretch
Quebecers head to the polls tomorrow morning, meaning this is the final day for candidates to convince voters they are the right leaders for the job, and why their opponents are the wrong choice.  
The Parti Québécois is spending much of the final hours of the campaign warning Quebecers about the return of a Liberal government.
Yesterday the PQ demanded the Liberal leader Philippe Couillard release the names of 11 people suspected by the province's anti-corruption squad of being involved in a system of illegal party financing — after a raid at the Quebec Liberal Party headquarters. 
Legal documents have blacked out the names.
Couillard says he doesn't know who the 11 people are — and the matter is in the hands of the prosecutor's office.
The PQ also continued their attack on the Liberals’s language policies and the proposed secular charter.
“Do you want an anglicized Quebec?” PQ candidate Bernard Drainville asked a crowd of supporters in Trois-Rivières. “Vote for the Liberal Party if that’s what you want.”
“They are just throwing mud to try and gain attention and it shows a great deal of despair and panic in their ranks,” said Couillard
Recent polls show the Liberals in the lead, though PQ leader Pauline Marois remains confident she will return to power.
"I will work until the end of the day Monday, and Tuesday I will be ready with my government," said Marois. "[The Liberals] don't have the team, they don't have the program."
Québec solidaire leaders are speaking in the Hochelaga-Maisonneuve riding of Montreal today.   
Francoise David and André Fontecilla will join Mercier incumbent Amir Khadir and other party members.
They will then meet with supporters in several other ridings around the city.  
The CAQ has seen a big boost in support in recent polls.
Legault spoke to an energized crowd of more than a thousand at a rally in Boucherville last night.
"From what I gather and meet with people, there is a trend, a new trend and it's the CAQ. And you might be surprised by what you see on Monday night," said Legault. 
He invited the crowd to abandon what he calls "the two old parties," that have governed Quebec for 40 years.