David Cameron in Brussels to explain how he let Brexit happen
David Cameron laughed and joked with Angela Merkel and other European leaders in Brussels today as he attended what is likely to be his last EU summit before handing over to his successor in September. 
The Prime Minister urged whoever takes over in Downing Street should forge the 'closest possible relationship' with the EU and urged his European counterparts today to pursue a 'constructive' approach to negotiations.
At a dinner with the heads of states tonight he faces the awkward task of explaining how he oversaw Britain's shock decision to leave the EU last week but he signalled his conciliatory approach as he declared: 'We mustn't be turning our backs on Europe'. 
Mr Cameron, who will only serve as Prime Minister until September 9 at the latest, said Britain and the EU had a mutual interest in agreeing the best possible deal on trade, cooperation and security. 
On arrival in the Belgium capital he met European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, posing for pictures in front of the hastily erected Union and EU flags. 
The Prime Minister held meetings with individual leaders before addressing them all at what promises to be an awkward and frosty dinner tonight to discuss last week's dramatic Brexit vote.
But he has been frozen out of official meetings among EU leaders tomorrow, when they will start to discuss their approach of forging a new relationship with Britain outside the bloc.
The meeting of EU heads of state is a routine summit but European Council President Donald Tusk chose only to include Mr Cameron in official proceedings for today's itinerary. 
In a sign of the hard-line approach being taken by Brussels, Mr Juncker ordered Brussels chiefs not to enter into any 'secret negotiations' with the UK over the terms of Brexit. 
He and other leaders today underlined their position that they will not start negotiatoins over a new relationship until the UK gives formal notifications of its intention to withdraw by invoking Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty.   
Speaking ahead of an afternoon of meetings, Mr Cameron told reporters: 'I'll be explaining that Britain will be leaving the European Union, but I want that process to be as constructive as possible and I hope the outcome will be as constructive as possible.
'While we're leaving the European Union we mustn't be turning our backs on Europe. 
'These countries are our neighbours, our friends, our allies, our partners and I very much hope we'll seek the closest possible relationship in terms of trade and cooperation and security because that is good for us and good for them and that' the spirit in which the discussions will be held today.' 
Mr Cameron will not be involved in the official negotiations over Britain's future relationship with the EU after announcing his resignation minutes after he learned of his crushing defeat in last week's referendum. 
He reportedly asked his aides 'why should I do the hard s***' as he prepared his resignation speech and it will instead be the job of the next Prime Minister to oversee the negotiations with Brussels. 
His successor is expected to be in place by September 2 at the latest, with Brexit champion Boris Johnson and Home Secretary Theresa May the current favourites to win the upcoming Conservative leadership contest.  
Mr Juncker met Mr Cameron after facing a dramatic showdown with Ukip leader Nigel Farage in the European Parliament this morning. 
Mr Farage was booed and heckled by EU lawmakers in Brussels this morning as he gloated about Britain's historic vote to leave the EU last week. 
The Ukip leader told fellow MEPs 'you're not laughing now' and accused the EU of being 'a political project in denial'. 
As he stood up to speak to a hostile reception in the European Parliament building this morning, he joked: 'Thank you for the warm welcome' before telling them they were also 'in denial' about the euro crisis and immigration.
Earlier in the session he clashed with European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker, who asked the Ukip leader: 'Why are you here?'
But there was a moment of  respite in the hostilities before the debate today when Mr Juncker embraced Mr Farge, but the Ukip leader looked uncomfortable as the European Commission president went in for a kiss.  
As lawmakers applauded the EU chief as they met for crisis talks about the future of the EU following Britain's decision to exit last week, the animated European Commission chief interrupted his address to hit out at Mr Farage.
Breaking off from his speech - delivered in French - Mr Juncker switched to English as he told Mr Farage: 'That's the last time you are applauding here...and to some extent I'm really surprised you are here. 
'You are fighting for the exit. The British people voted in favour of the exit. Why are you here?' he asked. 
The embattled Mr Juncker has been heavily criticised throughout Europe for his part in Britain's decision to cut ties with Brussels but used his address to a special session of the European Parliament to fight back. 
Hitting back at calls for him to resign, he told MEPs he was going nowhere and pledged to continue fighting towards his goal of a federal Europe. 
In a rare personal note, the 61-year-old former Luxembourg prime minister struck out at critics, notably in the German press but also among east European governments, who have called on him to stand down following the Brexit vote.
'The British vote has cut off one of our wings but we are still flying... now is not the time to turn inwards, Mr Juncker told MEPs today. 'I am neither tired or sick, as the German papers say. I will fight to my last breath for a united Europe.'
But he admitted the EU must accept the result of Britain's referendum. 'We must respect British democracy and the way it has expressed its view,' Mr Juncker said, drawing applause from the Ukip MEPs present. 
Mr Juncker spoke from a desk next to that of UKIP leader Nigel Farage, who followed the largely French and German speech with headphones and with a British flag planted in front of him.
Before the session began, Mr Farage had gone over to speak to Juncker. Both men appeared relaxed and as Farage made to leave, Juncker pulled him close and gave him an air-kiss on the cheek.
Mr Juncker said he would make no apology for being 'sad' at the result of the British vote - 'I am not a robot,' he said, 'I am not a grey bureaucrat.'
He urged Britain to explain quickly what it wanted from the EU in terms of a new relationship but insisted he had told his staff to engage in no preliminary talks with British officials until London engages the two-year mechanism for leaving the EU. No notification, no negotiation,' he said. 
Back home in the UK Chancellor George Osborne warned that tax rises and spending cuts will be needed within months to deal with the 'prolonged period of economic adjustment' caused by last week's vote in favour of Britain leaving the EU. 
Mr Johnson - who is tipped as Mr Cameron's most likely successor as PM - has called for informal discussions ahead of notification, while Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt suggests a deal on a new treaty should be agreed and approved in a second referendum before Article 50 is even deployed, setting in train a two-year departure process.
Business Secretary Sajid Javid and Work and Pensions Secretary Stephen Crabb are said to be canvassing support for a potential ‘dream ticket’. But this morning Mrs May overtook Mr Johnson in the race to become the next prime minister, according to polling.
A surge in support for has the home secretary leap ahead of the bookies' favourite to win the contest to replace Mr Cameron, research for The Times found.
The Cabinet minister is favoured by 31 per cent of Conservative voters against 24 per cent for Mr Johnson, according to the YouGov poll.
Nigel Farage was booed and heckled by EU lawmakers in Brussels this morning as he gloated about Britain's historic vote to leave the EU last week.
The Ukip leader told fellow MEPs 'you're not laughing now' and accused the EU of being 'a political project in denial'.
As he stood up to speak to a hostile reception in the European Parliament building this morning, he joked: 'Thank you for the warm welcome' before telling them they were also 'in denial' about the euro crisis and immigration.
Earlier in the session he clashed with European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker, who asked the Ukip leader: 'Why are you here?'
But there was a moment of respite in the hostilities before the debate today when Mr Juncker embraced Mr Farge, but the Ukip leader looked uncomfortable as the European Commission president went in for a kiss.
As lawmakers applauded the EU chief as they met for crisis talks about the future of the EU following Britain's decision to exit last week, the animated European Commission chief interrupted his address to hit out at Mr Farage.
Breaking off from his speech - delivered in French - Mr Juncker switched to English as he told Mr Farage: 'That's the last time you are applauding here...and to some extent I'm really surprised you are here.
'You are fighting for the exit. The British people voted in favour of the exit. Why are you here?' he asked. 
Boris Johnson's allies have complained about a coordinated drive by government whips to get Theresa May installed as Tory leader. The claims emerged as the battle to succeed David Cameron ramped up ahead of nominations opening tomorrow.
More than half-a-dozen senior figures are considering a run at the top job, with Cabinet minister Stephen Crabb, Sajid Javid, Nicky Morgan and Jeremy Hunt thought to be in the frame. 
However, Chancellor George Osborne today ruled out a bid admitting that his strong endorsement of EU membership in the referendum meant he could not bring the party together.
Attempts to about a coronation of Brexit champion Mr Johnson have fallen flat after supporters of Mrs May made it clear she is determined to fight her old rival to the bitter end.
The shortened timetable favours established politicians like Mr Johnson and the Home Secretary as it deprives lesser known candidates of the time to build momentum. Either could be Prime Minister in just nine weeks.
Mr Hunt is also preparing to stand, and today suggested that a second referendum or a snap general election would be needed to rubber-stamp a new deal negotiated with the EU. Mr Javid and Mr Crabb are said to be canvassing support for a potential ‘dream ticket’.
Team Johnson focused on signing up as many Cameron supporters as possible. His joint campaign manager, Michael Gove, is desperate to secure the backing of Mr Osborne, who he is trying to woo with the offer of a major job.
Leading figures in the Out camp were also being targeted as former London mayor Mr Johnson presented himself as the unity candidate. However, Remain campaigners are determined to sabotage his leadership bid – even setting up a special ‘Stop Boris’ group on the messaging service WhatsApp to secretly plot against him.
Last night, Tory MP Heidi Allen launched a scathing attack on Mr Johnson, saying he lacked the ‘skills and qualities’ to be a leader.
She told BBC2’s Newsnight: ‘Even as recently as February I think he was saying that a Brexit vote would cause uncertainty for business and government shouldn’t be distracted with these things. So it seemed very obvious to me that this was about his desire to be leader rather than putting the country first.’
The backbench 1922 Committee of Tory MPs yesterday accelerated the process for replacing Mr Cameron. The PM had wanted to stand down in October, but, amid the huge uncertainty over how to implement Brexit, nominations will take place tomorrow and Thursday.
MPs will whittle down the list of candidates to two by the middle of next month. A ballot of the party’s 150,000 members will then follow, with a new Tory leader named by September 2.
Those who let it be known they were interested in the top job included Mr Hunt, Education Secretary Nicky Morgan, former Cabinet minister Liam Fox and energy minister Angela Leadsom. Mr Javid and Mr Crabb were sounding out MPs about running on a ‘dream ticket’ to rival that of Mr Johnson and Mr Gove.
Mr Crabb would be leader and Mr Javid his Chancellor. Other possible contenders include Energy Secretary Amber Rudd and defence minister Penny Mordaunt.
Westminster insiders cast doubt over whether many of those currently declaring their leadership ambitions will actually stand rather than trying to secure offers of a major job in a new Tory administration. Bookmakers and most MPs remain convinced that the final battle will be fought between Mrs May and Mr Johnson.
In early skirmishes, both camps yesterday unveiled senior figures close to Mr Cameron as key supporters. In a coup, Gavin Williamson, who is the Prime Minister’s senior parliamentary aide, is to take a leading position running Mrs May’s campaign. Meanwhile, business minister Nick Boles – one of a small group of friends who first persuaded Mr Cameron to run for party leader – is backing Mr Johnson. Pro-Remain Mr Boles said: ‘I cannot escape the conclusion that our next Prime Minister needs to be someone who supported the idea of leaving the EU.’
Mr Gove, an old friend of the Chancellor’s, is determined to secure his support for Mr Johnson. Mr Gove is said to have offered Mr Osborne the post of Foreign Secretary – though allies of Mr Johnson rubbished the idea, saying it could be ‘toxic’.
Mrs May is expected to focus on her national security credentials, having spent six years in charge at the Home Office combating the threat from Islamist terror groups. She will also stress her long track-record of negotiating with Brussels and reassure MPs that – if she wins – there will be less clamour for a General Election later this year. Opposition MPs are expected to argue that Mr Johnson has no mandate if he is successful and demand that he go to the country. However, Mrs May will reassure MPs that she can carry on the mandate since she was a senior figure at the 2015 General Election.
In a sign of the bitterness already creeping in to the contest, it was last night claimed the Tory whips’ office was running an operation to support Mrs May over Mr Johnson. Complaints are understood to have been lodged with Graham Brady, chairman of the 1922 Committee.
Mrs May has overtaken Mr Johnson in the race to become the next prime minister, according to polling.
A surge in support for has the home secretary leap ahead of the bookies' favourite to win the contest to replace Mr Cameron, research for The Times found.
The Cabinet minister is favoured by 31 per cent of Conservative voters against 24 per cent for Mr Johnson, according to the YouGov poll.
Hinting at his own leadership ambitions yesterday, Mr Crabb said: ‘This is a really serious moment for our country. We need stability, we need direction and what I want to see over the next few days is a candidate emerge who understands the enormity of the situation that we are in.’
Mr Cameron will today travel to a summit in Brussels but will be sent home a day early so EU leaders can discuss the implications of Brexit.