Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (DPMC)
This page contains the relevant Cabinet papers and other documents relating to the process to consider changing the New Zealand Flag, undertaken from 2014–2016. The Responsible Minister was the Deputy Prime Minister, Hon Bill English, and the lead department was the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
For the results of the flag referendums, please visit the results section of the Electoral Commission's website.
The Flag Consideration Panel's reports to the Responsible Minister, and the documents from the Panel's meetings, can be downloaded below.
The New Zealand Flag Referendums Act 2015 received Royal assent on 14 August 2015 and is available at www.legislation.govt.nz, along with the Orders in Council governing the first and second referendums. The background to the Act is available at www.parliament.govt.nz.
The New Zealand Flag Referendums Amendment Act 2015 received Royal assent on 24 September 2015 and provided a mechanism for a fifth design to be included on the voting paper for the first referendum. To see the five alternative designs included on the voting paper for the first referendum, please visit this website (archived at the National Digital Heritage site) The NZ flag - your chance to decide. The amending Order in Council is available at www.legislation.govt.nz.
The two flag-related websites created to support the flag referendum process – www.flag.govt.nz and www.standfor.co.nz – have been decommissioned. They now redirect visitors to this page on the DPMC website.
The websites have been captured by the National Library's National Digital Heritage Archive (NDHA).
See the National Library catalogue records for 'View It' links to the archived instances of these websites:
Due to the dynamic nature of those websites, the archived instances do not fully capture all of the flag designs and comments submitted on those websites.
The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet is working on arrangements so that the submitted designs in electronic form can be made available to researchers on request. Researchers can contact the Deputy Secretary of the Cabinet for enquiries using the Cabinet Office contact details.
Note 1: The Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) at Appendix 4 of CAB (14) 541 is published separately on the Ministry of Justice's website. Note 2: The Regulatory Impact Statement (RIS) referred to in paragraph 47 of CAB (15) 23 is published separately on the Ministry of Justice's website.