Clinton beats Sanders in Nevada caucuses
Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton and her supporters breathed a sigh of relief Saturday following a narrow win in the Nevada caucuses.
“I am so, so thrilled and so grateful to all of my supporters out there,” Clinton told a crowd of cheering supporters in Las Vegas. “Some may have doubted us but we never doubted each other.”
Clinton’s Nevada win comes just a week-and-a-half after she lost to Bernie Sanders by double-digits in New Hampshire. Her campaign is hoping the win will serve to undercut Sanders’ momentum as they head next into several delegate-heavy contest.
"To everyone who turned out in every corner of Nevada with determination and heart: This is your win. Thank you," Clinton tweeted after the race was called. 
With 85 percent of precincts reporting in Nevada, Clinton has 53 percent to Sanders' 47 percent. 
CLICK HERE FOR ALL CAUCUS RESULTS. 
Sanders congratulated Clinton on her victory in Nevada’s closely-contested caucuses, and said he looked forward to the primaries and caucuses ahead. 
“I am very proud of the campaign we ran," Sanders said. "Five weeks ago we were 25 points behind and we ended up in a very close election. And we probably will leave Nevada with a solid share of the delegates."
The balloting in Nevada coincides with the Republican primary Saturday in South Carolina, where front-runner Donald Trump was projected the night's winner. 
In Nevada, Clinton was looking to rebound after losing big to Sanders in the party's New Hampshire primary, and only narrowly winning the Iowa caucuses. 
The candidates spent their final hours before the caucuses furiously trying to drive up turnout among their supporters. 
Significant spending by Sanders on paid media and staff helped his campaign make inroads into the Latino and African-American communities, which make up a significant portion of the Democratic electorate in the state. 
It wasn't enough to edge out Clinton. But each candidate benefited from a different set of constituencies. 
Entrance polls showed Clinton held the lead among the state’s influential union voters, with 56 percent going for Clinton and 43 percent going for Sanders.
But the breakdown was flipped among first-time caucus-goers, with 54 percent backing Sanders and 43 percent backing Clinton. Clinton also held the lead among women, but Sanders held a massive lead among caucus-goers under 45. 
Clinton had until recent weeks held a double-digit polling lead in Nevada, but that narrowed considerably in the closing days of the race. 
"The fact Bernie Sanders has shown the ability to compete anywhere on the map says as much about Democrats' dissatisfaction with Hillary Clinton and her weaknesses as a candidate as it does about the sharp left turn their party has taken," Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus said in a written statement. 
The Associated Press contributed to this report.