Papua New Guinea to elect new PM today
TONY EASTLEY: Papua New Guinea's general election is less than a month away but its parliament is due to meet later this morning to elect a new prime minister.
It comes after a dramatic u-turn by Peter O'Neill's government, which now says it accepts that his predecessor Sir Michael Somare is PNG's legitimate leader.
LIAM FOX: This is an ironic statement if ever there was one.
PETER O'NEILL: Everything in PNG is very straightforward. (Laughter)
LIAM FOX: Peter O'Neill is referring to the latest chapter in his seemingly endless leadership dispute with Sir Michael Somare.
In parliament the deputy speaker Francis Marus surprised everyone when he upheld last week's ruling by the Supreme Court that Sir Michael was PNG's legitimate prime minister. That's despite the fact parliament passed a motion purporting to nullify the court's ruling last Friday.
Mr Marus went on to say that despite the court's ruling Sir Michael no longer held the office because he'd missed three sittings of parliament this year.
FRANCIS MARUS: Honourable members on that note I formally declare there to be a vacancy in the office of the prime minister.
LIAM FOX: To fill the vacancy he said MPs would elect a new prime minister on the floor of parliament later this morning.
Mr O'Neill has maintained the Supreme Court's decision was tainted with bias and he won't recognise it.
He wasn't in the house for the deputy speaker's shock announcement and initially indicated parliament would sit again to "rectify" it.
But after lengthy discussions with his coalition partners he says the vote will go ahead.
PETER O'NEILL: So that this can for once and for all clear all the doubts that has been created by the decision of the court that has now put chaotic situation in the country.
LIAM FOX: His deputy Belden Namah says his PNG Party will nominate and vote for Mr O'Neill.
BELDEN NAMAH: If there is any level playing field, we'll play it on the floor of parliament. We call on the Somare faction to come up with the number and to bring their nominee to the floor of parliament.
LIAM FOX: Sir Michael won't be in parliament this morning. He's in his hometown of Wewak on PNG's northwest coast campaigning for the election and he's been unavailable for comment. Most of his supporters are also out in their electorates.
Even if Mr O'Neill wins the vote in parliament, which looks likely, that won't be the end of the matter. The chief justice and another judge have been controversially charged with sedition for handing down last week's Supreme Court ruling.
When asked what will happen to the charges now that he's accepted the court's decision, Mr O'Neill says the matter is in the hands of the police.
This is Liam Fox in Port Moresby reporting for AM.