Princess Sofia of Sweden and Prince Carl Philip announce borth of first child
The Swedish Royal Family have released the first picture of the newborn Prince of Sweden.
The image shows the proud parents - Prince Carl Philip and his wife Princess Sofia - and their baby boy at Danderyd's Hospital in Stockholm the day after his birth.
The newborn prince, whose name will be revealed by King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden in an official ceremony on Thursday, can be seen asleep in a baby carrier.
'The Prince family have now left the hospital and are at home at Drottningholm's Castle. Everyone is well and look forward to this time together,' the Swedish Royal Family wrote on its Facebook page. 
Marshal of the Realm Svante Lindqvist announced the arrival in a brief statement on Tuesday saying: 'Both mother and child are in good health,' Lindqvist said.
Although the official statement did not include the sex of the child sources have revealed that the couple have had a son.
According toPeopleSweden's Royal Palace revealed in a statement: 'Princess Sofia gave birth to a healthy and prosperous child on Tuesday, April 19 at 6:25 p.m. Both mother and child are doing well,' adding that the baby weighed in at 7lbs 9oz. and was 19.3 inches long.
The baby, born in Danderyds hospital outside Stockholm, is the Swedish couple's first child and is fifth in line to the throne.
It is thought the royal couple waited until today to find out if they were expecting a girl or a boy.
Princess Sofia was also careful to keep her cards close to her chest when it came to baby names.
When she quizzed about the subject at a fundraiser for her charity Project Playground, she said: 'We are keeping that to ourselves.'
Prince Carl Philip, 36, and Princess Sofia, 31, shared the happy news of the pregnancy last year via an official statement released on Facebook. 
'We are so happy and excited to announce that we are expecting our first child. We are very much looking forward to it,' it read.
The couple's baby comes at an exciting time for the Swedish royal family who have recently welcomed a new baby, Prince Oscar Carl Olof.
Sofia's sister-in-law Crown Princess Victoria, sister of Prince Carl Philip, gave birth to her second child in March.
Former glamour model Sofia Hellqvist married the prince last June. The elegant brunette is known for her infectious gap-toothed smile and easygoing ways.
Sofia and Carl Philip dated for five years before walking down the aisle and now live together in the upmarket Djurgården district of Stockholm.
Carl Philip and Sofia married in the royal palace's chapel, with the bride wearing a lace wedding dress created by local designer Ida Sjöstedt.
But thanks to Princess Sofia's reality TV and glamour modelling past, Carl Philip's choice of wife initially proved controversial.
The now Duchess of Värmland's first shoot aged 20 saw her posing topless in a pair of camouflage print bikini bottoms and clutching a snake to preserve her modesty.
Unsurprisingly, when news of Carl Philip's new relationship emerged in 2010, the Swedish Royal Family were initially put 'on the defensive' as sources revealed at the time.
Since then, however, Sofia has gone out of her way to tone down her image.
Meanwhile Carl Philip has hit the headlines for antics of his own - not least his infamous 'wild summer' of 2012, during which he hit the Swedish party scene wearing an alien mask, and hitchhiked to a motoring competition after losing his Gucci wallet, going on to crash his car in the first race. 