Hillary Clinton wins Puerto Rico
Washington (CNN)Hillary Clinton has won Puerto Rico's Democratic primary, putting her on the cusp of clinching the party's presidential nomination.
Clinton is not expected to win all 60 delegates that were at stake Sunday, which would have put her over the top in the nomination battle against rival Bernie Sanders. She remains shy of the 2,383 she needs to win the Democratic nomination.
Clinton is closing in on a historic nomination as the first female presidential nominee with one more round of states -- California, New Jersey, New Mexico, South Dakota and Montana -- set to vote Tuesday. Her nomination would become official during the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia.
Her total delegate haul includes superdelegates, party officials who are unbound and can switch their support at any time. Those superdelegates have overwhelmingly supported Clinton over Sanders, but could technically change their position.
Sanders has repeatedly said he'll lobby them to do just that.
He said Saturday that the Democratic convention would be contested. Asked by reporters Sunday if that was still his position, he simply responded: "Absolutely."
elevated his attacks on Clinton on CNN's "State of the Union," Sanders even elevated his attacks on Clinton on CNN's "State of the Union," saying he is bothered by the potential conflict-of-interest of the Clinton Foundation's acceptance of gifts from foreign governments during her tenure as secretary of state.
He also cast Clinton as too hawkish, criticizing her push to intervene in Libya, create a no-fly zone in Syria and vote to go to war in Iraq.
"I worry about that, yeah, I do. I think her support for the war in Iraq was not just an aberration," Sanders said.
"After Tuesday, I'm going to do everything I can to reach out, to try to unify the Democratic Party, and I expect Sen. Sanders to do the same," Clinton said Sunday on "State of the Union."
"And we will come together and be prepared to go to the convention in a unified way, to make our case, to leave the convention, to go into the general election to defeat Donald Trump," Clinton said.