Greek PM Papandreou wins confidence vote
‘‘I ask for a vote of confidence tonight so that we can secure the course of this country,’’ Mr Papandreou said. ‘‘I have already communicated with the president of the republic to inform him that I intend to proceed with consultations for a government of cooperation.’ ‘‘I have excluded nothing from the discussion’’ with his political opponents, Mr Papandreou told MPs. ‘‘Even my own position. And I am not tied to any particular post. I have already said that and I am proving it daily. ‘‘Even my re-election does not interest me. What interests me is saving the country,’’ the prime minister added. Mr Papandreou’s offer caps a tumultuous week that started with him securing a second bailout from the European Union then roiling markets by unilaterally deciding to put the terms of that rescue to the Greek people in a vote.
But on Friday, Finance Minister Evangelos Venizelos said that he had informed top EU officials ‘‘of Greece’s decision not to hold a referendum’’, the first senior Greek politician to announce it so clearly. Mr Papandreou had signalled a backflip later on Thursday after his controversial call for a referendum had earned him a humiliating dressing-down this week from European leaders, who warned it could derail the rescue package and even raised questions about Greece’s continued EU membership. The government must now heal political divisions to secure agreement on the aid package before Greece runs out of funds next month. Mr Venizelos said the aim of the confidence vote would be to form a national unity government. Sources told Reuters Mr Venizelos had won the backing of leaders of some smaller parties to support a new coalition that he would head. The new government would call early elections in a few months after the bailout was secured, sources close to the deal said.
The leaders of the far-right LAOS party and another centre-right party indicated after Papandreou's speech that they would cooperate in a new coalition. As the debate in parliament took place, several thousand communists staged noisy protest in front of the flood-lit building. Chanting, banging drums and waving red and Greek flags, the protesters overflowed the central Syntagma Square under the watchful eye of several hundred police officers carrying riot gear. In a poignant expression of the hardships ordinary Greeks are suffering, one little girl, high on her father’s shoulders, carried a sign which read: ‘‘My grandma needs care, my mother wants a job and I want schoolbooks.’’
On the street, people appeared to be in favour of a government of national unity. One pensioner who gave his name as Takis, told AFP: ‘‘As matters stand, nothing can save us.‘‘There must be a government of national salvation with all the parties until we have elections. They way things are now George (Papandreou) cannot continue.’’ On Syntagma Square, where violent demonstrations have taken place during the crisis, Sofia Papadimitriou, a 25-year-old student said: ‘‘Papandreou must go.’’‘‘He’s had it. He can’t get anything done. He hasn’t got any energy left.’’ The political atmosphere in Athens remained fraught after rowdy parliamentary scenes Thursday, with opposition leader Antonis Samaras accusing Papandreou of blackmailing and lying to the Greek people in a desperate bid to cling to power. The Ta Nea daily said the country was ‘‘on the edge of a cliff’’ and Eleftheros Typos rounded on Mr Papandreou, saying he was ‘‘destroying Greece.’’
As the turmoil on the Greek political scene intensifies, the debt-wracked country, enduring its worst post-war economic crisis, is in danger of running out of cash in little over a month. Mr Venizelos had admitted that Athens ‘‘absolutely needed’’ before December 15 an eight-billion-euro slice of aid that has been blocked by EU leaders furious at Mr Papandreou’s referendum gamble. For the first time, Ms Merkel and others raised the spectre of Greece leaving the euro, hiking the pressure on the politicians in Athens to strike a deal if they wanted to remain in the bloc. Bemoaning the fact that ‘‘Greece is once again in the world media spotlight for all the wrong reasons,’’ the Athens News said the country was in a state of ‘‘confusion and inconsistency.’’ Vangelis Ipadimou, a worker studying the headlines at one of the several newspaper kiosks in central Athens, said he wanted power removed from politicians.