Liberal Ken Wyatt expects to snatch Hasluck
HISTORY looks to be in the making with the east metropolitan seat of Hasluck teetering towards Aboriginal Liberal candidate Ken Wyatt.
Dr Wyatt, who would become the first Aborigine elected to the House of Representatives if successful, was leading 50.51 per cent against sitting Labor member Sharryn Jackson's 49.49 per cent in two-party preferred votes.
"I'm happy with the result, but I still would not call it yet. We'll see the end result," Dr Wyatt said last night.
A respected Aboriginal health expert, Dr Wyatt has revealed he wanted guaranteed parliamentary seats for Aborigines. And, in contrast with Tony Abbott's "stop the boats" mantra, has said he was not against asylum seekers.
He also said he wanted political parties to give Aboriginal candidates more winnable seats because that would help get more indigenous parliamentarians elected.
"We do need a discourse around whether we need four seats in the Australian Parliament, how we do that and what is the model that ensures representation of all Aboriginal cultural groups," he said on Friday.
"Because it is when you are in the parliament, particularly in the House of Representatives, that you can influence the way in which some of the planning, some of the decision making and the structuring of legislation occurs, so it becomes more inclusive.
"I want to see more of our (Aboriginal) people being given seats that are winnable because that will help guarantee people getting over the line."
Dr Wyatt, who had needed a swing of less than 1 per cent to win the seat from Ms Jackson, said of asylum seekers coming to Australia: "I would not stop an individual seeking to better themselves.
"But I would stop and prevent people who traffic in the misery of others for financial gain."
He was not frightened by the number of asylum seekers entering Australia, which had emerged as a hot issue in Hasluck.
"What does concern me and what does anger me, is the fact that people can live off the misery of others by charging them high rates, putting their lives at risk."
Ms Jackson said local issues, not only national ones, such as that of asylum seekers, would have had a big impact on the election result in her seat, including delays to the building of the Midland health campus by WA's Liberal Government.