Bob Turner Wins New York 09 Special Election
Unions countered with an aggressive GOTV campaign in and the support of the usual unions, such as the United Federation of Teachers, the Patrolman's Benevolent Association, and AFSCME.
Also at issue in the contest was same-sex marriage. Weprin's vote in favor of it while a state legislator came up often in the district, with rabbis in particular hammering the topic. But in the end its importance may have been overstated. If same-sex marriage was so central to the race, why were the favorability ratings of Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo, so closely identified with the push for same-sex marriage's legislative affirmation in New York, so sky-high? Buried in the same Siena College poll Fridaythat drew enormous attention to Weprin's fading chances, Cuomo held a favorability rating of 75 percent amongst likely voters in the 9th district. And a full 62 percent of Turner voters thought highly of Cuomo in the survey.
Economic policy may in fact have been the central issue in the race -- and that's what should really worry Democrats. That same Siena College poll that gave Turner the lead found a large chunk of voters said the economy and entitlements were the primary issues on which they would vote. In the special election race to replace Craigslist congressman Chris Lee in New York's 26th district earlier this year, Democrat Kathy Hochul was able to pull out a victory after focusing a great deal of attention on her party's efforts to preserve Medicare in the fact of efforts to radically alter it, like Paul Ryan's budget plan.
Weprin couldn't revive that message -- which, after all, was quashed by the Weiner Twitter pictures scandal -- and Turner volunteers in the district handed out fliers featuring a color photo of Obama in full feet-on-the-desk mode, with the tag line "Obama thinks he can fix the economy on a bus. He already threw Israel under it."
Outside Aron's Kissena Farms, an upscale kosher grocery store Thursday night, Phil Orenstein, 63, explained Turner's appeal: "Bob impresses me as a person. He's a businessman. He's not just talking. He really has a plan to cut spending. He's on the level of a sort of Paul Ryan."
That Wisconsin representative isn't necessarily the sort of character that Queens voters generally elect, a point made by Rep. Joe Crowley, head of the Queens Democratic Party. But it was Ryan's party they'd chosen when results came in Tuesday.
Weprin, for his part, had tried distancing himself from Obama, who has just 31 percent support in the district, according to a recent poll. Outside the Midwood shul, Weprin told an older couple: "I've never met him. But I know he's not happy about some of the statements I've made disagreeing with him. And I look forward to meeting him."
Democrats have been eager to play the "bad candidate" game, as they did after Martha Coakley upset loss to Scott Brown in the Massachusetts Senate race to replace Ted Kennedy. Hardly the most compelling of candidates, Weprin has had his gaffes, including famously underestimating the size of the national debt by $10 trillion, right in the midst of the debt-ceiling debate. The DCCC has dropped close to half a million on last-minute broadcast television ads. Media watchers, though, suggest that if the national party had been more prepared, they'd have focused their resources on print and cable campaigns.