Parliament confirms Poroshenko nominations for foreign minister, central bank, prosecutor general - Jun. 19, 2014
Speaking in parliament on June 19, Poroshenko said he wanted to form a team of “patriots, professionals and like-minded people,” proposing Pavlo Klimkin as foreign minister, Valeria Gontareva to head the National Bank of Ukraine and Viltaly Yarema as prosecutor general.
By law, the president can also appoint and dismiss the country’s minister of defense and the head of the State Security Service (SBU).
The appointments show that Poroshenko is seeking to fill out his government with people he knows and trusts, experts say.
“These candidacies were expected,” said Volodymyr Fesenko, head of the Penta political think tank. “Gontareva is respected in business circles. She will be Poroshenko’s person, with whose help he will control the stability of the financial system.”
“Klimkin, I think, is chosen as the president praised him in times when he [Poroshenko] worked as a minister of foreign affairs,” Fesenko added.
Klimkin has served as Ukraine’s ambassador to Germany since June 2012. He studied at the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, specializing in Aero Physics and Space Research. He began his diplomatic career in 1993, in the department of arms control and disarmament in Ukraine’s Foreign Ministry. From 1997 to 2000, Klimkin was entrusted as the Secretary to the Ambassador of Ukraine in Germany on scientific and technical issues, as well as political issues.
Interim Foreign Minister Andriy Deshchytsia has served in the post since Feb. 27, during which time he earned a reputation as an ardent critic of Russia. On June 15, he appeared at a rally near the Russian Embassy in Kyiv to try to temper protesters who defaced the building and hurled eggs and stones at it following the downing of a Ukrainian plane by separatists who fired Russian weapons at it, killing 49 servicemen in Luhansk. Outside the embassy, he was caught on film calling Russian President Vladimir Putin a “khuilo,” an obscene term in both Russian and Ukrainian meaning a part of the male anatomy.
Fesenko said that Deshchytsia, the country’s top diplomat, made the undiplomatic move knowing his dismissal was imminent. Deshchytsia hailed Klimkin’s appointment on June 18, writing on Twitter: “I know Pavlo as an effective professional. As for me, I am ready to continue to work for Ukraine’s good.”
Former investment banker Gontareva, whose name Poroshenko put forward to head the National Bank of Ukraine, has worked as Chairwoman of the Board at Investment Capital Ukraine (ICU) since December 2007. Prior to joining ICU, she worked for 18 years in leading local and international financial institutions.
The now former head of the NBU, Stepan Kubiv, is a former Kredobank head and was a commander during the EuroMaidan Revolution, during which time he was responsible for money donated for activists. Before the protests, Kubiv was vice head of the parliamentary committee for finance and banking. He was appointed as National Bank head after the change of power on Feb 24.
Kubiv claimed he was dismissed at his own request and posted on his Facebook page a letter of resignation, in which he said he plans to focus on “political activity” instead of government work.
Ahead of his nomination, Yarema served as First Deputy Prime Minister of Ukraine responsible for law enforcement and the power block of the Cabinet. Yarema studied at Kaliningrad High Police School and Ukraine’s Academy of Internal Affairs before serving as Kyiv city police chief.
Yarema replaces acting Prosecutor General Oleg Makhnitsky, a nationalist Svoboda party member, who was appointed to his post on Feb. 24. 
Fesenko said that by replacing Makhnitsky with former policemen Yarema, the president is showing his resolve to fight corruption, particularly within the prosecutor’s office.   
There are talks that Valery Kovalchuk, the head of Poroshenko’s election campaign, could be appointed to fill Yarema’s old position of first deputy prime minister soon, Fesenko added. 
Poroshenko thanked the three dismissed former officials, and said he proposed an advisor role to Makhnitsky, an ambassador position to Deshchytsia and planned to give “an important post” to Kubiv soon.  
Kyiv Post staff writers Iryna Yeroshko and Oksana Grytsenko can be reached at yeroshkoiryna@gmail.com and grytsenko@kyivpost.com. 