Greece awaits outcome of Alexis Tsipras gamble: ‘We have all aged’
At times Alexis Tsipras has the looks of a movie star, his clean-cut features belying a quiet charisma. From the posters pasted on the lamp-posts of boulevards and facades of buildings, it is his face that greets onlookers ahead of today’s crucial general election. “Tomorrow has an identity,” they say.
At 41, Tsipras is his Syriza party’s trump card. The hope is that even at this late stage – with polls showing the race to be so close the outcome is impossible to predict – the man adoringly referred to as Alexis will be the force that brings voters in. The ballot, the third this year, has drawn little publicity and even less enthusiasm, but it is poised to play a decisive role in a country whose battle against bankruptcy has assumed epic dimensions in recent years.
In a final campaign rally on Friday, the leftist former prime minister was in exuberant mood, exhorting followers to “turn their backs” on his main challenger, the conservative New Democrat Vangelis Meimarakis, and the corrupt regime that had pushed Greece into a mire of crisis and debt. “They have waged economic war against us,” he told the crowd. “Dark plans have been plotted in dark rooms … but they are not going to get rid of us so easily.”
A flurry of polls released late on Friday – the last before ballot boxes open at 7am on Sunday – revealed Syriza to be narrowly ahead after late gains by Tsipras. In the sea of purple, red and white party flags that swayed to and fro as the politician took to the podium in Syntagma Square, supporter Pericles Mavromatis, like those around him, roared with approval. “Tsipras is the first honest leader this country has seen in years!” he bellowed through the blare of music. “All the rest destroyed us.”
At 63, Mavromatis is typical of those who have fallen through the cracks since the eruption of Greece’s great economic crisis six years ago. In Tsipras, he sees a man who came up from the bottom without privilege or favour. “Before the death of our economy I had a small firm importing beers,” he said, flicking a set of amber worry beads. “I had a staff of 15 people, but for the past four years we have all been unemployed and we all know we are too old to ever find work now. It needs somebody like Tsipras, outside of the system, to rebuild it again.”
Eight months after the anti-austerians stormed to power promising to eradicate the “neoliberal” policies so widely blamed for Greece’s descent into joblessness and poverty, the leftists are a very different force. The experience of office has clearly changed them. In the posters that now line the streets of Athens, the once fresh-faced Tsipras appears transformed; his eyes ringed and puffy with fatigue, his hair speckled with grey, his brow slightly furrowed. They are the wounds of war – the effects of one of Europe’s most tumultuous tenures in power, and now part of the narrative of the little man taking on the continent’s elite – that have not been airbrushed by Syriza’s masterful PR machine.
“We have all aged,” Nikos Xydakis, the former culture minister, told the Observer. “It seems like years since we were elected, and yet it was only months ago. So much has happened, events have been so big, it has almost been too much for anyone to take in.”
This is an election that Syriza never wanted to call. After an internal revolt triggered by Tsipras’s “enforced” embrace of the measures he had pledged to oppose – budget cuts, tax rises and other reforms that came as the price of a third bailout to keep bankruptcy at bay and Greece in the euro – the leftists claim they had no other choice. “We had lost our parliamentary majority,” Xydakis lamented. “One day they will understand they made a big mistake,” he said of the rebels who, breaking ranks, established their own party, the far left, anti-euro Popular Unity, in August.
Describing the need for a fresh mandate as vital to implementing policies he had not been elected to impose, Tsipras thought the vote would be an easy cruise to victory. But the snap polls have been anything but predictable. A tenure marked by showdowns with European partners, the rollercoaster quest to reach an accord with creditors, a referendum on the terms attached to that agreement, the closure of banks and imposition of capital controls have all left an indelible mark. Along with a drop in his own popularity, weariness has set in, with exhausted Greeks complaining of being sucked into a vote they never wanted.
The terms attached to the €86bn bailout are some of the most onerous yet. For his detractors, Tsipras not only stands accused of incompetence but of a catastrophic legacy disastrous for the economy and Greece’s credibility abroad.
It is a far cry from the euphoria Syriza elicited in Europe when it was catapulted into office last January. With Tsipras now agreeing with his conservative opponents that unpopular reforms are a necessary evil, there is little that connects him to the party’s anti-establishment rhetoric of the past.
In the runup to the “express” election, EU officials have insisted that bailout commitments leave Athens with almost no room for manoeuvre.
“Voters are faced with a choice between parties with differing degrees of enthusiasm for implementing major measures in a very tight time frame,” said Kevin Featherstone, who heads the Hellenic Observatory at the London School of Economics. “Whatever the outcome, it will be a government under tutelage. Democracy in a sense is frozen,” he added, speaking from London. “A New Democracy victory would have more credibility with EU partners, a Syriza victory would reflect emotional opposition to the bailout but acceptance that this is the price we have to pay, but either way there will be little option but to implement the measures.”
The big question is whether any party will get enough of a majority – at least 38% of the vote – to enforce the measures being demanded of Athens by foreign lenders. More than 100 reforms – many with overarching consequences for the way the public administration is run – have to be legislated in the coming weeks. Previous attempts to enact such changes have led to massive defections from ruling parties and ultimately an expiry date for political leaders.
Whether Syriza or New Democracy emerges as the winner – automatically gaining a bonus 50 seats in the 300-member parliament under Greek law – either would be forced into a coalition with smaller parties. The threat of the country’s ejection from the euro zone, Grexit, still looms large, with many predicting that the terms of being rescued are so punishing that further drama, with Athens once again being brought to the precipice, is inevitable.
Trade unions are already preparing for massive unrest in what is expected to be an explosive winter.
In such climes, Sunday’s vote marks the death of hope in a country already brought to its knees. “Abstention will be the biggest impediment and danger,” says Konstantinos Tsoukalas, Greece’s leading sociologist and a former Syriza MP. “If Tsipras doesn’t win, it won’t be because Vangelis Meimarakis does but because more and more young people, in what was once one of Europe’s most politicised societies, are asking, ‘What is the point, what is our vote going to do?’”