Silicon Valley joins Global Work Party to combat climate change – The Mercury News
At San Jose State, students framed solar panels for an experimental zero-emissions house. In Milpitas, advocates talked up “personal rapid transit” that promises to provide efficient, 24-hour-a-day transportation networks. In East Palo Alto, volunteers built raised vegetable beds in the backyards of 10 low-income families.
Silicon Valley on Sunday rolled up its sleeves to join the 10-10-10 Global Work Party, intended to not only draw attention to the need to combat climate change but also to do something about it.
The 24 events in Santa Clara County and 400 in California were among 7,000 get-down-and-dirty events worldwide coordinated by the climate-action group 350.org. The Global Work Party coalesced online through websites and social networking.
As volunteers tilled the soil, hammered boards and planted mangroves, they uploaded photos to beam their accomplishments around the globe. In Afghanistan, students planted trees outside Kabul. In Kazakhstan, activists held a bicycling competition for children. In Ghana, volunteers planted trees.
Reuben Thibodeau, 25, a San Jose State senior majoring in electrical engineering, began the morning chatting up a project he had watched on the Web in which volunteers were beating sacred drums after working on a wind farm in New Zealand.
“We definitely felt that energy,” Thibodeau said.
With a grant from the National Science Foundation, students from five San Jose State departments are designing a 100-square-foot zero-emissions home, using sustainable materials, solar panels and battery backup. The idea is to make the tiny portable home — large enough for one person, Thibodeau said — so that it can be put on display in different areas. On Sunday, they built frames to test the solar panels.
Also in San Jose, workers ranging in age from their 20s to their 70s installed a bicycle rack and a rain barrel, and planted drought-tolerant agapanthus and manzanita outside the Collins House downtown.
“I’m tired right now, but it feels good to be part of an international effort,” said Roz Dean, 78, after a day of work. Dean is a board member of the Collins Foundation and a member of the San Jose Peace and Justice Center, which occupies part of the Collins House.
The 2-year-old 350.org is named for a goal of climate activists. They cite scientific studies that say the concentration of carbon dioxide in the Earth’s atmosphere should be below 350 parts per million to prevent global warming. Currently, the level has reached 388 ppm.
While the immediate point of the 10-10-10 projects was to make a practical difference, another was to send a political message, 350.org founder Bill McKibben said in a statement. “When they put down their shovels, many will pick up their cell phones to call their leaders and say, ‘We’re getting to work. What about you?’ ”