Queen's Speech passes after Tories forced into massive last-minute climbdown to let Northern Irish women have abortions on the NHS
The video will start in 8Cancel
The Tories have been forced into a dramatic last-minute climbdown just hours before a crunch vote threatened to derail the Queen's Speech.
Ministers announced women from Northern Ireland CAN now have free NHS abortions in England - a massive victory for Labour MP Stella Creasy.
The concession allowed the Queen's Speech to pass tonight 323-309, cementing Theresa May's place in Downing Street - for now.
It came after more than 100 MPs, including up to 40 Tories, backed her call for Theresa May to fund NHS abortions for desperate women who cross the Irish Sea because it is illegal back home.
Most have to pay in private clinics because the government "respects" Northern Irish policy in other parts of the UK. One girl aged 15 paid £900.
Only last night Jeremy Hunt had tried to dismiss criticism by saying there would be a "consultation".
But today Chancellor Philip Hammond announced NHS-funded abortions WILL be government policy, with extra funding for providers from the Government Equalities Office.
Labour MP Stella Creasy, who pioneered the bid, said she was "delighted". She added: "Let us send a message to women everywhere that in this Parliament their voices will be heard and their rights upheld."
Martha Spurrier, Director of Liberty, said: “This incredible victory shows what Parliament can do. By working across parties, MPs can force the Government to do the right thing."
Labour MP Ms Creasy put Theresa May in a nightmare situation when her bid was selected as a formal 'regret' amendment to the Queen's Speech today.
Defeat would have been humiliating for the Prime Minister.
A Queen's Speech has only been amended using a 'regret' motion twice since the 1850s, according to the independent House of Commons Library.
And accepting the amendment risked angering the anti-abortion DUP days after Mrs May paid £1billion for their backing.
But with pressure on the Prime Minister from her own side and a fragile working majority of just 13, she was forced to accept Ms Creasy's demands.
Mrs May missed a crunch meeting with G20 world leaders in Berlin to fly home and make the vote in time.
But in the end Ms Creasy withdrew her formal amendment, meaning the decision will not go down legally as a government defeat.
The decision will not change the highly controversial abortion law in Northern Ireland.
Pushing for the move, Tory former Culture Secretary Maria Miller said it was "wrong" to deny Northern Irish women the right to NHS-funded abortions in England.
And Tory Commons leader Andrea Leadsom revealed urgent talks were under way at the Department of Health.
She told MPs this morning, before the announcement: "It is my personal view that every woman should have the right to decide what happens to her own body, that is very clear.
"It is a question of devolution and the fact that health is devolved to Northern Ireland and therefore it’s the question of who should pay for it.
"The Department for Equalities and the Department of Health are discussing and looking very closely at this issue today."
The Supreme Court narrowly upheld the government's policy this month - saying while Jeremy Hunt could change it, he was "entitled" not to.
The Health Secretary was accused of "inventing" a consultation last night to deflect from the row.
It was thought Jeremy Hunt may have been talking about a consultation on the law in Northern Ireland.
But the DUP made clear the decision is one for England - not Stormont.
DUP MP Ian Paisley Jr told the House of Commons: "This is not a matter for Belfast; it is a matter for NHS England."
The votes came ahead of a final vote to pass the Queen's Speech - cementing the government's place for now - at 5.45pm.
In the first vote of the night, Labour failed 323-297 to pass its own version of the Queen's Speech into law.
Jeremy Corbyn's amendment had promised to end austerity, pursue a "jobs-first Brexit " and clamp down on tax avoiders.
A separate amendment by Labour's Chuka Umunna fought a so-called Hard Brexit - but despite some Tory support, was also destined to fail because Labour MPs were whipped not to vote on it.
Six Labour frontbenchers rebelled and at least one quit.
Tory Business Secretary Greg Clark rounded off a week of debate saying the parliament would see a "battle for ideas and values".
He slammed Labour's "determination to create in Britain a Socialist state" that he said would cause lower wages, higher prices and lower pensions.
"This is not a prosperity for the many or the few, but for no one," he said.
But Labour's Shadow Business Secretary Rebecca Long-Bailey said of the Tories: "As they precariously hang on to government by their tips of their fingernails, they are quite simply standing in the way of a fairer, richer Britain."