Two million French people to strike over Sarkozy's pensions reform
Train and plane travel will be severely disrupted across France while schools and other parts of the public sector will all but grind to a halt today as workers heed the call of the country's main unions.
Bernard Thibault, head of the CGT union, the country's largest, said he believed that even more people would turn out than in June, when more than 800,000 took part in demonstrations.
Dogged by low approval ratings, government sleaze allegations and a widely criticised crackdown on Roma gipsies, President Sarkozy is desperate to show the country and his own camp that his reform agenda is on track.
"I will not be the President who leaves office without solving the question of balancing the pension system," he said ahead of protests against plans to raise the official retirement age in France from 60 to 62 by 2018. The age at which people can retire with a full pension will also rise from 65 to 67.
Unions and the left-wing opposition hope to prove that the French President no longer has the political or moral clout to see the reform through.
The strikes were timed to coincide with a parliamentary debate on the reform led by Eric Woerth, the embattled labour minister at the heart of a party funding scandal involving Liliane Bettencourt, the l'Oréal heiress.
Mr Sarkozy faces a paradoxical situation in which up to 70 per cent of the country, according to one poll, backs the strike while a majority also concedes that pension reform is inevitable and will be enacted.
France is running a huge public deficit and the government says its pay-as-you-go pension system will be annually €50 billion in the red by 2020 if nothing is done.
France has one of the world's highest life expectancy rates while its minimum retirement age is well below the OECD average of 64. Britain's official retirement is 65, while Germany and Denmark have raised it to 67.
Mr Sarkozy's main problem is that the protests have already broadened into a wider show of no-confidence in his policies and style of leadership.
There were early signs of this yesterday when secondary schools went on strike with up to a third of teachers failing to turn up for work to protest against the slashing of 7,000 jobs in education – an issue not directly linked to retirement.
There is also anger against Mr Sarkozy crackdown on Roma and drive to dismantle illegal camps and expel ethnic gipsies to their native Romania and Bulgaria.
He has pledged to maintain the policy and push through other hardline law-and-order measures aimed at wooing his right-wing core electorate.
Yesterday he pledged to enact a law to strip foreign-born French people of their nationality if they kill or try to kill police or public officials.
However, he stopped short of extending the law to those guilty of polygamy.
Instead, rules will be tightened to prevent men claiming welfare benefits for multiple wives.