Irish church fury on government plan to 'legalise' some abortions after dentist Sativa died following a miscarriage
The head of Ireland's Catholic Church urged followers in his Christmas Day message to lobby against government plans to legalise abortion.
Ireland, the only EU member state that currently outlaws the procedure is preparing legislation that would allow limited access to abortion after the European Court of Human Rights criticised the current regime.
The death of Savita Halappanavar, who was denied an abortion of her dying foetus and later died of blood poisoning has intensified the debate around abortion laws in Ireland.
Abortion has been a hugely divisive subject in the predominantly Catholic country.
"I hope that everyone who believes that the right to life is fundamental will make their voice heard in a reasonable but forthright way to their representatives," Cardinal Sean Brady said in a Christmas message on Tuesday.
"No government has the right to remove that right from an innocent person." Irish Prime Minister Enda Kenny, a regular Mass goer, is bringing in legislation that would allow a woman to have an abortion if her life was at risk from pregnancy.
The country's Supreme Court ruled in 1992 that abortion was permitted when a woman's life was at risk but successive governments have avoided legislating for it because it is so divisive.
The death of Savita, who repeatedly asked for an abortion while she was miscarrying in an Irish hospital, highlighted the lack of clarity in Irish law that leaves doctors in a legally risky position.
Savita's death re-ignited the abortion debate and prompted large protests by groups both in favour of and against abortion.
Kenny and his conservative Fine Gael party have been criticised for tackling the abortion issue and some party members have indicated that they may not be able to back the law.
Relations between the Irish government and the once dominant Catholic Church are at an alltime low in the wake of years of clerical sex abuse scandals.
Kenny told parliament last year that the Vatican's handling of the scandals had been dominated by "elitism and narcissism" and accused it of trying to cover up the abuse.
The speech prompted the Vatican to recall its ambassador, or nuncio, to Ireland.
Brady has faced calls this year to resign over accusations that he failed to warn parents their children were being sexually abused.