Hugo Chávez recovering from tumour surgery, say Venezuelan officials
Vice-president Elías Jaua confirmed leader was stable and in 'good condition' after having pelvic lesion extracted
Doctors removed a tumour from Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez's pelvic region and he is stable and recovering in Cuba with family at his side, his vice-president has announced.
"President Chávez is in good physical condition," Elías Jaua told the main chamber of the National Assembly, prompting a standing ovation and cries of "Onward, comandante".
Reading a statement from the office of the presidency, Jaua said: "A total extraction of the diagnosed pelvic lesion was performed, removing also the tissue surrounding the lesion. There were no complications related to the local organs."
Jaua did not say when Chávez had the surgery, but added that the socialist leader was stable and recovering adequately. Chávez had previously said the growth was likely to be cancerous but there was no immediate word on whether it turned out to be malignant.
The youth minister, Mari Pili Hernández, said there were no complications with the surgery. "The operation was a success. Everything went well," she said during an interview on state television. "The president did not require intensive care. That was one of the possible scenarios."
The precise nature of Chávez's cancer has not been divulged.
Dr Sebastian Quintero, an oncologist in neighbouring Colombia, said the announcement did not add anything to what little is publicly known about Chávez's cancer. "They have not said anything different from what was already known: that he has a tumour in the area of the pelvis," Quintero said. "The pelvis is a large cavity with several organs inside, including the prostate, part of the bladder, part of the colon, so it's difficult to determine in what part the tumour is based. We're left the same as before."
Jaua said studies of the removed tissue would be available "in the coming hours", but did not say whether the results would be made public.
The president, who has not delegated authority during his absence, was in close contact with government officials, Jaua added.
Chávez, 57, announced last week that doctors in Cuba had found a new growth about one inch (2.5cm) in diameter in the same area where a baseball-sized cancerous tumour was removed last summer.
He travelled to Cuba on Friday, saying he would undergo tests at the weekend and have the operation early this week.
Chávez and his allies have said the president is still his party's only candidate for October elections.
Chávez's opponent in the vote, Henrique Capriles, has wished his rival a speedy and full recovery.