Hamas Suspends Voter Registration in Gaza
Fatah has also accused Hamas of jailing its members, in a sign of the enduring differences. The schism became entrenched when Hamas, an Islamic militant group that does not recognize Israel, won legislative elections in 2006 and then, after a brief factional war, seized control of Gaza a year later, routing Fatah forces there and confining them to the West Bank.
A Fatah spokesman, Fayez Abu Aita, said that the suspension of the work of the elections commission was surprising and constituted “a suspension of the reconciliation process.” In a statement issued in Ramallah, in the West Bank, Mr. Abu Aita rejected Hamas’s assertions and said that the registration of voters in the West Bank had not stopped.
The reconciliation accord, signed in May 2011, stipulated that a government would prepare for elections in the West Bank and Gaza within a year. Under a subsequent agreement brokered by Qatar in February, Hamas and Fatah said they would announce a new government within a week or two, along with a date for presidential and legislative elections. In May, Hamas allowed an elections commission team into Gaza to begin work toward that end.
But each side has accused the other of an unwillingness to make any real concessions. Israel has voiced strong opposition to any kind of joint government, and the future of American assistance to the Palestinian Authority would also be in question. Congressional amendments forbid foreign aid to Hamas, which both the United States and Israel regard as a terrorist organization.
Hamas has also been buoyed by the recent election of Mohamed Morsi, the Muslim Brotherhood candidate, as president of Egypt. Hamas was founded in the 1980s as an offshoot of the Muslim Brotherhood.
“The results of the Egyptian elections gave Hamas a dose of ecstasy,” said Akram Attallah, a political analyst in Gaza. “It wants the reconciliation now to be on a different, new basis because Hamas believes it has become stronger.”
Mr. Attallah noted that Hamas did not make any concessions toward reconciliation in the era of President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, who cooperated with Israel in imposing a blockade on Gaza after Hamas took over in 2007. “Will Hamas be willing to make concessions now?” Mr. Attallah asked.
The elections commission said in a statement from its West Bank headquarters that it had spent the last month in technical, administrative and logistical preparations for the registry update in Gaza.
Banners in the main streets of Gaza have been urging the residents to take part in the “democratic process.”
“The C.E.C. looks forward to the day in which it can be able to exercise its mandate without hindrances to maintain the democratic approach sought by all Palestinians,” the commission said.