ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Longest serving Tasmanian Speaker Michael Polley has announced he is retiring from politics.
Mr Polley, who is Australia's longest current serving politician, says after 42 years in State Parliament, he wants to spend more time with his family.
Mr Polley was first elected to Tasmania's House of Assembly in 1972 when he was just 21 years old.
The 63-year-old Member for Lyons says it is time to retire.
"The next election would be my 13th," he said.
Mr Polley has served under nine Labor Premiers and three Liberal Premiers.
He says being elected in 1972 was the first of his career highlights.
"It was my first attempt at the House of Assembly and I was lucky enough to secure a high primary vote," he said.
"Then of course the Lake Pedder issue, trying to get the Franklin Dam up, the pulp mill issues and trying to fight to ensure Tasmania's secure future."
He says his pro-development stance sometimes saw him labelled conservative.
"You know, having a pulp mill wasn't just to do with the timber industry, we need to have more industry here."
Mr Polley says he plans to spend his retirement supporting his wife, Northern Midlands mayor Kim Polley.
The Premier is confident the party can field a strong candidate to replace Mr Polley.
Lara Giddings says he has dedicated his life to the state for more than four decades.
"We will miss his enthusiasm, his drive."
The Polley family is currently represented in local, state and federal government roles in Tasmania and political scientists say it will be interesting to see if his wife or son step forward to nominate for pre-selection.
Ms Giddings says whomever the candidates are, Labor will be fielding a strong team coming into the 2014 election.
"The Labor Party is stronger than just one person."
Senator Polley says it was emotional hearing the news of his retirement this morning.
"I did know that it was coming, I had discussed it with my brother, but I have to say when I heard it on the radio this morning, it was a sad day and a tear actually came to my eye because it been a bit part of, obviously not only Michael's life and his family's, but my life as well and it's very sad."