Jim Flaherty resigns post as Finance Minister; Joe Oliver to replace him, sources say
[np_storybar title=”What economists are saying about Jim Flaherty’s sudden resignation” link=”http://business.financialpost.com/2014/03/18/jim-flaherty-resigns-as-finance-minister-what-the-economists-say/”%5D%5B/np_storybar%5D
OTTAWA — Finance Minister Jim Flaherty has resigned from the Harper government, saying he plans to return to the private sector and stressing his decision to leave — expected in a matter of days — was not related to his current health issues.
Natural Resources Minister Joe Oliver, the Conservative government’s point man on the Keystone XL pipeline, will be appointed the new finance minister, the CBC reported late Tuesday and sources have confirmed.
In his current role, Oliver has been the Conservative government’s main proponent of TransCanada Corp’s Keystone XL pipeline to the United States.
“This was a decision I made with my family earlier this year, as I will be returning to the private sector,” Flaherty said in a statement Tuesday, after stock markets closed.
“As many of you know, I faced a health issue over this past year. I have received much support and good wishes from Canadians across the country and for that, I am thankful,” said Mr. Flaherty, 64, adding that submitted to resignation to Prime Minister Stephen Harper on Monday.
“I am happy to report that I am on the road to a full recovery and the decision to leave politics was not related in any way to my health. This decision was made because it is the right one for me and my family at this time.”
A new minister is expected to be announced on Wednesday.
Mr. Harper, in a statement, said he accepted Mr. Flaherty’s resignation “with great reluctance.”
“In a political career of almost 20 years, Minister Flaherty has exemplified the best qualities of those who sincere desire to leave the country in better shape than it was when he entered politics.
Mr. Flaherty, the only person to serve as finance minister under the Harper government, said: “I am proud of the work I have done to help manage the deepest economic challenge to face Canada since the depression of the 1930s and ensure Canada emerged stronger and as a recognized economic leader on the international stage.”
Former Bank of Canada head Mark Carney had a few words to say about Flaherty.
“I had the privilege of working with Jim Flaherty for the better part of 8 years, including through some of the most turbulent times in Canada’s and the world’s economic history. From his sound management of the Canadian economy to his invaluable contributions to international policy making, Jim Flaherty has exhibited the very best of Canadian virtues in service to our country,” Carney said.
“I have many fond memories of our work together, but I particularly recall the G7 meeting in Iqaluit that he hosted during the depths of the global recession. Canada stood literally and figuratively at the top of the world given its economic and financial performance. That year Canada re-established the G7 and helped put in place the conditions for recovery. Much of that was down to Jim Flaherty, my colleague and friend.”
Last year, Mr. Flaherty acknowledged he was suffering from a non-life-threating skin disorder and that he was receiving steroid treatments.
His physical appearance caused concern that his recovery was not complete. The minister was often appeared weak and struggled to walk, while his voice was usually unsteady
Financial Post with files from Reuters
And here is the statement from Stephen Harper