Teva’s hostile bid for Mylan: Deal could open up a $2-billion opportunity for pharma companies
ET Intelligence Group: The news of Israeli drug firm Teva making a hostile bid for its US-based rival Mylan sparked mixed reactions in stocks of Indian drug firms which have partnerships with Mylan. Shares of Natco Pharma , for instance, fell 3.5% on Wednesday on fears that acquisition of Mylan will jeopardise its alliance with the company to market the generic of top-selling multiple sclerosis drug Copaxone. The Biocon stock, however, rose over 3% despite the possibility of its collaboration with Mylan for development of generic biologics and insulin analogs coming under threat. There are also concerns that if the acquisition bid of the world’s largest generic company to acquire its smaller rival turns out to be successful, it could lead to a more formidable competition for Sun Pharma , currently the fifth largest generic drug firm. However, amidst all these negative considerations, there is the possibility that the fruition of the deal will open up a $2-billion opportunity for Indian generic pharma companies. According to a report by Ambit Capital, Teva and Mylan as a combined entity would create a sizeable generic company with a dominant market share and with many overlapping products marketed in the US. There are 40 overlapping products (mostly oral solids), raking in $2 billion in primary sales, which could face compulsory divestment at the behest of Federal Trade Commission , the competition watchdog in the US. Companies intending to expand their footprint in the US generic market would be interested in acquiring these products based on their targeted therapy areas. Amongst the Indian generic pharma companies, the report lists Sun Pharma, Lupin, Torrent Pharma and Cadila as companies that have shown acquisitive intent time and again and could emerge as the potential bidders for these products. Sun Pharma is already selling eight of these products, making it a much less desperate candidate than its peers to bid for these products. While Cadila is selling five, it is Lupin and Torrent Pharma — selling only three of the 40 products — for whom acquiring more products becomes an attractive proposition. However, going by the track record in global pharma M&A, hostile bids typically are complex and take long to consummate. Mylan’s own hostile bid to acquire Irish drug maker Perrigo failed on Tuesday as board of directors of the Irish company rejected Mylan’s $29-billion offer. Last year, Canadian drug maker Valeant Pharma made a hostile bid to acquire botox-maker Allergan, which was ultimately acquired by generic drug maker Actavis. Valeant then acquired Salix Pharma in February after outbidding Endo Pharma The current Teva-Mylan deal has all the trappings of being a complex one. Teva needs Mylan to boost its earnings once its top-selling drug Copaxone opens to competition from generic players, including Mylan. Besides, Mylan is growing at a faster pace than Teva, leading to better valuations being expected from its shareholders. Its executive chairman has already said a merger with Teva would be without sound industrial logic or cultural fit and that it probably couldn’t get clearance from antitrust regulators. Given this, it is unlikely that there will be immediate fallouts from such a deal for Indian pharma companies.