Rupert Murdoch to stand down as CEO of 21st Century Fox, son James to succeed
Rupert Murdoch will step down as chief executive of his media-entertainment conglomerate 21st Century Fox and hand the job to his son James, his Fox News Channel has confirmed.
The 84-year-old tycoon presented a succession plan at the company on Thursday, passing his chief executive role to his son James and making his other son Lachlan executive chairman, according to a source close to the company.
"Rupert Murdoch is expected to relinquish the CEO role but remain executive chairman and continue to drive the company's agenda," the source said.
"Lachlan Murdoch is expected to be named executive co-chairman and he will work in close partnership with James Murdoch.
"The two of them will be a team and run the company together."
The plan is to be presented next week to the board of directors, the source said.
CNBC said the change would take place later this year or in early 2016.
The company did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
James Murdoch, 42, will take over day-to-day management at Fox, working "in tandem with his 43-year-old brother Lachlan and his father", according to CNBC.
Fox News, the cable channel which competes with CNN and MSNBC, will continue to be run by its president Roger Ailes, "reporting directly to Rupert Murdoch", according to CNBC.
The company — which includes the Fox Hollywood studios and a range of television entities — was created two years ago when Mr Murdoch broke off the struggling publishing operations of his News Corp empire from the faster-growing media and entertainment operations.
Rupert Murdoch and his family remained in control of both companies after the split.
The Australian-born Murdoch is executive chairman at News Corp with his son Lachlan listed as co-chairman.
At Fox, Mr Murdoch holds the title of chairman and chief executive, with Chase Carey president and chief operating officer and James Murdoch the co-chief operating officer.
According to CNBC, Mr Carey was expected to step down from his role while remaining an adviser to the company.
Rupert Murdoch has spent a lifetime building his News Corp empire from a single Australian newspaper he inherited.
He moved to London where his purchase of the weekly News of the World in 1969 gave him a high-profile foothold in the British market.
He went on to buy The Sun, a daily which he turned into a popular and big-selling tabloid.
The success of his London-based newspapers helped finance his 1981 purchase of The Times and Sunday Times, both prestigious broadsheets, in an acquisition that met with intense opposition from parts of Britain's establishment.
He relocated to the United States where more bold acquisitions followed and where he became a naturalised US citizen in 1985.
The empire came under pressure in recent years from the slump in newspaper revenues, and a scandal in Britain which led to the shutdown of News of the World after the revelation the tabloid hacked into the phones of a murdered teenager and the families of dead soldiers.
The split in 2013 was aimed at "unlocking value" in the print and entertainment operations.
In the latest quarter, Fox reported net income of $US975 million on revenues of $US6.5 billion.
The company includes the Fox studios in Hollywood and a global array of cable and broadcasting operations.
These include the Fox television entities, National Geographic Channels and local television stations, and a stake in the Sky satellite television service.
News Corp — which also owns Wall Street Journal parent Dow Jones — for the same period reported a profit of $US23 million on $US2 billion in revenues.
Fox shares fell 0.76 per cent on the news.