Twitter CEO Dick Costolo stepping down
SAN FRANCISCO — Embattled Twitter CEO Dick Costolo is stepping down, with company co-founder Jack Dorsey — who is also CEO of payments company Square — serving as interim-CEO effective July 1. Costolo will remain on the board.
Some investors had called for Costolo to resign after an earnings bomb in the first quarter, as the company was predicting future sales well below its initial projections as well as Wall Street's. Shares are down 20% since the company went public in 2013, a hint at perhaps growing public indifference to the service.
Twitter stock jumped 7.3% in after-hours trading on the news.
The news also is likely to fuel speculation about Twitter's ability to stay independent. Talk has long swirled about the $24 billion company perhaps being scooped up the the likes of Apple or Google.
Twitter also announced the formation of a search committee that includes co-founder Evan Williams, who had previously served as chairman and CEO.
"There is no one better than Jack Dorsey to lead Twitter during this transition," Costolo said in a statement. "He has a profound understanding of the product and Twitter's mission in the world as well as a great relationship with Twitter's leadership team."
Dorsey said: "The future belongs to Twitter thanks in large part to Dick Costolo's dedication and vision."
Some analysts feel Twitter's future is in fact linked to Costolo's departure. The outgoing CEO has also been criticized for a dizzying array of changes to the company's strategy and other wishy-washy leadership tactics, including five high-profile replacements since the company's IPO.
Pressure on Costolo intensified in recent weeks after early Twitter investor Chris Sacca published an 8,500-word essay on changes Twitter needs to make.After the essay, SunTrust Robinson Humphrey analyst Robert Peck said if Twitter disappointed investors again in July, it would have to consider a leadership change.
"We see this as significant news, showing TWTR (Twitter's ticker symbol) is open to important change," S&P Capital IQ analyst Scott Kessler said in a research note. "We also note TWTR reiterated its Q2 guidance, which we see as a positive after the mixed results and outlook provided in April."
For Twitter partners Brandwatch, which crunches social media data on Twitter for big companies, Costolo's departure will hopefully a signal a reversal in the company's fortunes.
"We're big on what they do, but (under Costolo) investors' concerns included an unsettled executive team and a failure to address the tricky problem of growth," says Brandwatch CMO Will McInnes. "When you read that some 75% of registered users are no longer active on Twitter that's a concern."
While bullish on the service, McInnes adds that "Facebook seems to be the company that people and investors understand the best."
After the nine-year-old, 140-character social media service went from unknown to all the rage almost overnight, Twitter has been struggling of late. It reported 302 million users in first quarter, about the same as Instagram, which is owned by Facebook. Twitter is considered not as intuitive to use by newcomers.
Twitter's monthly user base will grow just 14.1% this year, slowing from more than 30% two years ago, and by 2019, its user growth rate will be just 6% worldwide, according to eMarketer.
The research firm also reports Twitter accounted for 0.87% of the $145 billion digital advertising worldwide in 2014, up from 0.49% in 2013. By comparison, Facebook increased its share of the worldwide digital ad market from 5.81% in 2013 to 7.93% in 2014, according to eMarketer. Google remained the market leader with 31.42% share in 2014.
Dorsey is also a controversial figure, and his other start-up, Square, has yet to prove itself a success.