Congress balks at lifeline for Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico is suffocating under a mountain of $73 billion in debt — and everyone from Jeb Bush to Hillary Clinton to Barack Obama is urging Congress to throw the U.S. territory a bankruptcy lifeline.
Like European creditors wary of bailing out debt-ridden Greece, many Hill Republicans — from GOP presidential hopefuls to fiery rank-and-file conservatives — have no interest in rescuing the island from self-induced borrowing woes by allowing it to access key bankruptcy protections.
“I’m very reluctant to go down this road of bankruptcy because I don’t know where it ends,” said Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), a contender for the 2016 presidential nomination. “I talked to my people, really haven’t made up my mind yet. But I don’t see me supporting the Democratic legislation.”
But time is running out for Puerto Rico, which has racked up debt it’s struggling to repay and whose government could run out of cash as soon as this month after years of mismanaged finances. And while the island has become a flash point on the 2016 campaign trail, top Republicans on both sides of the Capitol so far have been largely noncommittal.
Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) has punted the Puerto Rico issue to the House Judiciary Committee, where panel leaders didn’t rule out offering the island bankruptcy protections but said doing so alone wouldn’t solve the commonwealth’s problems. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), meanwhile, declined to comment when asked about the issue by a reporter on Wednesday.
And while some GOP senators have shown a willingness to consider legislation, opposition runs much deeper in the more conservative House. The Judiciary Committee held a hearing on the issue in February, but House GOP lawmakers generally remain opposed to legislation that would allow the island to declare bankruptcy — at least without an aggressive commitment from Puerto Rico officials to get spending under control, lawmakers said.
“The ball is, to a certain extent, in Puerto Rico’s court,” said Rep. Darrell Issa (R-Calif.), a member of the Judiciary Committee. “They can begin making real reforms, or they can be like Greece and continue to be in denial that their problem is not that they’re poor. Their problem is that they have too many people on a payroll, too much fat and bureaucracy.”
Still, some senior Republicans are sympathetic to the island’s woes, aligning themselves with Bush and arguing that lawmakers should step in to help Puerto Rico — home to 3.5 million people and millions more who now live in the mainland U.S.
“I’m very favorably disposed to helping Puerto Rico,” Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) said Wednesday. “I think the sooner you attack it, the better off you are.”
Congress’ main option centers on legislation that would allow Puerto Rico to restructure its debts under Chapter 9 bankruptcy protection, which municipalities such as Detroit and Stockton, California, have used when they ran into similar financial crises. As a territory , Puerto Rico currently doesn’t have those options.
That bill is spearheaded by Puerto Rico’s representative in Congress, Resident Commissioner Pedro Pierluisi, a Democrat. In the Senate, Democratic Sens. Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut and Chuck Schumer of New York, No. 3 in his party’s leadership, are planning to introduce companion legislation, and they’re seeking Republican allies for the bill.
But resistance is already mounting on the other side of the Capitol, particularly on the House Judiciary Committee, whose Republican members are among the most conservative in Congress.
Rep. Jim Jordan (R-Ohio), an influential conservative who sits on the Judiciary Committee, said Wednesday: “We’re nervous about changing the rules, and people who’ve invested [in Puerto Rico] already.”
“I’m very hesitant,” Rep. Trent Franks (R-Ariz.) said of Congress allowing Puerto Rico to restructure its debts under Chapter 9 of the bankruptcy code.
“It’s as if Puerto Rico is the Western Hemisphere Greece,” added Rep. Steve King (R-Iowa), who also says he wouldn’t support legislation that allows Puerto Rico to restructure its debts under Chapter 9. “They refuse to accept austerity. They refuse to take the issue on.”
In contrast to the House, there are nascent bipartisan negotiations in the Senate around legislation that would give Puerto Rico more flexibility to manage its debt. Schumer and Blumenthal are in discussions with Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn of Texas over a bankruptcy bill, a significant development given Schumer and Cornyn’s collaborations on patent reform and their sway in their respective caucuses.
Blumenthal indicated in an interview that several other Republicans have also shown interest in moving legislation forward, though some outreach and education will be necessary among Republicans to alleviate concerns that Congress intends to bail out the island.
“The legislation has to be fully understood,” Blumenthal said. “It’s not a bailout. There’s no federal funding or cost involved.”
Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions, another senior Republican on the Judiciary Committee, said if Puerto Rico can’t access certain bankruptcy protections merely because of its status as a territory, then Congress should consider fixing the issue.
“Maybe it’s just a technical gap in the law,” Sessions said. “But on the other hand, if it represents some expansion of liability for the United States Treasury, I’d be very dubious of it.”
Indeed, the lack of consensus in the Senate and unfamiliarity among lawmakers makes it impossible to move quickly. Senators who have been speaking with Puerto Rico officials said there was no firm date to move, though Blumenthal and Schumer want to take up the bill before the August recess.
But there’s a time crunch. In a letter sent in April, Puerto Rico’s top financial officials warned the island’s leaders that the territory is likely to run out of money and face a government shutdown within three months, which would come in July. The letter urged the governor and Puerto Rican lawmakers to adopt a budget for the next fiscal year to control its finances, as well as a longer, five-year fiscal plan.
Back in the U.S. Senate, there’s little hope of July action, said Cornyn. And Senate Republican leaders haven’t mentioned the subject in private meetings about their crowded July to-do list.
Top Puerto Rican officials have long lobbied key lawmakers for help. Puerto Rico Gov. Alejandro Garcia Padilla has met with top lawmakers such as Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa), whose panel would oversee the issue, and the second-ranking Senate Democrat, Dick Durbin of Illinois, as part of an aggressive one-on-one lobbying effort in the Capitol.
There’s also a twist in the Senate talks over Puerto Rico: Cornyn has suggested expanding the legislation to allow states to enter bankruptcy, sensing an opportunity to have a broader fiscal conversation.
“This is a problem that cuts across broader governments that frankly are burdened with debt that they’ll never be able to pay,” Cornyn said in an interview. “While we’re looking at Puerto Rico and while Greece is in the news, we can look at some of the states that may have similar problems in the future.”
But that proposal highlights beleaguered states such as New Jersey and Illinois, which could turn off other lawmakers who don’t necessarily want their state’s situation compared to Puerto Rico’s.
“I’ve got an Illinois situation and a Chicago situation, and I don’t want to conflate all the different jurisdictions and all the different challenges. That’s been my reluctance,” Durbin said.
And then there’s the 2016 wild card. Graham doesn’t appear inclined to support the bankruptcy bill. And while he wouldn’t take a firm position, Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) said Puerto Rico has “definitely shown that somebody doesn’t have the proper fiscal responsibility on what they can spend.”
A spokeswoman for Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), whose home state has a significant Puerto Rican population, said Rubio has been monitoring the crisis and is reviewing the bankruptcy bill. And others were wary of the politics and complexity of the issue.
“It’s complicated enough that I don’t want to weigh in on the fly,” said Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas), referring a reporter to his press office. The press office did not comment.