Skip Yowell, JanSport Co-Founder Who Blazed Trail for Backpacks, Dies at 69
JanSport’s initial focus was on external-frame backpacks, the type commonly used by hikers, but by the mid-1980s those packs made up just 20 percent of the company’s sales. Day packs, the kind students often use to lug around their pencils and books, made up half.
The VF Corporation, a lifestyle brand based in Greensboro, N.C., purchased JanSport in 1986. Since then, the company’s backpacks have evolved to meet the needs of a changing world. Its customers, now more apt to be students than mountaineers, need backpacks to be water-resistant to protect their smartphones, tablets and other electronic gear.
Harold Murray Yowell was born on July 5, 1946, in Hays, Kan. His father, Harold, worked in the oil well business. His mother, Marjorie, was a homemaker taking care of four siblings.
After graduating from Great Bend High School in Great Bend, Kan., Mr. Yowell attended Wichita State University and then Fort Hays State University but did not graduate, Ms. Crouch said.
Mr. Yowell soon joined his cousin in Seattle. Mr. Pletz’s idea for an adjustable backpack had won some money in a design competition, and he enlisted Mr. Yowell and other family members to help him start a company.
Mr. Pletz promised his girlfriend, Jan Lewis, that if she married him, he would name the company after her.
It was several years until JanSport got real office space. Ms. Lewis helped with the sewing, while Mr. Pletz led the design work. Mr. Yowell was the salesman and would lecture the others on the importance of marketing the brand.
At the time of his death, Mr. Yowell held the title of vice president for global public relations.
Ann Daw, the vice president for marketing, said that until his failing health prevented it, Mr. Yowell would often drive four and a half hours to the Denver airport to fly to Indonesia, Brazil or anywhere else he was needed to promote the brand.
“The hardest thing for him over the last 10 months was that he couldn’t travel,” she said.
Besides his sister, survivors include his wife, Winnie Kingsbury; a daughter, Quinn; a stepdaughter, Wesley Kingsbury; a stepson, Hunt Kingsbury; and a brother, Lindsey.
Mr. Yowell’s lifelong love of nature had material results. He and Mr. Pletz came up with the idea for a dome tent after being caught in a snowstorm on Mount Rainier.
He was a founding member of the Outdoor Industry Association, a trade group, and worked with the Big City Mountaineers, a wilderness mentorship program.
On its website, JanSport still offers a rugged-looking line of backpacks inspired by Mr. Yowell. One model, the Pleasanton, which sells for $245, comes with pockets designed to fit laptops and electronic tablets. But its look — a more classic style with leather details — is more reminiscent of Mr. Yowell’s early days at the company.
“Things just took off,” Mr. Yowell once said. In the beginning, he added, his major worry “was whether I was going to have enough money to go skiing.”