Tribune Publishing statement: Not in discussions to sell company
Seeking to quash speculation, Tribune Publishing sent a message to employees Monday denying reports that the company was about to be bought and the Los Angeles Times spun off.
Reports of a pending sale were fueled by a tweet Friday from News Corporation's Rupert Murdoch. Tribune Publishing's statement, which was also filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, said the Chicago-based newspaper company has not entertained offers to sell its assets.
"Over the Thanksgiving weekend, a rumor was reported in social media and the press regarding a potential purchase of Tribune Publishing Company," the company's statement said. "While our policy is not to comment on rumors, given the source of this speculation and the fact that it has received considerable public attention, the company believes a statement to employees is warranted. As our board of directors noted earlier this fall, and as we articulated in our November earnings call, Tribune Publishing remains committed to its strategy and transformation plan and is not engaged in discussions or a process to sell the company. As we finish the important fourth quarter, we appreciate the continued hard work and commitment of our employees."
Murdoch, whose News Corp. owns The Wall Street Journal and other media outlets, tweeted that the Los Angeles Times would be sold to investor Eli Broad while the rest of the Chicago-based newspaper company would go to an investment firm.
From Murdoch's Twitter feed: "Strong word Tribune newspaper group to be bought by big Wall St firm, LA Times to go to philanthropist Eli Broad and local group."
A report by media analyst Ken Doctor suggested that the Wall Street investment firm referenced in Murdoch's tweet may be Apollo Global Management. Doctor wrote that Apollo approached Tribune Publishing about a month ago to explore an acquisition, but the company was "non-responsive," according to Doctor's sources.
The Apollo acquisition strategy would include the subsequent sale of the Times and San Diego Union-Tribune to Broad, Doctor said.
"I know that they have been pursuing it," Doctor said in an interview with the Tribune over the holiday weekend, noting that Apollo has assembled an advisory staff of newspaper experts to chart a course, should an acquisition be completed.
Broad has previously expressed interest in acquiring the Los Angeles Times, most recently in September in overtures that were rejected by Tribune Publishing. Tribune Publishing CEO Jack Griffin told the Chicago Tribune at the time that no formal offer was made to buy the Los Angeles Times. Sources said the company was also not interested in removing the No. 2 market in the country from its portfolio, which would diminish its national aspirations.
Tribune Publishing fired Austin Beutner as publisher and CEO of the Los Angeles Times and San Diego Union-Tribune in September, citing poor financial performance, but sources said Beutner's association with Broad may also have contributed to his dismissal.
In 2013, Beutner teamed up with Broad as part of an investor group interested in buying the Los Angeles Times, according to reports at the time. Tribune Publishing was subsequently spun off, allowing Tribune Media (formerly Tribune Co.) to offload the newspapers while avoiding the large capital gains tax it would have incurred from an outright sale.
Beutner's ouster led to petitions from Los Angeles civic leaders, including Broad, seeking to return the Times to local ownership, a demand that has surfaced many times over the years since Tribune Co. acquired Times Mirror Co. for $8.3 billion in 2000.
Tribune Publishing owns 11 major daily newspapers including the Chicago Tribune, the Los Angeles Times and the Union-Tribune, which it acquired in May for $85 million.
The company has lost more than half of its valuation since spinning off from Tribune Media in August 2014. Its stock, which trades on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol TPUB, rallied somewhat last week to close at $9.29, giving the company a market cap of about $244 million.
Earlier this month, Tribune Publishing approved buyouts for approximately 7 percent of its eligible 7,000 employees, looking to cut costs in the face of continuing revenue declines for the newspaper industry. The first wave of employees leaving in the voluntary separation plan departed Wednesday.