U.S. files suit to block Tribune purchase of O.C. Register parent
Tribune is looking to extend its reach in Southern California and save money by streamlining some business operations at a time when newspapers struggle to remain profitable. If the sale is finalized, the company would own four major daily newspapers in Southern California. It acquired the San Diego Union-Tribune and related properties last year for $85 million. "The successful bid for the business of Freedom Communications will allow the Orange County Register and the Press-Enterprise to continue providing a distinct local voice in their communities and deliver premium news and information to consumers across Southern California," Tribune Publishing Chief Executive Justin Dearborn said in a statement. Some media and antitrust experts supported the Tribune's stance. Gabriel Kahn, co-director of the Media, Economics and Entrepreneurship program at USC's Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism, said the federal government's concerns were "from a different era." He noted that consumers and advertisers have many more options than decades ago and added that it's prudent for struggling newspapers to share costs. "I think local democracy is most ill served by blocking any efforts these publications have to achieve scale, to combine resources. Because the consequences of that are the businesses continue to diminish and that means the ability to afford strong local reporting is diminished as well," he said. Daniel Lazaroff, professor emeritus at Loyola Law School, said an expanded Tribune Publishing still wouldn't be able to dictate rates for advertisers, given the many online options, including websites, search engines and social media. "If they raise advertising rates significantly they would lose even more advertising," he said. "It's like saying Italian suits are a separate market from all suits." Still, the government's action, which will be heard in U.S. District Court, opens the possibility that another bidder could end up with the papers. Bankruptcy Court Judge Wallace could determine that antitrust scrutiny could tie up a sale for months or years — and decide to move on to another bidder. andrew.khouri@latimes.com Twitter: @khouriandrew