Temporary restraining order blocks Tribune purchase of OC Register, Press-Enterprise – Orange County Register
A federal judge, siding with antitrust regulators, late Friday granted a temporary restraining order halting Tribune Publishing’s planned purchase of the Orange County Register and The Press-Enterprise.
U.S. District Judge André Birotte Jr. in Los Angeles agreed with the Justice Department’s argument that the deal combining Tribune, the owner of the Los Angeles Times, the San Diego Union-Tribune and other papers, and bankrupt Freedom Communications’ two newspapers would create a Southern California news monopoly.
Tribune, which on Wednesday won a bankruptcy auction with $56 million bid, argued that the local news business has grown well past printed publications to include numerous electronic sources, for example.
“The court is not convinced of Tribune’s position that the Internet renders geography and distinctions between kinds of news sources obsolete,” Birotte wrote.
Alan Friedman, Freedom’s bankruptcy attorney, said it was too early to know the full impact of the restraining order but that the judge’s order did open the door to Freedom accepting a back-up offer from Digital First Media, publisher of the Los Angeles Daily News, the Long Beach Press-Telegram and other papers. Digital First bid $53 million.
“There are several options we have to consider,” Friedman said Friday night.
A hearing before U.S. Bankruptcy Court Judge Mark Wallace is scheduled Monday to review the auction results. Friedman expected the hearing to be held as scheduled.
Newspaper analyst Ken Doctor was not surprised, saying “Tribune would dominate the market using the government’s narrow definition of it.”
Justice Department attorneys on Thursday filed a lawsuit against the purchase, claiming the deal would let Tribune illegally control the market for newspaper readers and advertising in Orange and Riverside counties.
Justice Department attorneys argued in their lawsuit that combining the Times and the Freedom papers would give Tribune 98 percent of newspaper sales in Orange County, and Tribune would control 81 percent of English-language newspaper sales in Riverside County.
The combined papers could “increase subscription prices, raise advertising rates and invest less to maintain the quality of its newspapers,” the department said in court papers.
Tribune said in a court filing Friday that the Justice Department’s “eleventh hour” move would “destroy Tribune’s ability to acquire these assets, relying on antiquated notions of the relevant market and what competition means in the newspaper industry in today’s digital world with its plethora of sources of news content and advertising platforms.”
Tribune officials could not be reached for immediate comment Friday night. But Tribune attorneys said in court papers that a restraining order would “effectively remove” Tribune from the Freedom sales process as Freedom’s temporary financing ends March 31 – the day the auction sale is to close. A hearing on whether to expand the temporary restraining order with a preliminary injunction is scheduled for March 28.
Tribune attorneys wrote that “the unavoidable consequence of even a ‘temporary’ order restraining Tribune from seeking Bankruptcy Court approval of its auction-winning offer will result in those papers either being acquired in the next several days by another bidder or liquidating, with irreparable harm to Tribune, the creditors of the bankrupt estate and the public. That does not preserve the status quo – it destroys it.”