Chicago teachers strike updates
CTU President Karen Lewis and other principal negotiators finished up for the evening about 9:45 p.m. "Today we made some progress,” said Lewis this evening. “We are trying to move the issues off the table. We still have a lot of work to do obviously. And we got a lot of work done today." "We pushed off (the table) looking at what the day actually looks like for people for elementary school, middle school and high school,” Lewis said. "Those articles that the board originally just completely struck out of their original proposals - they are now back in our contract. We worked on that today." Of about 400,000 Chicago Public Schools students, about 18,000 took advantage of "Children First" programs at 144 schools throughout the city on the first day of the strike, according to the school system. School Board President David Vitale left negotiations at around 6:30 p.m., and said he doesn’t expect the contract to be resolved today, although talks continued. "We started out this morning by emphasizing that we are close to getting this situation resolved,”  Vitale said. “That was our starting point.  We spent the day exchanging proposals. Some of them are somewhat complex." "There are other issues that are being discussed upstairs that don't require my presence,” Vitale said. “So they will continue to work on those other issues." The teachers rally in the Loop started on the sidewalks at Clark and Adams, but broke through barriers and spilled into the streets. Maritza DeLeon, a fourth grade teacher, said she was overwhelmed by the turnout. "I have never seen so many people sticking together for the same reason," she said. DeLeon was outside Marsh Elementary School at 9822 South Exchange Ave. at 6:30 a.m. today, picketing outside her school before going downtown. "We are going to keep going to make sure we have a fair contract," she said. 3:40 p.m. 'We are all sticking together' Clark Street in front of CPS headquarters in the Loop is a sea of red-shirted teachers chanting and waving signs. "Hey Rahm, how many kids in your child's classroom?" one sign read. Another said, "Use your outdoor voice." "Hey, hey, ho, ho. Rahm Emanuel has got to go," they chanted. Many in the peaceful crowd said they were surprised at how many teachers showed up to rally. "This is an amazing display of democracy," said Rick Sawicki, a 7th grade teacher at Evergreen Middle School. "It is a wonderful lesson for children and adults alike. I'm honored that we are all sticking together. We all want what is fair. We want to make sure everyone is treated fairly, just like I teach my children." Clark and Adams streets near the CPS offices at 125 S. Clark St. have been closed. Turnout at most Park District programs was in the dozens today, with a few approaching 100. The highest turnouts were in programs on the North Side, officials said. If the strike continues, park district officials said they expect more parents to take advantage of the programs. Park workers said they believe a lot of parents didn’t know what their options were today, and more CPS students likely will be at park sites on Tuesday. About a dozen religious leaders on the South and West sides urged CPS and teachers to come up with a contract by the end of the day. "The mayor, the teachers union, the board of education need to stay in that room and resolve this," said Bishop Larry Trotter at news conference at Sweet Holy Spirit Church. "It doesn't need to go past today." Trotter, whose church is offering a safe haven for students while school is not in session, said the strike is jeopardizing the education and safety of local youth. The strike puts "our children back on the street so they can be the target of bullets," he said. Trotter said Sweet Holy Spirit Church relied on 15 volunteers to create programming for a couple dozen kids aged 5 to 15 who arrived today. Catholic Charities delivered food for the kids to eat. "How long will we have volunteers that are willing to come?" asked Trotter. "We don't have the bodies or the resources for an extended (strike)." The leaders touted the importance of safe havens but emphasized that they are not a long-term solution. "We do not consider a safe haven a substitute for a world class education," said New Mount Pilgrim Church pastor Marshall Hatch. "We want this to be one of the shortest strikes. . .The young people don't need an extended vacation." The religious leaders were critical of the political turn the negotiations took. "It's a national embarrassment in the middle of a national campaign," said Hatch. "This is the last city in America that needed (a strike)." Bishop James Dukes of the Liberation Christian Center agreed. "Politics have interfered with potential," he said. "We hope that a settlement happens today." Hundreds of teachers have gathered in front of the headquarters of the Chicago Public Schools at 125 S. Clark St. for a rally. Clark Street in front of the building has been closed.
1:15 p.m. Mayor: 'It's the wrong choice for our children' Mayor Rahm Emanuel sought to frame the teachers strike today as one that could have been avoided. As he did last night after the Chicago Teachers Union announced the walkout, Emanuel characterized the move as "a strike of choice. And it's the wrong choice for our children." The mayor made his comments at Maranatha Church, one of the 59 faith-based organizations that is serving as a "Safe Haven" for students. While he praised faith leaders and parents for stepping in to fill the gap, Emanuel said "the safest place and the right place for children is in the classroom." The strike, the first in 25 years, already has made national headlines. Emanuel said he knows there may be some focus on the national implications of a teacher work stoppage, but he won't let it distract his attention from the students and striking a deal. "I've got enough challenges. I wasn't looking for another challenge," Emanuel said. Emanuel once again argued that negotiations hinge on two remaining issues: a new teacher evaluation system and principals' ability to get rid of teachers. Chicago Teachers Union officials said there are more remaining issues than that, although they conceded the strike is not primarily about money. The strike on Emanuel's watch cuts against the narrative the mayor is trying to craft as a leader who's a problem solver moving the city forward. Emanuel’s aggressive posture in pushing for a longer school day and year, while also cutting the pay raise teachers were supposed to get last year, galvanized the union. With negotiations being watched carefully on a national basis, the soured relationship may have led union leadership to strike as a way to take a stand against Emanuel's tactics. Sending Emanuel into negotiations to broker a last-minute deal wasn’t an option because there was so much bad blood between him and Chicago Teachers Union President Karen Lewis, several sources said. Instead, the administration dispatched Board of Education President David Vitale to sit in on talks in the waning days. Vitale helped negotiate teacher contracts in 2003 and 2007, and the union took his hands-on involvement as a sign the district was serious about sealing a deal. 1:10 p.m. 'It's a shame my daughter can't learn' Only a handful of parents showed up at Eli Whitney Elementary School in Little Village to pick up their children this afternoon from a strike contingency program that appeared to be sparsely attended. Maria Garcia, who lives across the street from the school, picked up her 11-year-old daughter Carla at 12:30 p.m. She said she and her husband are both unemployed. During the strike, Garcia said, it's good she can be with her daughter. "I understand both sides, they have their right to strike," Garcia said in Spanish, "but it's a shame my daughter can't learn." Cynthia Gonzalez, a 19-year-old who just graduated from high school, picked up her niece and nephew after school. Their mother works full time. Daniel Diaz de Leon, 8, said he was excited that he "got two hours on computers." "But I was freezing!" he said, because the air conditioning was on full blast. Monica Diaz de Leon, 10, said her half-day at school was "fun," but she still misses classes. "We don't really learn anything," Monica said. "What's the point of going to school if you don't get to learn?" Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney says Chicago teachers are turning their backs on thousands of students and President Barack Obama is siding with the striking teachers. Romney, in a statement released hours before he was set to land in Chicago for fundraisers, says he is disappointed by the Chicago teachers' decision to walk out of negotiations.  Romney says he sides with parents and students over unionized teachers. Thousands of teachers walked off the job in Chicago's first schools strike in 25 years. The walkout by 26,000 teachers and support staff in the nation's third-largest school district affects almost 400,000 students. Romney has been critical of public employee unions, including teachers. Romney says union interests run counter to students' education. 11:27 a.m. 'We shouldn't be outside walking' Eighth grade teacher George Drase said 95 percent of the Disney Magnet teachers are on the street today. "We're in the wrong spot. We shouldn't be outside walking back and forth. We should be inside with the children." But the tremendous turnout among veteran and young teachers shows the level of solidarity, said Drase. "For those who have been here 20 years, not being is school is easier. But for the younger teachers, it's a lot harder. They don't know what to expect." To get some of the younger teachers involved, he said, he had to break down the numbers. "I sat down with them last year and crunched the numbers. I said what they were offering us, then, was like working on Saturday for free. They realized what that meant." While Disney, located on North Marine Drive overlooking Lake Michigan, is one of the city's better equipped schools, teachers said they are fighting for schools that don't have as much. "We have a lot more technology. We have an underground parking garage. We have air-conditioning, but we're doing this for every Chicago public school that doesn't have it," Drase said. John Harvey said he was nervous dropping off his 7-year-old son, Aiden, at Disney Magnet School. "I don't know how they feel about us bringing our children," said Harvey. "We're a little at odds now. I didn't know if we were hurting the situation or not. I didn't know what they were going to do. So I came with my shield up." Aiden's mother, Sarah Vanderstow, said she had concerns dropping the second grader off at an unfamiliar place, but since their usual school, Nettelhorst, was closed, they had no choice.
"I don't know who these people are who will be watching him and that concerns me," she said. "But I have to go to work and we can't afford to pay for him to go somewhere else all day." She said Harvey would pick their son up at 12:30 p.m. and drop him off at her job. "He's going to have to go to work with me today," she said. Negotiators for the Chicago Public Schools and the Chicago Teachers Union are back at the bargaining table this morning. The talks began around 10 a.m. 10:30 a.m. Some students balk at crossing pickets Vicente Perez, the parent of 4th and 6th grade boys, had planned to drop them off at one of the contingency locations CPS is keeping open half days during the strike. But they stopped short when they arrived at William Ray Elementary this morning and saw they'd have to walk through a line of picketing teachers. His children were afraid. "I don't want to go there," his youngest son, Kahlil, 9, said. Perez called his wife on his cell phone and decided to either take the kids to a church or just keep them home. Perez's wife works, but he said he's fortunate enough to be able to stay with his sons for as long as there's a strike. Ray Elementary is one of the schools included in Chicago Public Schools' contingency planthat will remain open from 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. each day of the strike. School administrators were concerned that picketers were turning parents away. Tom Alexander, assistant press secretary for the Office of the Mayor, said taking advantage of the half-day program -- which includes activities like puzzles, movies, reading and writing -- is the smartest option for parents. On the picket line, drums and tambourines joined a bagpipe player as teachers picketed and chanted: "Everywhere we go, people want to know, who we are, so we tell them: 'We are the teachers. We are the parents. We are the students. We are the union, the mighty, mighty union.' " Some parents and children joined teachers holding up signs. Cherry Turner, a parent of two Ray Elementary students, handed out information about alternative places where children could go for the day. "It's only half a solution," Turner said of the contingency plan's half day. 9:30 a.m. 'What am I supposed to do with my kid?' Parents started arriving at Disney Magnet School shortly after 8 a.m. Many were from nearby Nettelhorst Elementary. They walked their children past protesting teachers as security guards directed them to an area in back of the school across a parking lot. Some parents said they found the situation awkward. "It's really awkward. We support the teachers but, on the other hand, what am I supposed to do with my kid? I have to go to work," said Antonia Hernandez, holding the hands of her 5- and 7-year old children, both students at Nettelhorst. On the other hand, she said, the teachers are invaluable. "If we don't have them, who will teach our children?" she said. "It's time to have their demands met, every single one of them." Some students expressed anger at the strike, blaming the school district for interrupting their education. “They're not hurting the teachers, they're hurting us,” said Ta'Shara Edwards, a 16-year-old student at Robeson High School on the South Side. She said her mother made her come to class to do homework because so she “wouldn't suck up her light bill.” But there was also anger toward teachers. “I think it's crazy. Why are they even going on strike?” asked Ebony Irvin, a 17-year-old student at Robeson. 9:10 a.m. At Kenwood, bongos and honking horns At Kenwood High School, 80 union members showed up to picket at 6:30 a.m. The picket line had a festive atmosphere, with bongo drums and honking horns, dancing and signs that read, "Honk if you love teachers." Union delegate Darryl Reed said teachers expect to be there until 10:30 a.m., when they will head to a rally at CPS headquarters that is to begin at 3:30 p.m. Reed said he always knew there would be a strike. "If you go back to legislation last year making it harder for us to strike, they bragged that we'd never reach that threshold. The attitude they had this whole time gave us the attitude we have had this whole time." He said he expects the strike will be brief, but thinks teachers will be back on the picket line Tuesday morning. The Chicago Transit Authority was offering free rides to CPS students between 5:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. today. The CTA said the free rides on buses and trains were intended to accommodate students traveling to and from the 144 "Children First" locations open during the strike, as well as those going to parks and libraries. Students need to show their CPS identification card, reduced fare card or other identification. The free rides will continue until CPS classes resume their normal schedule, the agency said. Information on CTA routes and schedules is available at www.transitchicago.com 8:20 a.m. 'We won't let you ruin our schools' About 150 teachers marched in front of Disney Magnet School in Lakeview this morning chanting, "Rahm, Brizard, we're no fools. We won't let you ruin our schools." Passersby on Marine Drive, including some CTA bus drivers and taxi drivers, tooted their horns in support, drawing screams from the group.
Union delegate Stephanie Davis-Williams, a first grade teacher, said parents dropping their children off for the Children First program should not worry about crossing the picket line. "We understand that there are many people who need some place for their children to go," she said. "I just don't trust the people they're leaving them with. I've seen some this morning and don't know them. I didn't recognize any of them." The teachers seemed exuberant as they marched back and forth chanting "What do we want? Fair contract. When do we want it? Now!" But Davis-Williams said they would rather be in the classroom. "I miss my babies," she said. "I had them almost where they needed to be but once we break, it's hard to get back. We really miss the children. That's why we're here. Nobody wanted to strike." 8:15 a.m. Confusion among parents as strike begins Parents and students are trying to make sense of the Chicago teachers' strike. The district is keeping some schools open, but there's no instruction and it's only for a half-day. At Mays Elementary School there was confusion about when the doors would open. Students usually arrive at 7:45 a.m. but the school didn't open today until 8:30 a.m., so some children were left waiting outside. Parent April Logan decided to take her 5-year-old home instead of leaving her at school, where she wasn't sure who would be watching her. At Paul Robeson High School, a handful of students trickled in as about two dozen teachers picketed outside. Seventeen-year-old Ebony Irvin says she only came to school because she didn't have anywhere else to go. She planned to do homework from last week. 8 a.m. 'Honk for more art and music' About 100 teachers picketed at Lake View High School this morning, carrying coffee mugs and signs that said “We’re tired of the Rahm-around” and “Honk for more art and music classes.” Cars driving by the intersection of Irving Park Road and Ashland Avenue honked in support, raising group cheers from the teachers. Melissa Zagorski, a physics teacher and union representative at the schools, said one of the main sticking points for her is the district’s evaluation system, which she feels is unfair. “They will use this evaluation system to get rid of higher paid teachers,” she said. “We think a fair contract is what’s best for the students.” She said she was not surprised negotiations didn’t prevent a strike because she said the district’s negotiators only began moving in the direction of compromise in the past couple of days. Her colleague Linda Kim, an English teacher, agreed. “They said yesterday the strike is our choice. It could have been their choice to resolve this a while ago … They could resolve this any day, but they’re choosing not to.” About a dozen teachers were protesting outside Benjamin Banneker Elementary School on the South Side. The teachers wore red union T-shirts and carried signs with slogans such as “Fair Contract Now!” and “On Strike for Better Schools.” Eighth-grade teacher Michael Williams says he hopes for a quick contract resolution. But he says wages and classroom conditions need to be improved, including air-conditioning in the classroom. Banneker has students in kindergarten through eighth grade and no air-conditioning. Williams says students have fainted in the hot classroom conditions. 7:30 a.m.  'Clear they were headed for this' Chicago Public Schools president David Vitale said this morning the two sides were "very close" before the teachers went on strike. "We are very close," he said as teachers set up pickets throughout the city. Vitale said 20 proposals had been discussed over the last four days "to close the gap." He said the union appeared intent on striking. "It's clear they were headed for this." 7:15 a.m. 'We all want to get back' Some 26,000 teachers and support staff were expected to join the picket this morning. Among teachers protesting outside Benjamin Banneker Elementary School on the South Side, eighth-grade teacher Michael Williams said he wanted a quick contract resolution. “We hoped that it wouldn't happen. We all want to get back to teaching,” Williams said, adding that wages and classroom conditions need to be improved. 6:45 a.m. Teachers strike for first time in 25 years Striking for the first time in 25 years, Chicago's teachers set up picket lines this morning after talks with public school officials ended over the weekend without resolution. "Rahm says cut back, we say fight back," picketers dressed in red T-shirts chanted this morning outside Chicago Public Schools headquarters. Chicago Teachers Union President Karen Lewis announced late Sunday night that weekend talks had failed to resolve all the union's issues.  “We have failed to reach an agreement that will prevent a labor strike,” she said. “No CTU members will be inside of our schools Monday.”  After an all-day negotiating session Sunday, school board President David Vitale told reporters the district had changed its proposal 20 times over the course of talks and didn't have much more to offer.  “This is about as much as we can do,” Vitale said. “There is only so much money in the system.”  The district said it offered teachers a 16 percent pay raise over four years and a host of benefit proposals.  “This is not a small commitment we're handing out at a time when our fiscal situation is really challenged,” Vitale said.  Lewis said the two sides are close on teacher compensation but the union has serious concerns about the cost of health benefits, the makeup of the teacher evaluation system and job security.  With a strike, CPS will put its contingency plan in effect, opening 144 schools to students from 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. But parents are being urged to find alternatives and use the schools only as a last resort. The city's 118 charter schools are not affected by a strike.