Euro zone strikes deal on Greece bailout
The euro jumped almost half a cent, reversing earlier losses, after Reuters reported the deal had been struck. A report prepared for ministers by EU, European Central Bank and IMF experts, obtained exclusively by Reuters, said Greece would need extra relief to cut its debts near to the official debt target 2020, given the ever-worsening state of its economy. If Athens did not follow through on economic reforms and savings, its debt could hit 160 per cent by that date. "Given the risks, the Greek program may thus remain accident prone, with questions about sustainability hanging over it," the nine-page confidential report said, highlighting the fact that Greece's problems were far from over. The accord will enable Athens to launch a bond swap with private investors to help reduce and restructure its vast debts, put it on a more stable financial footing and keep it inside the 17-country euro zone.
About €100 billion of debt will be written off as banks and insurers swap bonds they hold for longer-dated securities that pay a lower coupon. Private sector holders of Greek debt are expected to take losses of 53.5 per cent or more on the nominal value of their bonds. Previously they had agreed to a 50 per cent nominal writedown, which equated to about a 70 per cent loss on the net present value of the bonds. The debt sustainability report delivered to ministers last week showed that without further measures Greek debt would fall to only 129 per cent by 2020. The IMF had said if the ratio was not cut to nearly 120 per cent, it may not have been able to help finance the bailout, putting the whole scheme in jeopardy. To help fill the financing gap, one senior euro zone source said the ECB would pass up profits it has made from buying Greek bonds over the past two years under its emergency bond-buying programme.
The ECB has spent about €38 billion on Greek government debt that is now worth about €50 billion. By forgoing that profit and redistributing it to national euro zone central banks, the ECB can indirectly provide debt relief to Athens. Economists say that, whatever its constituent parts, the deal may only delay a deeper default by a few months. A turnaround could take as much as a decade, a prospect that brought thousands of Greeks on to the streets on Sunday to protest against austerity measures. Sceptics question whether a new Greek government will stick to the deeply unpopular programme after elections due in April, and believe Athens could again fall behind in implementation, prompting exasperated lenders to pull the plug once the euro zone has stronger financial firewalls in place. While there are doubts in Germany and other countries that Greece will be able to meet its commitments, including implementing €3.3 billion of spending cuts and tax increases, the threat of contagion from a chaotic Greek default always made a deal more likely than not, no matter how tortuous the negotiations.
Greek Prime Minister Lucas Papademos, International Monetary Fund managing director Christine Lagarde and ECB president Mario Draghi all attended the Brussels talks in a sign they were likely to be decisive. The private creditor bond exchange is expected to launch on March 8 and complete three days later, Athens said on Saturday. That means a €14.5-billion bond repayment due on March 20 would be restructured, allowing Greece to avoid default. The vast majority of the funds in the €130-billion programme will be used to finance the bond swap and ensure Greece's banking system remains stable: €30 billion will go to "sweeteners" to get the private sector to sign up to the swap, €23 billion will go to recapitalise Greek banks. A further €35 billion will allow Greece to finance the buying back of the bonds, and €5.7 billion will go to paying off the interest accrued on the bonds being traded in. Next to nothing will go directly to help the Greek economy. Those numbers could change in the final analysis, given the scramble to meet the overall objective of reducing Greece's debts from 160 per cent of GDP to about 120 by 2020.