Caribou Coffee to pull out of Chicago market
Minneapolis-based Caribou, taken private this year in a $340 million deal with Joh. A. Benckiser, said Monday that it will close 80 locations nationwide Sunday and turn 88 others into Peet's over the next 12 to 18 months. The German investment firm bought Peet's last summer for $974 million.
Known as JAB, the holding company also owns a variety of personal care products such as Calgon, Durex and Air Wick, as well as fashion brands including Derek Lam and Jimmy Choo.
Caribou didn't provide a list of stores affected by the closings or conversions. But most downtown Chicago Caribou locations will remain open and be rebranded Peet's stores by 2015. Employees at the chain's Long Grove, Lake Forest, Northbrook and Winnetka locations said Monday that their stores also would remain open, eventually becoming Peet's. It's unclear if personnel in those stores will retain their jobs.
Employees in Arlington Heights, Glenview, Rolling Meadows, Vernon Hills, Hoffman Estates and Schaumburg said their locations will close Sunday. One local store employee, who asked not to be identified, estimated that about 1,000 people will lose their jobs as a result of the Sunday closings.
"Over the past few months, we at Caribou have revisited our business strategy, including closely evaluating our performance by market to make decisions that best position us for long-term growth," Caribou President Mike Tattersfield said in a statement. "While the decisions we've made have been difficult for our team in Minneapolis, as well as our team members across the country and our guests and fans everywhere, we are working to make this transition as seamless as possible for the Caribou community."
The decision marks a stark departure from 2011, when Tattersfield described Chicago as an important part of Caribou's growth.
At the end of 2012, Caribou had 610 locations, mostly in the Midwest and Great Plains. That number will be trimmed to 486 by 2015. Following the closings and conversions, Caribou will have stores in Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, western Wisconsin, Iowa, Kansas, North Carolina, Denver and 10 international markets, the company said.
Peet's, which has about 200 cafes, has a significant presence in larger retail stores, including Jewel, Target and Dominick's. Peet's has two area locations, at North & Clybourn avenues and in Evanston, according to the chain's website.
Robert Passikoff, president of consulting firm Brand Keys, said companies "don't make this kind of decision casually." While Caribou "was doing very well," he said, its new owners likely believe that coffee drinkers in the area "are in fact looking for a different kind of experience, and they have (Peet's) in their arsenal, so why not try it?"
Peet's upscale ambience and prices could be jarring to loyal customers of Caribou, which has long positioned itself as a laid-back alternative to Starbucks, the leader in the cafe segment by a significant margin.
Because of the difference in brands, the locations staying open "may see some transference in who the guests are walking into the store," said Dennis Lombardi, of WD Partners.