J.C. Penney Wins Ruling in Dispute With Macy’s
Mr. Johnson offered to resign several weeks ago, the person briefed on the matter said, but he was asked to stay while the board looked for a successor. Mr. Ullman, whom the board first contacted about the shake-up last weekend, agreed to take the post, but he is an interim leader while the board continues a search for a permanent replacement, this person said.
While sales in the quarter have been struggling, that is partly because large sections of the stores are not selling anything as they undergo renovations, said the person, who spoke anonymously because of the confidential nature of the discussions. The company hopes to see improvement in May, when its stores’ home departments will be largely ready to go, coupons will be back and Mother’s Day sales will arrive, this person said.
The trial resumed on Monday after Penney’s, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia and Macy’s — which is suing both companies, saying they violated a contract specifying where Ms. Stewart’s branded goods could be sold — failed to reach a settlement ina court-ordered monthlong break.
Macy’s, which has sold Martha Stewart products since 2007, says its contract prevents Ms. Stewart’s company from selling her home goods to competitors. But there is an exception for sales at Martha Stewart stores.
J. C. Penney and Ms. Stewart’s company say that because Penney’s planned to set up boutiques within its department stores for the products, the exemption applies. They also say Penney’s should be able to sell housewares designed by Ms. Stewart without her name on them.
As the trial proceeds, Penney’s is barred from selling Martha Stewart-branded products in housewares categories, and it has not produced any of those.
Friday’s ruling clears the companies to sell unbranded products at least until the trial ends, though the judge left the door open for Macy’s to come back and claim harm once there is actual sales data. The final ruling in the nonjury trial could either permit Penney’s to sell any type of Martha Stewart housewares or prohibit it from doing so.
Justice Oing has been pushing the companies to settle, and Friday’s ruling could give J. C. Penney and Ms. Stewart’s company a bargaining chip.
“If you’re a lawyer in a dispute, you never want to reach out after you’ve just suffered a loss, but after you’ve won you can reach out,” said Gregory G. Little, a partner at the law firm White & Case, “from a position of strength.” His firm is not involved in the case.
The ruling came after a lively courtroom session. Macy’s needed to demonstrate irreparable harm to get its motions through. Because Penney’s is not now selling any Martha Stewart-designed product, “at this moment, there clearly is no irreparable harm to Macy’s,” Justice Oing told a lawyer for Macy’s.
 Mark Epstein, a J. C. Penney lawyer, made a similar argument: if Macy’s suffers lost profit, he said, then the judge can “make them whole.”
“But, your honor, you don’t have to do it today,” he said. “Right now, we are about to unveil the reimagining of the J. C. Penney stores. It cost a lot of money. It took a lot of time and some people didn’t survive it.”
 Theodore Grossman, a lawyer for Macy’s, countered that once Penney’s started advertising and promoting the products, there would be harm.
“There’s no question that if Penney were selling these goods, and the public came to the conclusion that Martha Stewart goods are overpriced at Macy’s and could be purchased elsewhere” for less, he said, “that would be irreparable harm.”
 While Ms. Stewart’s name is not on the products in question, Mr. Grossman argued, Penney’s used other cues to suggest an association. For instance, Penney’s logo for the product is a double house, which Macy’s says looks like an “M” (for Martha), and it uses the word “Everyday,” which Ms. Stewart has used on magazines and other products. 
Mr. Epstein of J. C. Penney said Macy’s had no surveys showing that consumers would be confused or more likely to buy products at Penney’s than Macy’s.
Questioning Mr. Epstein, Justice Oing asked how quickly Penney’s could respond. What if, once the products started selling, Macy’s could produce sales or traffic data to show it had been hurt by Penney’s products? Was Penney’s prepared to pull products from shelves then?
Mr. Epstein responded that that would be reparable harm, not irreparable harm, and could be remedied financially. “We may have to write a check,” he said.
Justice Oing seemed concerned about the practical effects on Penney’s as he questioned Mr. Grossman from Macy’s.
 “It’s not Ron Johnson that I’m enjoining. It’s a company, and that company employs a lot of people,” the judge said. “If I bar them from putting products on the shelves — and there’s no dispute that these are products that they’ve accounted for to sell, rightfully or wrongfully — they’ve hired people. They have people on staff ready to sell them.”
 He noted earlier testimony that “it’s not that easy to have replacement products put in place that soon,” he said. “What happens is that they lose the money, the money they’ve spent. Employees may be terminated. Their investments may be going to the wayside, their vendors.”