Apollo Tyres to acquire US co for Rs 14,500 crore
CHENNAI: In what's being cheered as the largest M&A deal in India's automotive history, Apollo Tyres has announced it will acquire US-based Cooper Tire & Rubber Company in an all-cash transaction valued at $2.5 billion or around Rs 14,500 crore. The Gurgaon-based tyre major said on Wednesday that it would offer Cooper stockholders $35 per share in cash — a 40% premium — to buy back all the shares and delist the Ohio-headquartered company from the New York Stock Exchange. The mega deal, which comes at a time when markets are depressed globally, will catapult Apollo from its 16th position in the global pecking order to being the 7th largest tyre company. It will have a footprint in both developing and developed markets, including the US and China, and churn out daily volumes of 3,500 tonne, double what it now clocks. It will finance the deal through cash flows from its Indian operations and by leveraging that of Cooper Tire and Apollo's European operations. "Around $450 million will be serviced out of India cash flows," said Neeraj Kanwar, VC & MD, Apollo Tyres. The lion's share of around $1.9 billion will be raised through seven-year dollar bonds, while another $200 million will come from asset based loans (ABR)." Though the debt burden of Apollo, which currently has a 1:1 debt-equity ratio, will go up substantially, the company is confident its business plan and cash inflows will neutralize the skew later. The deal, larger than Tata Motor's $2.3 billion Jaguar-Land Rover acquisition, will dramatically change Apollo's revenue mix. "From 65% India-specific revenue, Apollo will move towards 22% revenue from India, 43-44% from the US, 18% from China and the balance from Europe and the rest of the world," said Kanwar. Its geographical spread means Cooper will ensure Apollo gets roughly 50-60% of its revenue from high-margin developed markets, while high-growth China and India comprise around 40%. Cooper has two plants in China, one each in the UK, Mexico and Serbia and three in the US. Apollo has six plants; the two companies had a combined revenue of $6.6 billion in 2012. There will no change in the American company's management or in the 14,000 staff on Cooper's rolls worldwide. Apollo will introduce the Cooper brand in India particularly to cater to the SUVs and light trucks. It will also introduce the Apollo brand in Cooper's global markets like the US and China. "Our technology and values compliment each other and so do the brands," said Kanwar. The $2.2 billion Apollo Tyres is already the market leader in the commercial vehicle radial segment in India with 32% marketshare. Ditto for light trucks where it has 24-25% marketshare while in passenger vehicles it has a 18-19% marketshare. "Our focus in India will be to take and retain the leadership position in segments where we operate through new brands and new technology... we want to take our relationships with OEMs in India global through this acquisition," said Kanwar. tnn