Greece Confident of Bond Swap Approval
According to two officials closely involved in the debt negotiations, the participation rate could surpass 90 percent, a level that few would have predicted weeks ago. Greece will still need to impose so-called collective action clauses — provisions that will force the holdouts to accept the offer.
But to pull that trigger with a number of 90 percent or better would put Greece in a much better position legally if some investors challenged the swap.
“It’s a done deal,” said Hans Humes, the president and chief investment officer of Greylock Capital Management in New York, whose fund is a member of the committee of banks that negotiated the transaction.
One remaining wild card in the deal was the 20 billion euros ($26.5 billion) of Greek bonds governed by foreign law, which gives creditors better legal protection than the local-law bonds. The foreign-law securities have attracted the attention of potential holdouts, at least some of which are speculators that bought them at a discount on the open market in hopes of extracting a better deal.
Petros Christodoulou, the head of Greece’s debt management agency, has told wavering bondholders that there will be no sweetheart deals for holdouts. “We know what money we have and we know what money we don’t have,” he said during a recent interview. “My blood curdles to think what happens if this deal does not get done.”
The Institute of International Finance, the global banking body that has represented private bondholders in the discussion, circulated a confidential memorandum to European leaders recently estimating that a disorderly default by Greece, which could result in the nation’s departure from the 17-nation euro monetary union, could result in losses to banks, corporations and governments of as much as a trillion euros.
Although many considered the memo a scare tactic, it nevertheless seemed to have had an effect on some of the potential holdouts. When the alternative was put in such stark terms, many investors evidently concluded it would be better to accept the swap — giving them a package of foreign-law Greek bonds, as well as securities from Europe’s financial rescue fund — than to end up with nearly worthless bonds subject to Greek law.
The value of Greek 10-year bonds recently hit a record low of 16 cents on the euro.
“This is the best offer they can make to investors,” said Ioannis Sokos, a bond analyst at BNP Paribas. “Because at the end of the day Greece has no cash.”
Still, many foreign investors say they believe that even with a successful debt swap, the Greek debt burden will remain untenable — well above the 120 percent of Greece’s gross domestic product that the I.M.F. considers the highest sustainable level. And with the Greek economy still in free fall and the makeup of the next government uncertain, many analysts contend that Athens may have to restructure its debt yet again within a year or so.
Against that possibility, some hedge funds and other investors are already talking about the prospect of eventually buying the new foreign-law bonds at rock-bottom prices and then fighting Greece in courts outside the country in hopes of earning a handsome profit.
A successful swap deal right now would also leave much of Greece’s debt in the hands of official lenders like the European Central Bank and the I.M.F. Those institutions might ultimately face large losses themselves if Greece cannot find a way to manage its finances without further bailouts.
Legal analysts contend that the Greek government’s recent strategy of bluntly emphasizing the cost of not participating in the swap deal has been a significant factor behind its coming together so quickly.
“What is remarkable is the speed with which this has been executed — that is unprecedented,” said Michael Waibel, an expert on sovereign debt law at Cambridge. “And this very well may have been done by design.”