Missouri Firm Recalls Chicken Nugget Products Due To Possible Foreign Matter Contamination
WASHINGTON, April 4, 2014 – Tyson Foods Inc., a Sedalia, Mo. establishment, is recalling approximately 75,320 pounds of frozen, fully cooked chicken nugget products that may be contaminated with extraneous materials the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) announced today.
The following products are subject to USDA recall:
The problem was discovered after the firm received consumer complaints that small pieces of plastic were found in the products. The problem was traced to a product scraper inside a blending machine.
The company has received reports of minor oral injury associated with consumption of these products. FSIS has received no additional reports of injury or illness from consumption of these products.  Anyone concerned about an injury or illness from consumption of these products should contact a healthcare provider.        
FSIS routinely conducts recall effectiveness checks to verify that recalling firms notify their customers of the recall and that steps are taken to make certain that the product is no longer available to consumers.  
Consumers with questions about the recall should contact Tyson Foods Consumer Services toll free at (866) 328-3156. Media with questions about the recall should contact Dan Fogleman, of Tyson public relations, at (479) 290-2166. 
Consumers with food safety questions can “Ask Karen,” the FSIS virtual representative available 24 hours a day at www.AskKaren.gov or via smartphone at m.askkaren.gov. “Ask Karen” live chat services are available Monday through Friday from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. ET. The toll-free USDA Meat and Poultry Hotline 1-888-MPHotline (1-888-674-6854) is available in English and Spanish and can be reached from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. ET Monday through Friday. Recorded food safety messages are available 24 hours a day. The online Electronic Consumer Complaint Monitoring System can be accessed 24 hours a day at: www.fsis.usda.gov/reportproblem