OSIRIS-REx: NASA launches spacecraft to intercept asteroid
Cape Canaveral, Florida (CNN)NASA on Thursday evening launched a space probe called OSIRIS-REx to chase down a dark, potentially dangerous asteroid called Bennu. The probe will take a sample of the asteroid and -- in a US space first -- bring the sample back to Earth.
"NASA did it again!" Jim Green, Planetary Science Division director at NASA, said at a post-launch briefing.
"Tonight is a night for celebration," said Ellen Stofan , NASA chief scientist. "We are on our way to an asteroid."
OSIRIS-REx lifted off at 7:05 p.m. ET from Cape Canaveral on top of a United Launch Alliance Atlas V rocket. NASA tweeted, "Our @OSIRISREx spacecraft is on its way, and everything is on the timeline ..."
Our @OSIRISREx spacecraft is on its way, and everything is on the timeline. Keep watching: https://t.co/KX5g7zfYQe pic.twitter.com/89uZ54af0v
Mission managers said the launch was flawless, the spacecraft is in excellent health and that the mission is hitting all its early milestones.
"Everyone on the team has some image in their mind of what Bennu is going to look like and it's going to be phenomenal to see what it really looks like."
Potentially Hazardous Asteroids In this real life story, OSIRIS-REx will study and sample Bennu, a big, roundish space rock that has made it onto NASA's list of Potentially Hazardous Asteroids . That means Bennu is one of the most dangerous space rocks we know of because it could one day collide with Earth.
TAGSAM Then, in July 2020, OSIRIS-REx will unfurl its 11-foot-long (3.35-meter) robot arm called TAGSAM and make contact with Bennu's surface for about five seconds. During those few seconds, the arm will use a blast of nitrogen gas to kick up rocks and dust and then try to snag a sample of the dust and store it.
drop off the capsule OSIRIS-REx heads home in March 2021 and arrives back at Earthon September 24, 2023, but it won't land. In a bit of Hollywood-style drama, it will fly over Utah and drop off the capsule holding the asteroid sample. A parachute will guide the capsule to the ground at the Utah Test and Training Range in Tooele County.
This close approach will change Bennu's orbit, and scientists say that could cause it to impact Earth sometime between 2175 and 2199. The odds are small -- about 1 in 2,500. But NASA wants to get as much warning as possible for anything that threatens Earth.
Apollo astronauts NASA's Stardust GENESIS mission NEAR-Shoemaker • The Apollo astronauts brought back rocks and soil from the moon. NASA's Stardust mission brought back samples of dust from Comet Wild 2.• The GENESIS mission brought back samples of the solar wind, material ejected from the outer portion of the sun, in 2004.• And NASA has landed on an asteroid before: The NEAR-Shoemaker mission touched down on asteroid Eros in 2000. It's still there. But it didn't send back any samples.
"Just right about now, it's on its closest approach to the Earth, passing underneath the Earth at about 21,000 miles (33,796 kilometers)," Johnson said a briefing Wednesday afternoon. "That's closer than communications satellites orbit the Earth."
NASA estimated the asteroid to be between 25 and 50 feet (7 and 16 meters) in diameter and said it was not a hazard to Earth."If it were to have impacted the Earth, it would have disintegrated in the atmosphere," Johnson said.
Bennu was named Bennu was named by North Carolina student Michael Puzio during a 2013 international contest. Puzio, who was 9 at the time, thought the spacecraft's robot arm and solar panels looked like the Bennu bird, also from Egyptian mythology. (Before Puzio stepped up, the rock was known in the scientific community as 1999 RQ36.)
OSIRIS-REx will keep flying and will go orbit the sun. NASA said it may be repurposed, but it won't be bringing home any more samples.