Airbus sends first A350 XWB into the sky
Aviation enthusiasts around the world had their eyes on France as the aircraft took off from Toulouse-Blagnac airport around 10 a.m. local time and landed safely about four hours later.
"After the first few minutes, it didn't feel like we were doing a first test flight," said Peter Chandler, chief test pilot for Airbus. "It was so relaxed and so predictable."
"This is about going fast but never rushing, and I am very confident that after this first flight ... we will deliver this aircraft by 2014 to our first customers," he said. Airbus hopes to capture more than half the global market of 6,000 long-range aircraft over the next 20 years, he added.
"Did you hear how quiet it was? Did you hear what you didn't hear? We're going to set new standards. Not just for comfort, not just for performance. But for environmental friendliness. People living around airports won't even know we're taking off," he said to the attending press.
However, the company has not confirmed speculation that Airbus is planning to show off its new plane to aviation enthusiasts at the show, which runs June 17 to 23.
Frank Chapman, an Airbus test pilot who watched from the ground, said the decision had not yet been made but would depend on the data from the test flight and safety checks over the next few days.
"The company, which was hip-deep in sorting out A380 development, simply hadn't foreseen the huge pent-up demand for a more efficient 250-seat airliner, and tried to take the easy way out by offering a re-engined version of its A330." 
Being publicly lambasted by some of its largest customers -- one aviation executive called it a Band-Aid reaction to the 787 Dreamliner, while the CEO of Singapore Airlines said the plane just didn't go far enough -- the pressure was on for Airbus to come up with a plane that would genuinely advance the global aviation scene.
The A350 XWB is the first Airbus passenger jet to use both fuselage and wing structures made primarily of carbon fiber-reinforced polymer, resulting in lower fuel burn as well as easier maintenance, according to the company. 
Its rival, the 787, is one of the most advanced airliners launched in recent years, and is made up of 50% composites and uses 20% less fuel than other aircraft in the same category.
Industry experts said ahead of the test flight that there was an outside chance the A350 XWB might be spotted in the skies at the air show, even though Airbus had said the plane would be too busy carrying out flight tests to attend.