Twin birth rate reaches record high as more women undergo IVF
The twin birth rate hit an all-time high in the US last year, new statistics have revealed.
Rising IVF rates and a tendency for women to delay motherhood until later in life, are, in part, explanations, experts said.
But, as the twin birth rate increased, figures from the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reveal the rate for triplets, quadruplets and other multiple births has fallen.
Those birth rates are at the lowest level for 20 years.
The figures come from the CDC's final 2014 birth statistics, released today.
They reveal of the nearly four million babies born last year, more than 135,000 were twins.
That equates to around one in every 29 babies.
In comparison, in 1980, only one in every 53 babies was a twin.
The increase in twin births has been attributed, in part, to more women waiting until they are older to have babies.
Women in their 30s are more likely to have twins than younger mothers, studies have found. 
Experts also point to fertility drugs and procedures including IVF, which generally increase the chance of multiple births.
While twin births have been rising for years, the rate of triplet and higher-order births has fallen 40 per cent, from its high in 1998.
The reason, experts say, is down to the fact doctors have been implanting fewer embryos during IVF procedures, than they did in the past.
The change recognises the fact more embryos increase the risk of dangerous complications during pregnancy, some specialists say.
Michelle Osterman, one of the authors of the CDC report, said: 'What might have been a triplet birth in the past is now a twin birth.' 
The report adds: 'Infants born in twin and triplet deliveries are at higher risk of adverse birth outcomes compared with singletons.
'In 2014, similar to earlier years, more than one of every two twins and more than nine of every 10 triplets were born preterm or low birth weight.' 
About one in every 881 babies born last year was a triplet, quadruplet, or part of a higher number set.
Guidelines urging use of fewer embryos were strengthened following the 2009 'Octomom' case, in which a California woman had octuplets after her doctor transferred 12 embryos.