Supermoon lunar eclipse 2015 live: Amazing pictures from the UK and around the world of the 'blood moon'
• Blood moon in pictures: the eclipse as it was seen around the world • Did you take a great picture of the blood moon? Email it in to mypic@telegraph.co.uk • In October's Night Sky: Venus and Jupiter, and stars older than the universe itself
Stargazers in the UK and in many parts of the world have had their smartphones and cameras out for a rare supermoon eclipse, the first of its kind since 1982, and the last we'll see until 2033.
Clear skies in Britain allowed those who stayed up or woke up at around 3 a.m. to enjoy spectacular views of the 'Blood Moon', which takes its name from the reddish hue the moon takes as Earth's shadow passes over it.
The supermoon phenomenon occurs when the moon is full at its perigee - the closest part of its orbit around Earth (226,000 miles), meaning it appears larger in the sky.
And those lucky to be in North America, South America, West Africa and Western Europe - including Telegraph readers - could also enjoy the blood moon as a total lunar eclipse also occurred.
This was how it unfolded in the sky over London:
As we mentioned earlier, those in Australia missed out on all the lunar eclipse fun and could only see photos as they appeared on social media. Night has arrived in Sydney and while this full moon is pretty, it's not as spectacular as the eclipse seen from this side of the world early this morning:
But given the time difference, it's Monday night there heading into Tuesday, that's to be expected.
This photo is more impressive:
This fantastic timelapse video has come in from Copenhagen - the supermoon rising over Øresund Bridge.
And there we go. As the sun comes up over the UK, a once in a generation event comes to an end.
We have tracked the supermoon across the globe from Australia, to LA, to New York and then to lovely Norfolk.
It was a bit of a slow-burner, starting at 1.10am, before the moon was fully immersed in Earth’s umbral shadow at 3:11am.
Its greatest eclipse arrived at 3:47am when the moon took on a glorious coppery hue.
Thankfully the sky over the UK was mostly clear giving the perfect opportunity to get a view.
If you saw it you can tell your grandchildren in later years. If not, have a quick scan through our gallery or through the liveblog below, and then tell the grandchildren.
Observers in the British Isles have to wait until the morning of Monday, January 21 2019 for the next total lunar eclipse visible from these shores, but it will only be a "normal" one.
I leave you with possibly the worst image of the moon seen tonight, from Streatham in south London:
We've collated the best pics of the blood moon / supermoon / call it what you will, in this gallery. Have a look.
Missed the blood moon and the eclipse? Don't despair. Here are some mildly amusing Twitter Supermoon posts to cheer you up:
While sky-gazers in the UK had to stay up late to catch the blood moon, in South Africa they set their alarms early, and were rewarded:
While in Norfolk, this was the view:
Here's a selection of the latest blood moon images from around the world:
In Los Angeles, a large crowd filled the lawn of Griffith Observatory to watch the celestial show while listening to Beethoven's "Moonlight Sonata" played by 14-year-old pianist Ray Ushikubo.
"You always want to see the eclipse because they're always very different," said astronomer Edwin Krupp, the observatory's director.
Mr Krupp said the additional component of the earth's atmosphere adds "all kinds of twists and turns to the experience."
In Miami, sky-watchers had a nice view on a cloudless, warm night. People came out to Bayfront Park and other parts of downtown to watch it, taking many photographs.
The moon appeared in more of a copper rather than reddish tone, however.
Our correspondent in Washington DC, David Lawler, says sadly the skies were too cloudy to see the eclipse:
No luck here in Washington. Thick cloud cover has translated to vaguely orange sky but no moon in sight.
Several disappointed would-be moon watchers spotted in my neighbourhood.
Let's return to some of the beautiful images of the blood moon.
Meanwhile, let's spare a thought for Australia, where it is broad daylight - so no impressive celestial show for our friends Down Under.
Right then, where are we up to? The blood moon will stay in full eclipse for about an hour, meaning now is the best time to see it in all its red/pink/orangey glory. After that, the red tones will slowly fade as the moon emerges from the Earth's shadow. For the rest of the night the Supermoon will still be incredibly big and bright, so lots to stay awake for.
Wow - the Supermoon is very red in this shot. Amazing.
Lots of images of the blood moon are starting to come through, with red tones clearly visible:
And sky-watchers are a little bit excited:
Our correspondent in New York, Harriet Alexander reports:
In Manhattan, crowds are on the streets standing and staring at the sky.
I'm outside a Mexican cafe and the waiters have all poured out to look.
One man is explaining, in Spanish, the concept to his colleagues. Another is on the phone to his mother in Mexico: "Esta muy bonita," he said.
A 4x4 has just driven slowly past the crowds, with the driver winding down his window to yell: "Eclipse! Yeah!"
Definitely looking orangey-red in Arizona:
And the colours are very strong in this shot:
A reminder that we are about 20 minutes from the full eclipse.
You can start to see the reddish glow of the blood moon in this photograph by Rick Haslam:
Some beautiful eclipse pictures as we approach the half-way point:
Here is a clearer eclipse shot, with a fairly big chunk of the moon now obscured:
Some early eclipse photos are coming in - and they are pretty blurry.
IPhones not getting a lot of love tonight from people trying to capture images of the Supermoon on their mobiles...
For those looking up at cloudy skies:
As we await the first images of the eclipse, here is a lighter take on Supermoon mania:
Is it a streetlight? No, it's Supermoon:
Just ten minutes to go until the eclipse begins.
Let's spare a thought for people in parts of the US, where clouds are obscuring their view of the Supermoon.
Elsewhere, in crystal clear skies, it is looking like this:
The Supermoon looks more like the sun in this image from Boston:
And this one from Rivington:
Some advice for sky-watchers via the Press Association:
Anyone staying up to see the red moon is in for a "quite an unusual sight", according to Society for Popular Astronomy vice president Robin Scagell.
His tips are to arm yourself with binoculars and look out for the deep redness in the sky when the moon is fully in shadow.
The shade will depend on the atmospheric conditions, and there may be a bluish tinge at the moon's edge.
Unlike with a solar eclipse, a lunar eclipse is completely safe to observe through binoculars or a small telescope.
A reminder that we have just one hour to go until the eclipse begins in the skies over Britain - if you haven't done it already set your alarms for 1.10am.
Russ McNally has taken a great shot of the Supermoon from Merseyside:
And here it is starting to take on a more orangey hue over Bradford:
In other space news, it seems the clever people over at Nasa have solved the mystery to life on Mars and are about to announce their findings.
The Supermoon is looking pretty impressive from Yorkshire.
Here are some more beautiful shots of the moon as it rises:
While the eclipse itself isn't taking place for a few hours yet, people are taking some amazing pictures of the Supermoon and posting them on Twitter.
This is useful from Mashable: how to take the best Supermoon photos.
Still not sure quite what all the fuss is about? Here's some nifty explainers from the people who know best, Nasa:
Welcome to the Telegraph's supermoon lunar eclipse liveblog. Join us throughout the night as we bring you the best of the photographs and social media reaction from around the world. The biggest spectacle won't start until after 1am, but already we are seeing some stunning pictures of the moon. If you would like to see your photographs published here in our liveblog, send them to mypic@telegraph.co.uk. Our favourite image so far is the picture from Glastonbury Tor:
Amateur astronomers will be given a rare chance to capture a spectacular celestial event that has not occurred for 30 years - a lunar eclipse with the moon near to its closest point to the Earth.
An awe-inspiring blood-red "supermoon" will cast its eerie light on the Earth early on Monday, creating an atmosphere of wonder and fear across the world.
When the moon is at "perigee", its shortest distance from the Earth, it is 226,000 miles away and appears 14 per cent larger and 30 per cent brighter than when it is at its furthermost point.
The last time this coincided with a lunar eclipse,when the moon is covered by the Earth's shadow, was in 1982 and the event will not be repeated until 2033.
During a lunar eclipse, the moon turns a deep rusty red, due to sunlight being scattered by the Earth's atmosphere.
Down through the ages, so-called "blood moons" have been viewed as ill-omens by superstitious people.
For some - religious groups and believers in astrology - the eclipsewill be dreadful in the most literal sense, a sign that the End of Days is approaching.
Monday's eclipse is said to be even more significant, since it marks the completion of an unusual line-up of four total eclipses at six monthly intervals known as a "tetrad".
From the UK, the moon starts to enter the Earth's shadow at 01:10 early on Monday morning.
The moon will be completely within the shadow from 03:11 to 04:24. The eclipse ends when the moon leaves the shadow at 0624.
When the eclipse is at its maximum, the moon will be just above the tree tops.
The phenomenon is well worth staying up for, according to leading amateur astronomer Robin Scagell.
He said: "From a UK point of view, it's happening at a most unsuitable time, but I would say it's definitely worth setting the alarm for to look out and see this red moon hanging over the tree tops."
The Earth's atmosphere scatters more blue light, so that the light reaching the lunar surface is predominantly red.
Observers on Earth see a moon that may be brick-coloured, rusty, blood red, or sometimes dark grey depending on the atmospheric conditions.
Joel 2:31 in the Bible says: "The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord comes."
The blood-red full moon has happened only five times since 1900 and will be the last in a sequence of four in a row occurring at six-monthly intervals on biblical feast days - a so-called "biblical tetrad".
Throughout history, these incredibly rare events have been associated with major global events and disasters.
The 1493 tetrad was marked by the expulsion of the Jews by the Catholic Spanish Inquisition and in 1949 another tetrad coincided with the establishment of the state of Israel. Furthermore in 1967 the tetrad occured at the same time as the Arab-Israeli Six-Day War.
However, while lunar tetrads can be rare - there were none between 1600 and 1900 - Nasa says the pattern is largely random and there will be eight in the 21st century.
It will be the last total lunar eclipse visible from the UK until 2019.
The previous three total lunar eclipses in the tetrad occurred on April 15 2014, October 8 2014, and April 4 2015, but were not visible from the UK. A tetrad cycle like this one hasn't been seen since 1982 and won't begin again until 2032.
The most recent occurrences of the big red moon took place in 1910, 1928, 1946, 1964, and 1982.