 McGovern Senate Nixon Democrats Republican history Dakota Wesleyan Washington Vietnam presidency party Eagleton South Dakota re-election Clinton congressman liberal Congress Republican leftward Democratic Methodist Church war rules idealist minorities Democratic presidential nomination was assassinated primary elections national convention platform liberalism running mate Kennedy mental illness mission graduate work teaching malnourished Humphrey politics alcoholism Iraq Midwestern progressivism civil rights antipoverty food stamp nutrition opposition to the Vietnam War American history electoral votes burglary Watergate Hotel sabotage operations threat free-market economy mainstream thought loser good old boy healthy Edmund S. Muskie front-runner Gov. populist segregationist Hillary Rodham Law School start general election welfare court-ordered busing racial discrimination major party immediate withdrawal amnesty abolition draft poverty line rostrum nervous exhaustion electroshock therapy ticket deep cuts Paris peace talks arms limitation treaty Soviet Union economy diplomatic telegram Holiday Inn Sioux Falls Theodore H. White antiwar my opposition nation World War II get over it good life parsonage pastor mother homemaker junior high school Pearl Harbor Army Air Corps identical twin B-24 Liberator heavy bomber Lieutenant Adriatic Distinguished Flying Cross master’s degree university political science Ph.D. Northwestern South Dakota Democratic Party sedan county New Deal Depression incumbent first Karl E. Mundt special assistant Food for Peace food for the hungry Joseph H. Bottum Francis H. Case presidential primary Eugene J. McCarthy 1968 campaign McGovern commission states center of gravity rules Gridiron Club landslide Watergate Leo K. Thorsness conservative movement James Abdnor National Conservative Political Action Committee convention Massachusetts lobbying inn Stratford, Conn. Madison ambassador Food and Agriculture Organization Presidential Medal of Freedom Rome ranch-style house educational institution St. Augustine, Fla Eleanor McGovern son C-Span public affairs op-ed impeachment Vice President William R. Polk health care federal government state legislatures land