Sierra Leone starts nationwide lockdown to stop Ebola
"We believe this is the best way for now to identify those who are sick and remove them from those who are well," said Alhaji Alpha Kanu, the nation's minister of information.
"Forced quarantines and lockdowns are driving people underground and jeopardizing the trust between people and health providers," the charity group said in a statement this month. "This is leading to the concealment of cases and is pushing the sick away from health systems."
"Unfortunately, it was described as a lockdown, I think, by accident in the first description and that term has stayed there," Nabarro said. "But it's actually not a lockdown. It's a sensitization, house-to-house as they call it, which is used quite often for other issues."
"He wants communities throughout the country to have a better understanding of the disease, to understand its causes, and also to understand how it's transmitted so they can start to take ownership and take action themselves to reduce the spread and also to insure when people are infected or suspected of infection that they can be taken to places where they can receive care."
"Resistance will be less. They will be talking to people they know," he said.
He did not say what punishment, if any, people would face if they violate the lockdown.
But MSF, which is working with patients in the nation, said this will not be an easy task.
"It will be extremely difficult for health workers to accurately identify cases through door-to-door screenings as this requires a certain level of expertise," the group said. "And when cases are identified, there will not be enough Ebola management centers to care for them."
In a related incident, youth around Matainkay in Waterloo, 18 miles outside Freetown, attempted to disrupt the burial of corpses of Ebola victims, according to the local member of Parliament for the area, Claude Kamanda, and the police local unit commander, Mustapha Kamara.
The police chief said he sent troop reinforcements to ward off the attackers. He described them as youths in the village.
As the number of new cases escalates, there's a question of what a lockdown will do to slow the spread of the virus, given that the Ebola incubation period can range between two and 21 days.
The outbreak has been centered in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia, with a handful of cases in Nigeria. The overall fatality rate is 50%, WHO said.
The virus is named after the Ebola River in the Democratic Republic of Congo (formerly Zaire), where one of the first outbreaks occurred in 1976.