Ebola crisis: Second Texas nurse tests positive for virus one day after taking commercial flight
US health authorities are trying to track down more than 130 passengers who shared a domestic flight with a woman who has now become the second person in the US to contract the Ebola virus.
Amber Vinson, a 29-year-old nurse at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital, and a fellow Texas nurse tested positive to the virus after treating Liberian man Thomas Duncan, who later died.
Earlier reports suggested Ms Vinson showed no symptoms during the flight but the Texas Health Department says she had a slight temperature.
Ms Vinson cared for Mr Duncan and was immediately isolated after reporting a fever on Tuesday (local time), the department said.
"Health officials have interviewed the latest patient to quickly identify any contacts or potential exposures and those people will be monitored," the department said.
Ms Vinson took a Frontier Airlines flight from Cleveland, Ohio, to Dallas on October 13, just one day before she reported developing symptoms of the infection, US and airline officials said.
The airline said it was attempting to contact all 132 passengers who were aboard the flight, the US Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said in a statement.
CDC director Dr Thomas Frieden said the Ebola-infected nurse should not have boarded a domestic flight in the days before she began to show signs of the disease, however, the risk to other passengers was "very low".
"She should not have travelled on a commercial airline," he said.
He told reporters CDC guidelines outline the need for "controlled movement", and that does not include taking any kind of public transportation.
He also noted the woman was self-monitoring for signs of Ebola symptoms, but that her colleague's diagnosis had not yet been announced when the she boarded the plane.
"At that point it was not known that there had been exposures in the care of the patient," Dr Frieden said.
At the time, Dr Frieden said the case indicated a professional lapse that may have caused other health workers at the hospital to also be infected.
"We don't know what occurred in the care of the original patient... but at some point, there was a breach in protocol, and that breach in protocol resulted in this infection," he said at the time.
National Nurses United, which is both a union and a professional association for US nurses, said on Tuesday the hospital lacked protocols to deal with an Ebola patient, offered no advance training and provided nurses with insufficient gear, including suits that left their necks exposed.
Basic principles of infection control were violated by both the hospital's Infectious Disease Department and CDC officials, the nurses said, with no one picking up hazardous waste "as it piled to the ceiling".
"The nurses strongly feel unsupported, unprepared, lied to, and deserted to handle the situation on their own," the statement said.
The hospital said in a statement it had instituted measures to create a safe working environment and it was reviewing and responding to the nurses' criticisms.
The CDC said the second worker's positive test came from a preliminary analysis conducted overnight and the CDC is carrying out its own test to confirm the result.
"As we have said before, because of our ongoing investigation, it is not unexpected that there would be additional exposures," it said in a statement.
The second patient will be transferred to Emory University Hospital in Atlanta on Wednesday, Sylvia Burwell, secretary of Health and Human Services said.
Dallas County authorities said they were anticipating more possible Ebola cases following the diagnosis of the second healthcare worker.
"We are preparing contingencies for more, and that is a very real possibility," Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins, the county's chief political officer, said at a news conference with other local officials.
"You can imagine the gunshot that this is to the family that is Presbyterian [Hospital]."
Neighbours of the second healthcare worker had also been alerted and her flat and possessions had been disinfected.
Both of the health workers were involved in the care of Mr Duncan, a Liberian who died last week after being exposed to Ebola in his home country.
Mr Duncan died in an isolation ward last Wednesday, 11 days after being admitted. More than 50 people attended to his care.
The CDC said it was taking a series of new measures to boost hospitals' preparedness, including sending two Dallas experts who have managed to control Ebola outbreaks in Africa over the past two decades.
The centre said it was improving procedures to protect healthcare workers at the Dallas hospital, and providing staff there and elsewhere with opportunities for more training.
At least 4,493 people have died in the Ebola epidemic in West Africa since the start of the year, the World Health Organisation (WHO) said.
US president Barack Obama pledged a "much more aggressive" response at home to the Ebola threat, and insisted that the risk of a serious outbreak on US soil was low.
"I am absolutely confident that we can prevent a serious outbreak of the disease here in the United States," he said.
"The key thing to understand about this disease is that these protocols work."
Mr Obama held a crisis meeting with top White House aides and emphasised the importance of helping African countries stem the spread of the virus, calling such aid "an investment in our own public health".
"If we are not responding internationally in an effective way... then we could have problems," Mr Obama said on US television.
"This is not a situation in which, like a flu, the risks of a rapid spread of the disease are imminent," he said, adding that he "shook hands with, hugged and kissed" nurses who had treated an Ebola patient at Emory University hospital in Atlanta last month.
"They followed the protocols. They knew what they were doing and I felt perfectly safe doing so."
Mr Obama earlier organised a videoconference with the leaders of Britain, France, Germany and Italy to discuss the latest on the epidemic.
Since the announcement last month that the US would send at least 3,000 troops to West Africa to help fight the outbreak, Mr Obama has repeatedly criticised the international response to the health crisis as insufficient.
European health ministers will consider screening travellers for the Ebola virus at airports across the European Union when they meet in Brussels on Thursday.
The WHO predicted that the three worst-hit countries in West Africa - Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea - could produce as many as 10,000 new cases a week by early December.