ReEBOV Antigen Rapid Test kit for point-of-care and laboratory-based testing for Ebola virus disease: a field validation study
Our field validation study of the ReEBOV rapid diagnostic test performed in Ebola care centres and reference laboratories during the ongoing epidemic in Sierra Leone enables us to make several key conclusions. We found that it was feasible to perform the test in the restricted so-called red zone; that interoperator agreement at the point of care was high; that results of point-of-care fingerstick testing were consistent with the results of the rapid diagnostic test performed on venepuncture blood samples in the reference laboratory; and that in our study cohorts the rapid diagnostic test had sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 92% compared with the altona RT-PCR assay, which was the test used for clinical decision making at our care centres. These findings suggest that the test could have had an immediate effect on patient care and infection control in our facilities by reliably detecting patients with cycle threshold values of up to 26·3, all of whom would be expected to be highly infectious. Earlier test results would allow much improved triage of patients, enabling clinical staff to focus their attention and resources on those most likely to have the disease and reducing the opportunity for infection of patients who do not actually have Ebola virus disease.
Our analysis yielded the unexpected and important finding that the altona assay used in this study, under the conditions deployed in the field, was itself an imperfect reference standard. The sensitivity of the altona assay performed in the reference laboratory for routine clinical testing during the study period was suboptimum in plasma samples with cycle threshold values higher than about 30. We were not able to retest all samples with the Trombley assay, and therefore unable to accurately estimate the sensitivity of the rapid diagnostic test versus the Trombley assay, although clearly it would be less than 100%. Possible factors that might have led to suboptimum analytical performance of the altona assay include laboratory-specific choices of RNA extraction and amplification methods—choices in turn made to balance logistics, performance, efficiency, biosafety, cost, and other considerations relevant to rapid clinical deployment in a humanitarian outbreak scenario. However, other investigators have previously noted that the performance of PCR assays for Ebola varies widely.9x9Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND). Situational review of Ebola diagnostics and opportunities for rapid improvement. http://www.finddiagnostics.org/resource-centre/news/141030.html; Nov 5, 2014. ((accessed March 9, 2015).) Google ScholarSee all References 10x10Niedrig, M, Schmitz, H, Becker, S et al. First international quality assurance study on the rapid detection of viral agents of bioterrorism. J Clin Microbiol. 2004; 42: 1753–1755 Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (31) | Google ScholarSee all References Notably, the two PCR tests compared in this study target different genes, specifically the L gene (altona)8x8RealStar Ebolavirus RT-PCR Kit 1.0, instructions for use. Version 11/2014. Altona Diagnostics, Hamburg; 2014http://www.altona-diagnostics.com/tl_files/website/downloads/RealStar_Ebolavirus%201.0%20RT-PCR%20Kit%20Instructions%20for%20use%20clean%202014-11-26.pdf. ((accessed April 28, 2015).) Google ScholarSee all References and the NP gene (Trombley).7x7Trombley, AR, Wachter, L, Garrison, J et al. Comprehensive panel of real-time TaqMan polymerase chain reaction assays for detection and absolute quantification of filoviruses, arenaviruses, and New World hantaviruses. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2010; 82: 954–960 Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (115) | Google ScholarSee all References Nonetheless, we note that the altona assay, in view of its commercial availability, wide clinical deployment, and regulatory status (at the time of this study, it was the only assay approved for use by WHO through its Emergency Use Assessment and Listing procedure), was recommended by WHO as a preferred benchmark for performance assessments of novel Ebola diagnostics during the outbreak.
Our study findings are informative for the future implementation of the ReEBOV rapid diagnostic test for point-of-care testing. Fingerstick collections of blood were completed successfully in all patients, despite varying degrees of dehydration and a requirement to undertake these fingersticks while wearing personal protective equipment, and the use of safety lancets minimised risk of sharps injury to the operator compared with venepuncture. Technicians responsible for routine phlebotomy were able to perform and read the test with a minimum amount of additional training. Although the ReEBOV rapid diagnostic test does need refrigeration for storage, in view of the cold chain requirements for vaccines and other medical products, this is probably a minor barrier for most clinical facilities. The present requirement in the package insert for control reagents to be reconstituted with a precision pipettor and deionised water (not included in the kit) reduces feasibility, but this could be addressed in future iterations of the package insert (we used bottled water for reconstitution, after consultation with the rapid diagnostic test manufacturer). Finally, in our study, two readers were needed to achieve 100% sensitivity versus the altona assay.
Our results differ from those recently generated by WHO as part of its emergency use assessment, which included laboratory but not point-of-care test evaluation.11x11WHO. WHO emergency use assessment and listing for Ebola virus disease IVDs. Public report. Product: ReEBOV™ Antigen Rapid Test Kit. http://www.who.int/diagnostics_laboratory/procurement/150219_reebov_antigen_rapid_test_public_report.pdf. ((accessed March 9, 2015).) Google ScholarSee all References As reported in the updated ReEBOV emergency use authorisation package insert,12x12Corgenix, Inc. ReEBOV Antigen Rapid Test kit package insert. ftp://ftp.corgenix.com/Intra/ReEBOV/14005.pdf; Feb 25, 2015. ((accessed March 9, 2015).) Google ScholarSee all References WHO estimated a sensitivity of 78·3% (95% CI 58·1–90·3) and specificity of 90·7% (84·4–94·6) in fresh venous whole blood versus altona as the benchmark RT-PCR assay. Differences in the number of rapid diagnostic test readers, extraction or amplification methods, sample age, and the specific population studied (cycle threshold range) might have contributed to the differences between the two studies. However, the methodological details of WHO's study are not available for comparison.
Our study had some important limitations. First, the use of a reference standard that itself had imperfect sensitivity probably caused us to overestimate the true sensitivity (and underestimate the true specificity) of the rapid diagnostic test. Our results are specific to our study population and, as noted, the maximum cycle threshold value (by altona) in our point-of-care cohort was 26·3 (although the mean and median cycle threshold values in this cohort were very similar to that reported in the same laboratory 2 months earlier); this was a field study done at one point in the outbreak, and the cycle threshold values represent consecutive patients who presented to our study sites for testing during the study period. We further note that the duration of symptoms at presentation in patients confirmed to have Ebola virus disease by altona RT-PCR ranged from 1 day to 16 days (with a mean of 4 days). Therefore, we do not know how well the rapid diagnostic test would perform in patients tested very early in the course of their disease. However, the same caveat applies to testing with RT-PCR, and accordingly WHO guidelines13x13WHO. Laboratory diagnosis of Ebola virus disease. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/134009/1/WHO_EVD_GUIDANCE_LAB_14.1_eng.pdf?ua=1; Sept 19, 2014. ((accessed March 9, 2015).) Google ScholarSee all References recommend retesting of patients who test negative by RT-PCR but who have been symptomatic for fewer than 72 h.
We obtained witnessed and documented verbal consent, rather than written consent, for our study. This decision was based on infection control restrictions in place at our treatment facilities (requiring that all items coming into contact with suspected Ebola virus disease patients be incinerated, thus complicating the collection and storage of signed consent forms) and low rates of literacy in our study population. Furthermore, the study procedures imposed a minimum amount of risk on the participants because the results of the rapid diagnostic test did not affect medical management.
In summary, our findings show that in our study cohort the ReEBOV rapid diagnostic test had sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 92% compared with the altona benchmark, and high interoperator agreement, when performed in both point-of-care and reference laboratory settings. In view of the observed limitations of our study's reference standard, the true performance of this rapid diagnostic test in patients with low viral loads (cycle threshold >30) remains to be ascertained. The clinical significance of these low viral loads in this testing context is also unclear. Recommendations for incorporation of the ReEBOV rapid diagnostic test into testing algorithms for use in affected countries should be guided by WHO14x14WHO. Interim guidance on the use of rapid Ebola antigen detection tests. http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/ebola/ebola-antigen-detection/en/; March 31, 2015. ((accessed April 12, 2014).) Google ScholarSee all References and national public health officials, and should take into account variations in patient population, testing scenarios, and access to RT-PCR testing in each area. Nonetheless, we can conclude that the ReEBOV rapid diagnostic test could be very useful as a rapid test for Ebola virus disease at the point of care in high-risk populations.