Feds to end Ebola screening for air travelers from Liberia
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
WASHINGTON – Federal authorities will end mandatory Ebola screening Monday for travelers from Liberia to five U.S. airports, but will continue to scrutinize travelers from Sierra Leone and Guinea, federal officials announced Friday.
The Department of Homeland Security's Customs and Border Protection had provided extra screening for more than 30,000 travelers during the past year, after an outbreak of the often fatal disease in West Africa.
The Ebola outbreak that began in early 2014 sickened 28,220 in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea, and killed 11,291 through Sept. 13, according to the World Health Organization.
WHO declared Liberia free of Ebola transmission on Sept. 3.That date was 42 days, or twice the incubation period, since the last patient ended treatment in that country.
Customs and Border Protection and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention agreed to remove Liberia from the list of countries subject to enhanced visa and port-of-entry screening, effective Monday. CDC revised its travel notice for Liberia on Sept. 3, to advise U.S. residents to take the usual precautions when visiting that country. The previous advisory recommended enhanced precautions to avoid contracting Ebola.
The U.S. will maintain extra screening for travelers from Sierra Leone and Guinea, which still see a handful of new cases each week, and for people who traveled through those countries during the previous three weeks.
Extra airport screening began Oct. 11, 2014, three days after Thomas Eric Duncan, 42, died from Ebola after arriving in Dallas from Liberia. Two healthcare workers who treated Duncan became ill in October 2014, but they were treated and recovered. A New York City doctor fell ill that October after returning from treating Ebola patients in Guinea, and he recovered.
Ebola is relatively difficult to catch because it is transferred through bodily fluids, such as blood or vomit, rather than through the air like flu. But the disease sparked widespread panic about travelers spreading the disease because it typically kills half the people who become infected.
The U.S. does not have direct flights to West Africa. But the extra airport screening focused on connecting flights at five airports that handle 94% of the travelers arriving from the three outbreak countries.
The extra screening is conducted at New York’s John F. Kennedy, New Jersey’s Newark, Chicago O’Hare, Washington Dulles and Atlanta Hartsfield-Jackson airports. The screening involves questionnaires about possible exposure to Ebola and a temperature check. Arriving travelers are also educated about how to monitor their temperature for fever and to seek health care if they fall ill.
Of the 30,982 travelers screened by CBP through Thursday, authorities found 68 with elevated temperatures and transported 40 to medical facilities for treatment for ailments other than Ebola.