Dengue outbreak: Government orders hospitals to defer all planned surgeries
NEW DELHI: The Delhi government has ordered deferring all planned surgeries to facilitate addition of 1,000 beds to dengue wards in all state-run hospitals by Sunday. The move, however, is likely to affect thousands of patients suffering from other serious medical problems. Ambedkar Hospital in northwest Delhi's Rohini has already closed down its operation theatres. Sources said the manpower and beds meant for patients who were scheduled to undergo surgery have been diverted towards treating dengue patients. Lok Nayak Hospital, the biggest tertiary care hospital run by the Delhi government, plans to curtail surgeries by 50% beginning Monday, confirmed Dr Y K Sarin, the hospital's medical superintendent. He said staff nurses, OT technicians, resident doctors of anesthesia and surgical wings who become surplus by curtailment of surgeries will be deployed in fever wards. "There is an emergency situation at hand, which has to be dealt with urgently. Elective surgeries can wait," Sarin said. Dr V K Khurana, the medical superintendent of Hindu Rao Hospital, the largest corporation-run hospital in the city, also confirmed deferring of routine surgeries at the hospital. Patients who had planned gynaecology, ENT, gastrointestinal, urology and plastic surgeries are likely to be the worst affected by the government's decision. "It is a knee-jerk reaction. Have the politicians who ordered for deferring elective surgery indefinitely considered the effect it is having on patients who have waited for two to three months to get operated," said a doctor at Ambedkar Hospital. Citing the example of a 40-year-old TB patient admitted in the hospital, the doctor added: "It took five months for our nutrition team to increase his weight from 27 kg to 44 kg, the ideal weight for conducting the review surgery. It was scheduled for September 14. But due to the dengue rush, he could not be operated and is losing weight again." "At Lok Nayak, nearly 100 minor and major surgeries are conducted daily. There is waiting time of two to three months in many departments, for example ENT. The decision to defer planned surgeries indefinitely will hit the patient hard," said a doctor, who did not want to be identified. AIIMS, one of the busiest hospitals in the country and perhaps the world, has asked its specialty departments to reserve two beds each for dengue patients but it has not shut down operation theatres. Public health experts say the current dengue crisis has exposed the poor state of primary healthcare centres in the city due to which people are forced to visit tertiary hospitals for minor illnesses. "Also, there is no prior planning by government for tackling dengue, which happens every year. The fact that it is likely to get worse this season due to its cyclical trend was known and the government should have acted in advance," Dr P N Arora, vice-president of the Association of Health Providers of India, said. He added that only 10% to 20% of the patients visiting hospitals with febrile illnesses suffer from dengue and fewer still require admission.