CDC Reports 14 New Cases of Sexually Transmitted Zika in U.S.
"CDC and state public health departments are now investigating 14 new reports of possible sexual transmission of Zika virus, including several involving pregnant women," the CDC said in a statement.
"In two of the new suspected sexual transmission events, Zika virus infection has been confirmed in women whose only known risk factor was sexual contact with an ill male partner who had recently traveled to an area with local Zika virus transmission; testing for the male partners is still pending."
Evidence is growing that Zika can cause serious birth defects, especially microcephaly, which results from a damaged brain that stops developing in the womb. There are also suspicions that Zika is causing a paralyzing condition called Guillan-Barre syndrome.
The CDC's Dr. Anne Schuchat said only two cases are confirmed, but all of the suspected cases involved men who had traveled potentially infecting women who had not.
"In each of the episodes, a man was traveling to a Zika affected area, developed symptoms that were consistent with Zika, and within two weeks…a female partner developed symptoms consistent with the virus," Schuchat told NBC News.
Earlier this month, Dallas health officials reported the first known case of sexual transmission of Zika in the current epidemic.
Doctors had known Zika could be spread by sexual transmission. In 2008 a U.S. researcher was infected in Africa and infected his wife back in Colorado. Zika has been found in semen.
"Although this is an investigation in progress, we thought it was important to get the word out to people to remind them that we think pregnant women should avoid traveling to Zika-affected areas," Schuchat said. And women who are pregnant and whose sex partners have been to affected areas should abstain from sex or use a condom throughout their entire pregnancy, just to be safe, she said.
Zika's spreading fast across the Americas and the Caribbean and the World Health Organization has declared it a public health emergencyof international concern. The virus itself is relatively harmless to most people, but what's worrying is the potential that it causes severe birth defects.
Related: What is the Zika Virus? Your Questions Answered
The CDC’s already advised travelers to be aware of the risk, recommending that men who have traveled to Zika-affected zones should use a condomif they want to be absolutely sure they don't infect sex partners.
"We are not changing the guidance today but we are really reinforcing it," Schuchat said. "For the time being we are telling women to avoid sex or to be careful during sex with a partner who is coming back from an area where Zika is."
CDC issued a travel advisory last month telling pregnant women tostay away from countries where Zika is circulating.