Total solar eclipse attracts hordes of sky gazers across north Australia, Indonesia
A solar eclipse has enthralled Indonesia but clouds spoiled the view for many sky watchers in the east of the archipelago, the only part of the country that had the opportunity to see it in totality.
In Palembang city on the western island of Sumatra where the total eclipse should have been visible, cloudy skies and smog obscured the view for many of the thousands of people who gathered outside shortly after daybreak.
"It was very annoying that we couldn't see the sun properly," said David Pratama, 18, as jeers of disappointment rose up in the crowd around him as the sun moved behind the moon.
A partial eclipse of the sun was visible to millions in Australia, parts of South-East Asia and the Pacific, but only people in a small band of Indonesia had the opportunity to see the moon perfectly silhouetted by the sun.
People in areas north of Rockhampton in Queensland were able to partially see the eclipse, while it was also visible in areas of the Northern Territory and Western Australia.
In Indonesia's capital, Jakarta, hundreds of residents and school children flocked to the city's planetarium where special viewing glasses were handed out to see the partial eclipse.
"We are very excited because it's our first time seeing something like this," said Santi, who brought along her five-year-old daughter to watch as the eclipse briefly dimmed the skies.
"It was spectacular," said Daniel Orange, a 52-year-old American tourist from California, who was watching the total eclipse on the small western Indonesian island of Belitung.
"It was very beautiful, there are a lot of people here and when the totality hit, everybody cheered. I got goosebumps."
From a festival featuring live bands, to fun runs and traditional dances, events were organised across Indonesia for an estimated 10,000 foreign visitors and 100,000 domestic tourists who witnessed the phenomenon.
Hotels in the best viewing spots filled up weeks ago — in the city of Ternate, in the Maluku Islands, officials have had to find extra space for tourists on boats.
"It's an extraordinary spectacle that only takes place about once a year in one part of the world," said Arnaud Fischer, a 33-year-old French tourist, who has witnessed several eclipses and was set to watch Wednesday's in Ternate.
I Gde Pitana, the Indonesian Government's head of foreign tourism, described the phenomenon as "a tourism attraction created by God".
It was a deeply spiritual experience for many in the world's most populous Muslim-majority country, with the faithful being urged by Islamic authorities to perform special eclipse prayers.
"Our Prophet Mohammed said the prayer signifies the greatness of Allah, who created this wonderful phenomenon," said Ma'ruf Amin, chairman of the Indonesian Ulema Council, the country's top Islamic clerical body.
Some of Indonesia's tribespeople are fearful of the phenomenon, however. Members of the Dayak tribe in one part of Borneo island performed a ritual to ensure that the sun, which they view as the source of life, does not disappear entirely.
The total eclipse swept across 12 out of 34 provinces in Indonesia, which stretches about 5,000 kilometres from east to west, before heading across the Pacific Ocean.
Before hitting Sumatra, the eclipse swept across Sulawesi and Borneo, then moved over the Malukus and headed out into the ocean.
The last total solar eclipse occurred on March 20, 2015, only visible from the Faroe Islands and Norway's Arctic Svalbard archipelago.
Total eclipses occur when the moon moves between the Earth and the Sun, and the three bodies align precisely.
As seen from Earth, the moon is just broad enough to cover the solar face, creating a breath-taking silver halo in an indigo sky.