Endometriosis Increases Risk of Heart Disease in Young Women
Women with endometriosis, a chronic, painful condition that affects the reproductive organs, have a higher risk of heart disease, according to a new study.
The study, published Tuesday in Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes, an American Heart Association journal, found that women age 40 or younger were disproportionately at risk: they were three times as likely to develop heart attack, chest pain, or need treatment for blocked arteries, compared to women without the condition.
Researchers from Brigham and Women’s Hospital followed 120,000 women over 20 years. Nearly 12,000 participants had endometriosis — the growth of the tissue that lines the uterus to other places in the body.
While the overall rate for heart disease was 21 cases per 100,000 women under 40, the researchers found that for every 100,000 women with endometriosis, the heart disease rate increased to 65 cases.
Compared to women without endometriosis, women with the condition experienced:
“We don't think that it's a coincidence," said Dr. Stacey Missmer, director of epidemiologic research and reproductive medicine at Brigham’s Women's Hospital, who co-authored the study. "We know that women with endometriosis have systemic inflammation, they have a poor oxidative stress profile, they also may have a difference in their lipid profile and their cholesterol levels, for example, all of which can increase their risk for cardiovascular disease.”
Related: 'Pain' and 'uncertainty': A young woman shares her struggle with endometriosis
At least 10 percent of women of reproductive age suffer from endometriosis — or "endo" — which, according to Missmer, can have important life consequences such as infertility and inability to participate in work or daily activities due to extreme pain.
Allison Moldoff, 21, was diagnosed with endo when she was 12-years-old. Growing up, she experienced pain so horrendous that she developed anxiety and depression out of fear of the pain caused by her period each month. She also quit exercising due to pain and gained weight.
“The pain is excruciating," says Moldoff, whose older sister and mother were diagnosed with endometriosis. "It feels like you have a knot in your back, but when you go to stretch it out, five more come. It’s piercing and your whole body becomes taken over by this pain."
Moldoff has already had three surgeries to help reduce the pain, and will likely undergo a fourth soon.
After her battle with weight and fitness, learning about the association with heart disease makes Moldoff more determined to stick with her nutritionist.
“I don’t want to make myself scared, so for me the next step is to take the study to my doctor and ask him what proactive things I can do now to stay healthy,” she told NBC News.