'Give smokers e-cigarettes,' doctors urge after landmark report finds they DO help people quit
There are 2.6 million e-cigarette users in the UK, and nine million smokers
E-cigarettes are likely to benefit the health of the nation and should be widely promoted as a substitute to smoking, a new report has concluded.
Issued by the Royal College of Physicians (RCP), the authors conclude that smokers can be reassured and encouraged to use the devices. 
Experts at the College looked into the science, public policy, regulation and ethics surrounding e-cigarettes. 
From their research, they made a series of conclusions about the devices including:
Professor John Britton, chair of the RCP's Tobacco Advisory Group, said: 'The growing use of electronic cigarettes as a substitute for tobacco smoking has been a topic of great controversy, with much speculation over their potential risks and benefits.
'This report lays to rest almost all of the concerns over these products, and concludes that, with sensible regulation, electronic cigarettes have the potential to make a major contribution towards preventing the premature death, disease and social inequalities in health that smoking currently causes in the UK. 
'Smokers should be reassured that these products can help them quit all tobacco use forever.'
There is a possibility that the devices may result in some long-term harm because of the inhalation of the ingredients other than nicotine - but the harm that could be caused is substantially smaller than that caused by smoking, the authors said. 
While there is a need for 'sensible' regulation of the devices, regulation should not significantly inhibit the development and use of the products, the authors add.
RCP president Professor Jane Dacre added: 'With careful management and proportionate regulation, harm reduction provides an opportunity to improve the lives of millions of people. 
'It is an opportunity that, with care, we should take.'
Cancer Research UK's director of prevention Alison Cox said e-cigarettes had 'real promise' in helping to reduce the huge death toll from tobacco in the UK.
'This important report is an accurate summary of the latest scientific evidence on e-cigarettes and will help dispel the increasingly common misconception that they're as harmful as smoking,' she said.
'They're not. Tobacco kills more than 100,000 people in the UK every year, we should grasp every opportunity to encourage as many people as possible to stop smoking for good.'
Experts from both Public Health England and the British Heart Foundation also welcomed the findings.  
Duncan Selbie, chief executive at Public Health England, said: 'The evidence is clear; vaping is much less harmful to health than smoking, and this report further highlights the important role of e-cigarettes in reducing the deadly harms smoking causes.
'E-cigarettes are the most popular quitting aid in England and local stop smoking services are the most effective route to giving up, we encourage smokers to combine these, giving them an extremely good chance of quitting smoking successfully.' 
Dr Mike Knapton, Associate Medical Director at the British Heart Foundation, said there were some nine million adults in the UK who still smoke, despite 70 per cent wanting to quit. 
He added: 'E-cigarettes are new devices commonly used by smokers that deliver nicotine without tobacco, and are an effective way of reducing the harm caused. 
'We welcome this report which says that e-cigarettes can be an effective aid to potentially reduce harm from smoking and lower the risk of death and disability. 
'There are 2.6 million e-cigarette users in the UK, and many smokers are using them to help quit. 
'Although more research is needed to establish the long term safety of e-cigarettes, they are likely to cause significantly less harm to your health than smoking tobacco.' 