Metal–organic framework with optimally selective xenon adsorption and separation
For capturing Xe from nuclear reprocessing, the Xe/Kr selectivity is the most important thermodynamic property determining the performance of a MOF. We used molecular simulations to predict the Xe/Kr selectivity of 125,000 MOF structures at dilute conditions relevant to UNF reprocessing (Supplementary Methods, Fig. 1a,b). The distribution of simulated selectivities in the MOFs is shown in Fig. 1a. We partitioned this distribution into a database of existing MOFs (∼5,000 structures) and a database of predicted/hypothetical structures (∼120,000). These distributions span a large range of selectivities, illustrating the unique tunability of MOF materials. Our simulations predict that the most selective material in the database of existing MOFs is SBMOF-1 (Fig. 1c), a three-dimensional, permanently porous MOF (Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) code: KAXQIL). Furthermore, the Xe/Kr selectivity of SBMOF-1 is ranked in the top 0.01 percentile in the database of 120,000 hypothetical MOFs (Fig. 1b). The red line in Fig. 1b illustrates the outlying Xe/Kr selectivity of SBMOF-1 predicted by our screening. While SBMOF-1 has been synthesized and considered for CO/N separation, it has not been tested for Xe/Kr separations.
Encouraged by the data from our high-throughput screening, we synthesized SBMOF-1 and measured its pure-component Xe and Kr adsorption isotherms at room temperature (see synthesis section of Supplementary Methods, Supplementary Figs 17–21). Our first measurement of low pressure Xe uptake in SBMOF-1 at 298 K, when activated by the reported activation procedure, was much lower than predicted by molecular simulation (Supplementary Fig. 22). However, we found that activating SBMOF-1 at a lower temperature yielded low pressure Xe uptake closer to the simulation (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Fig. 23, see effect of activation temperature section of the Supplementary Methods). The Xe adsorption isotherm in SBMOF-1 saturates at a low pressure, indicative of a high affinity for Xe compared with other gases including Kr (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Figs 24 and 25). The Kr adsorption isotherm exhibits a smaller slope and does not saturate even at 1 bar, indicative of a much weaker affinity for Kr. This hints that SBMOF-1 is highly discriminatory for Xe over Kr. Indeed, identifying the Xe and Kr Henry coefficients from the pure-component adsorption isotherms, we predict SBMOF-1 to exhibit a thermodynamic Xe/Kr selectivity of 16 at dilute conditions at 298 K.
It is interesting to compare the equilibrium Xe and Kr uptake of SBMOF-1 with the reported top-performing MOFs. We collected from the literature experimentally measured Xe and Kr adsorption isotherms in Co-formate, SBMOF-2 (ref. 13), HKUST-1 (ref. 14), MOF-505 (ref. 10), PCN-14 (ref. 19), Ni-MOF-74 (ref. 8), Zinc tetrazolate, IRMOF-1 (ref. 22), and FMOF-Cu and identified the Xe and Kr Henry coefficients from the data in the low pressure regime (see Computational Calculation section of Supplementary Methods, Fig. 2b, Supplementary Figs 1–16). The saturation loading of Xe in SBMOF-1 is lower than observed in the majority of these materials due to the comparatively low (∼145 m g) surface area of SBMOF-1 (Supplementary Figs 26 and 27). However, the Henry coefficient of Xe in SBMOF-1 is a factor of two higher than in CC3, the material in our survey with the second highest Xe Henry coefficient; we thus expect SBMOF-1 to have an outstanding Xe uptake under UNF reprocessing off-gas conditions. Figure 2b shows that SBMOF-1 exhibits by far the largest Xe Henry coefficient and the highest Xe/Kr selectivity at dilute conditions among all reported Xe and Kr adsorption isotherms in our literature survey.
From a practical point of view, it is important that the kinetics of Xe adsorption/desorption are sufficiently fast and the material can undergo multiple ad-/de-sorption cycles without losing capacity. We measured the kinetics of Xe adsorption into an SBMOF-1 sample by connecting a chamber of Xe at 1 bar and 298 K to an evacuated chamber with the SBMOF-1 sample, then opening a valve to allow flow. Figure 2c shows that the rate of Xe uptake is sufficiently fast, reaching ∼80% of saturation uptake within 10 min. Next, we performed 10 ad-/de-sorption cycles to test if SBMOF-1 retains its high Xe adsorption capacity after many cycles. Figure 2d shows that SBMOF-1 retains its performance after multiple cycles. In addition, SBMOF-1 shows high thermal stability up to 500 K (Supplementary Fig. 20). To demonstrate the practical applicability of SBMOF-1 for capturing Xe from UNF reprocessing off-gas, we conducted single-column breakthrough experiments with a representative gas mixture (400 p.p.m. Xe, 40 p.p.m. Kr, 78.1% N, 20.9% O, 0.03% CO and 0.9% Ar) (see breakthrough measurement section of the Supplementary Information, Supplementary Figs 28 and 29). We fed this gas mixture through a column packed with SBMOF-1 and initially purged with He. Figure 3 shows that all gases except Xe broke through the column within minutes, whereas Xe was retained in the column for more than an hour). This demonstrates that SBMOF-1 can selectively remove Xe from air at UNF reprocessing conditions. Under these conditions, SBMOF-1 adsorbed 13.2 mmol Xe per kg, higher than the reported breakthrough Xe capacities of benchmark materials, Ni-MOF-74 (4.8 mmol Xe per kg) and CC3 (11 mmol Xe per kg) (Supplementary Fig. 29). The experimental breakthrough capacity is close to that predicted from the Henry coefficient of the pure-component Xe isotherm (15.4 mmol kg), suggesting minimal diffusion limitations in the SBMOF-1 pellets. Next, we conducted column breakthrough experiments on SBMOF-1 in the presence of 42% relative humidity (Fig. 3b). Remarkably, SBMOF-1 retains a high Xe uptake (∼11.5 mmol kg) even in the presence of water vapor. These results suggest the outstanding stability of SBMOF-1 makes it a practical material for the removal of Xe from UNF reprocessing off-gas. Such stability is a desirable property, as very few metal–organic hybrid materials exhibit such properties. We postulate the absence of open metal sites to be responsible for the stability of SBMOF-1 in the presence of water vapour.
To identify the location of adsorbed Xe and Kr, we performed single-crystal X-ray diffraction experiments on activated SBMOF-1 (Supplementary Data 1 and 2). Single-crystal analysis of Xe-loaded SBMOF-1 reveals that Xe adsorbs at a single site, near the midpoint of the channel, interacting with the channel wall composed of aromatic rings by mainly van der Waals interactions. Due to symmetry considerations (space group P2/c), each Xe atom is positioned at two possible sites (Fig. 4, Supplementary Table 1). The distance between each Xe atom along the b axis is 5.56 Å, closely matching the b axis length of the unit cell. There are 1.72 atoms of Xe per unit cell based on crystallographic analysis (∼1.25 mmol g), close to the loading obtained from gas-adsorption data (1.38 mmol g). The saturation loading of Xe in Fig. 2a approaches two atoms per unit cell (see horizontal line), indicating commensurate Xe adsorption, which occurs when the adsorbed amount, location and orientation of an adsorbate are commensurate with the crystallographic symmetry of the adsorbent. Such commensurate adsorption in SBMOF-1 was previously observed for small hydrocarbon molecules (C–C). The observed position of Xe in the pore is consistent with calculated potential energy contours and molecular simulations of Xe adsorption (Figs 1d and 4b, Supplementary Fig. 30, Supplementary Table 2).
We can rationalize the high Xe adsorption capacity and selectivity exhibited by SBMOF-1 by its optimal Xe adsorption site. First, the pore size of SBMOF-1 is tailored for Xe. As a metric for pore size, we calculate the diameter of the largest included hard-sphere that can fit inside the pore of SBMOF-1 as 4.2 Å, slightly larger than a Xe atom, ∼4.1 Å. Simulations of Xe/Kr adsorption in the database of experimental MOFs show that all of the most selective MOFs have pore sizes slightly larger than a Xe atom (Fig. 1b). Such a pore diameter is a prerequisite for a highly Xe-selective material, as the pore size controls the proximity and degree of overlap from multiple framework atoms contributing van der Waals interactions from multiple directions to achieve a highly favourable host–Xe interaction. A pore of optimal size for Xe is suboptimal for Kr because of the size difference, so this forms a pore that is highly discriminatory for Xe over Kr. As shown in Fig. 1c, the pore size of SBMOF-1 falls in the optimal pore size window for Xe/Kr separations, distinguishing it from other MOFs. Porous organic cage CC3, another outstanding Xe-selective material, also exhibits a pore size tailored for Xe (pore window 4.4 Å), but SBMOF-1 constructs a denser wall of chemical moieties than CC3 to achieve a higher Xe binding energy, enhancing its preference for Xe (Supplementary Table 3). This is the second reason why SBMOF-1 is outstanding in Xe adsorption; the colour in Fig. 1b shows that the dense wall of SBMOF-1 surrounds a Xe atom to achieve a high energy of Xe adsorption and thus a high Xe selectivity, following the trend in other MOFs.