Zika Worsens in Singapore, and U.S. Experts Are Worried
Singapore's outbreak of Zika is worsening fast and U.S. health official say they are worried.
Singapore, a city-state about two-thirds the size of Washington, D.C., has 115 confirmed cases of the viral infection spread by local mosquitoes. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has added Singapore to its list of Zika-affected countriesthat pregnant women should avoid.
The U.S. now has 47 home-grown cases, all in Florida. Florida health officials added one more case to the count Wednesday.
The jump to Singapore is worrying, health experts say. "I really think we need to keep our eye on Singapore, among other places," said Dr. Tony Fauci, head of the National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases.
"It went from a handful of cases to 50, to 80 and now it's well over 100 cases," Fauci told a session on Zika at Georgetown University law school Wednesday.
“Any time there is a disease outbreak in Singapore, it tells us how difficult that disease is to control,” CDC director Dr. Tom Frieden told reporters.
That’s because Singapore has a tight system for controlling disease. It made Zika a notifiable disease, meaning any doctor who diagnoses a Zika case must inform the government.
“To prevent Zika from becoming entrenched in our local population, all confirmed cases will be admitted to a public hospital until they recover and test negative for the virus,” Singapore’s National Environmental Agency (NEA) says in a statement on its website.
“(The Ministry of Health) will also screen people in close vicinity of the case (e.g. household, colleagues) for the Zika virus.”
Singapore is home to the Aedes mosquitoes that spread Zika, and has struggled to fight dengue virus, a close relative of Zika that’s spread by the same mosquitoes.
What impresses Frieden is Singapore’s team of inspectors, who keep an eye out for the standing water that breeds mosquitoes. The Aedes mosquitoes that spread Zika virus are notorious for breeding in small containers such as potted plants or trash.
“As a pre-emptive approach, NEA conducts regular inspections at residential and commercial premises to remove the breeding habitats of vectors and prevent the transmission of diseases,” it said.
“Where lapses are found, fines and other penalties will be levied.”
These measures tend to be very effective.
Related: Who Should Worry About Zika
“Any time there’s disease in Singapore, we say that disease is hard to control,” Frieden said.