Apple unveils two new iPhones -- the 5S and 5C
For the first time ever, Apple unveiled two new iPhones on Tuesday, a traditional upgrade of its iPhone 5 as well as a simpler, cheaper version.
"Business has become so large that this year we are going to replace the iPhone 5 and we're going to replace it with not one, but two new designs," Cook said. "This allows us to serve even more customers."
"It has an incredible all new design, one that's more fun, more colorful than any iPhone we've made yet," said Phil Schiller, Apple's senior vice president for marketing. In a video, Apple design guru Jonny Ive described the 5C as "beautifully, unapologetically plastic."
The phone will sell for as little as $99, for a 16GB version, and $199 for one with 32GB of storage (each with a two-year mobile contract). In a departure, Apple will also be making its own cases for the 5C, selling them in a variety of colors for $29.
It will have the first 64-bit chip in a smartphone -- Apple's A7 -- which Schiller said has tested at up to twice as fast as the iPhone 5's processor. It also will have a new feature, a motion co-processor, that will let the phone be used as a fitness tracker along the lines of a FitBit.
Schiller said battery life will be "the same or better" than the iPhone 5 and its camera will have 15% more active sensor space, improved white balance and auto-focus, and a new flash.
Arguably the most dramatic new feature on the phone, though, is Touch ID, a fingerprint scanner for added security. Users will be able to log into their phone via the home button and make purchases from iTunes using their fingerprint as a password of sorts.
Pre-orders for the iPhone 5C starts on September 13. Both versions are on sale starting September 20. Cook also announced the newest version of Apple's mobile operating system, iOS 7, will be released to the public on September 18.
The iPhone has remained the world's top-selling smartphone, save for a few quarters when it was dethroned by phones in Samsung's Galaxy S line. But after making up nearly 24% of all smartphones sold in late 2011, Apple's device is now down to about 14%, while Android phones account for a whopping 79%.
A likely candidate could be the company's anticipated "iWatch." Apple is all but certain to join the emerging smartwatch market that Samsung entered last week with its Galaxy Gear device.
Also, Apple has also long been rumored to be working on a TV set.