 Supreme Court Congress court law presidential Jerusalem Executive branch power case Israeli decision United States Government separation of powers policy Constitution Act sovereignty McCorvey Brown v. Board of Education Foreign Relations Roberts State Department governments CNN struck down United States states official position same-sex couples health care reform law right first tapes Roe abortion right to an attorney conviction Dollree Mapp Fourth Amendment citizen Korematsu segregated blacks right Ogden McCulloch v. Maryland statute dissent Alito foreign affairs Scalia arguments strikes federal statute Hollingsworth v. Perry appeal California's Proposition 8 jurisdictional voter ballot measure same-sex marriage in California high court United States v. Windsor Edith Windsor estate taxes federal government Defense of Marriage Act of 1996 heterosexual National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius Obama administration Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission Activists rally campaign finance law corporations unions political action committees Texas v. Johnson Gregory Lee Johnson American flag lawyer William Kunstler freedom of speech United States v. Nixon Richard Nixon executive privilege Watergate scandal Dallas County District Attorney Henry Wade felony mother first trimester Gloria Allred Miranda v. Arizona Ernesto Miranda crime police right against self-incrimination confession inadmissible Miranda rights Gideon v. Wainwright burglary Clarence Earl Gideon trial evidence searches and seizures white Washington unconstitutional race Fred Korematsu Japanese-American Mexican-American internment camp World War II rights individual country Bill Clinton Presidential Medal of Freedom Plessy v. Ferguson Homer Plessy separate but equal Dred Scott v. Sandford circuit court freedom free state slavery African-American descent Gibbons v. Ogden interstate commerce state of New York New Jersey lawsuit Thomas Gibbons state Maryland implied power Philadelphia Marbury v. Madison Secretary of State James Madison loyalists William Marbury John Adams judicial Anthony Kennedy opinion displeasure things Kennedy American citizen list a commitment Stephen I Vladeck American University Washington College of Law experts U.S. passport federal law George W. Bush Solicitor General authority diplomatic communication nations people tinderbox Palestinians people