 racial program Diversity Grutter racial discrimination strict scrutiny case benefits segregationists Equal Protection Clause blacks government white Regents of Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke blacks discrimination minorities Hispanics States schools Powell Fourteenth Amendment citizens Constitution constitutional society Texas burden academia good faith Court of Appeals summary judgment judgment leaders people slaveholders District Court United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reason Virginia Thomas, J undergraduate precedents decisions first state analysis Higher consciousness good Law School principle Brown v. Board of Education SAT unconstitutional judicial review missionaries cases positive legislative administrative rights laws school board desegregation Prince Edward County opportunities GPA Richmond v. J. A. Croson Co. judgment opinion Nation engineers public policy public reality Asians Briggs ideal Asian selective schools Reporter of Decisions Gratz v. Bollinger jurisprudence essential explanation experience fairness benefits press critical mass Amend family Ten Percent Law African-American Research proper minority y-axis creation quota Bolling v. Sharpe Stevens, J Scalia, J Ginsburg, J truth Wygant v. Jackson Bd. of Ed. plaintiffs mismatching Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Peña analysis Court of Appeals religion Korematsu national security Sabotage plurality opinion custody stigma Private biases tolerance teachers violence fields enforcement customs war belief peace color blind time Institutions evil authority Plessy Iowa Supreme Court O’Connor, J civilized good barbarous Ten Percent plan Science FISHER v. UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS headnote United States v. Detroit Timber & Lumber Co. Rice v. Cayetano publication print United States Reports Supreme Court of the United States Washington ap campus Caucasian parties deci Cert. case Austin, Texas Texas state university system ance 78 F. 3d 932 holistic community service single-parent English at home responsibilities socioeconomic Texas State Legislature environment Michigan formal expression anecdotal” reports interaction Liberal Arts United States District Court for the Western District of Texas status medical school individual statutory beyond race stereotypes New Hampshire disparate treatment Fullilove v. Klutznick canons Florida iden parties Seattle U. S. 701 Greenawalt Judicial univer dynamic Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan vacates process trial motions broa higher education Missouri v. Jenkins California human suffering Nation impact Japan espionage strong basis in evidence claim father mother mixed-race marriage perceived prejudices collective-bargaining agreement union American Indian Spanish University of Michigan Law School anarchy Lee v. Washington sec proposition mars sky-is-falling equality separate but equal per curiam matter Sarratt fortiori marginal exis tence Northern participation development secure heis historically black colleges Booker T. Washington Thurgood Marshall Martin Luther King, Jr. ethnic stereotypes breaches of the peace knowledge welfare McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Ed. bar ethical political practical realization harmony mores Briggs practice DeFunis v. Odegaard persuasive majority opinion rejected power color theories race mixing public interest eye of the beholder Iowa youths equal before the law equality privileges spirit national fundamental benighted istory Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC Slaveholders Calhoun Senate Central Africa relation Harper Memoir Ideology Faust heathen Mudsill God loving dear God DuBois cts bondage healthful learning benevolent motives federal, state racial discrimination Richard Sander Amici Curiae mean UCLA quarter Occupational Sowell Affirmative Action Around the World elite self-confidence Social Work clustering McWhorter Court of Appeals