Parliament forced to close debating chamber – POLITICO
The European Parliament’s administration has closed part of the building where the main debating chamber is located after cracks were discovered in the ceiling. Klaus Welle, the European Parliament’s secretary-general, announced the decision to close part of the Paul-Henri Spaak building, which is on the Parc Leopold side of rue Wiertz, today. In an email to all Parliament staff, Welle said: “This precautionary measure has become necessary after the discovery of cracks in three of the wooden beams carrying the roof of the plenary chamber, during checks made in the framework of our increased inspection and maintenance policy.” The Paul-Henri Spaak building is split into three sections – A, B and C. Section A, which is closest to Chaussee de Wavre, is the only one affected by the damage to the ceiling. At least 65 staff in this section have been affected by the closure and have been given temporary places to work. Section A contains the press area. Although the main press briefing room is closed, the working area for the press remains open (although it is not accessible through the press entrance to the building).
One of the Parliament’s largest committee rooms – the Anna Lindh Room – is affected by the closure. The committee room is directly beneath the debating chamber. The offices of the Parliament’s president and the secretary-general are in section B of the building and are not affected.
A meeting of the foreign affairs committee and the sub-committee on human rights that was scheduled to take place in the Anna Lindh Room at 3pm will have to be moved to another room. This was a hearing of Stavros Lambrinidis, the newly appointed EU special representative for human rights.   Welle said that the cause of the damage could not be determined so the decision was taken to close part of the building until the source of the problem is identified.
“We are relieved that this problem has been discovered in time as a result of a rigorous inspection system,” said Jaume Duch, a Parliament spokesman. “The Parliament has decided to take strong measures as a matter of precaution and prevention.”   
The next scheduled meeting that would involve the use of the debating chamber in Brussels is on 8 October. Two plenary sessions are scheduled for October in Strasbourg.
The roof of the European Parliament’s main debating chamber at its Strasbourg building collapsed in August 2008. The Parliament held two plenary sessions in Brussels while the work in Strasbourg was being carried out.
French MEPs in the centre-right European People’s Party (EPP) group have called for Brussels plenary sessions to be held in Strasbourg until the Brussels building is safe to use.
A statement issued on behalf of Jean-Pierre Audy, the leader of the 30 French EPP MEPs, said that the delegation was “increasingly concerned” about safety problems at European Parliament buildings in Brussels. In addition to the recent problems, the statement said a fire in September 2001 had “paralysed” the Parliament.
Klaus Welle's email to staff Temporary closure of Section A of the  Paul-Henri Spaak  Building         In agreement with the President and the responsible Vice-President, I have taken the decision to temporarily close Section A of the Paul-Henri Spaak (PHS) Building.     This precautionary measure has become necessary after the discovery of cracks in three of the wooden beams carrying the roof of the plenary chamber, during checks made in the framework of our increased inspection and maintenance policy. The causes of the cracks could not be determined which makes the temporary closure of the Section A of the Paul-Henri Spaak building necessary until the source of the problem can be identified.     In the interest of our colleagues, this precautionary measure exceeds the partial closure that was recommended by the experts. All affected colleagues have already been allocated alternative workspaces, which will be furnished and equipped with computers and telephones by Monday afternoon at the latest.     In case of any questions or problems, an info point is open in the Yehudi Menuhin space (1st floor of Section C in the Paul-Henri Spaak Building).     I would like to thank colleagues from Directorates General INLO, ITEC and Security, who have made this immediate reaction possible.     Klaus Welle