The global decline of cheetah Acinonyx jubatus and what it means for conservation
Here, we compile and present the most comprehensive data available on cheetah distribution and status. Our analysis shows dramatic declines of cheetah across its distributional range. Most cheetah occur outside protected areas, where they are exposed to multiple threats, but there is little information on population status. Simulation modeling shows that, where cheetah population growth rates are suppressed outside protected areas, extinction risk increases markedly. This result can be generalized to other “protection-reliant” species, and a decision tree is provided to improve their extinction risk estimation. Ultimately, the persistence of protection-reliant species depends on their survival outside and inside protected areas and requires a holistic approach to conservation that engages rather than alienates local communities.
Establishing and maintaining protected areas (PAs) are key tools for biodiversity conservation. However, this approach is insufficient for many species, particularly those that are wide-ranging and sparse. The cheetah Acinonyx jubatus exemplifies such a species and faces extreme challenges to its survival. Here, we show that the global population is estimated at ∼7,100 individuals and confined to 9% of its historical distributional range. However, the majority of current range (77%) occurs outside of PAs, where the species faces multiple threats. Scenario modeling shows that, where growth rates are suppressed outside PAs, extinction rates increase rapidly as the proportion of population protected declines. Sensitivity analysis shows that growth rates within PAs have to be high if they are to compensate for declines outside. Susceptibility of cheetah to rapid decline is evidenced by recent rapid contraction in range, supporting an uplisting of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List threat assessment to endangered. Our results are applicable to other protection-reliant species, which may be subject to systematic underestimation of threat when there is insufficient information outside PAs. Ultimately, conserving many of these species necessitates a paradigm shift in conservation toward a holistic approach that incentivizes protection and promotes sustainable human–wildlife coexistence across large multiple-use landscapes.
The spread and dominance of humans across the world during the Anthropocene have precipitated a sixth global biodiversity extinction crisis (1). To maximize biodiversity retention through this period of rapid change, scarce conservation resources need to be targeted toward species and ecosystems that are most threatened. However, in the absence of complete information, reliable assessment of threat is challenging. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List criteria are the primary tools for identifying and categorizing species-based extinction risk, enabling prioritization of species facing the highest threat (2). However, much of the information used for assessment comes from relatively well-monitored populations, usually within protected areas (PAs) (3), although across a species’ distributional range, populations are likely to be exposed to variable threat levels and differing management regimes (4).
Inaccuracies in threat assessment are particularly problematic for large terrestrial mammals, which can be especially vulnerable to anthropogenic impacts, such as habitat loss and fragmentation, human–wildlife conflict, illegal wildlife trade, and overharvesting for bushmeat or traditional use (5
The cheetah Acinonyx jubatus is a large carnivore that faces particularly acute challenges during the Anthropocene. It is one of the most wide-ranging carnivores, with home ranges documented in excess of 3,000 km (10, 11) and movements of translocated animals exceeding 1,000 km (11). However, densities seldom exceed 0.02/km and have been recorded as low as 0.0002/km (12). Historically widespread across Africa and southwestern Asia, cheetah are now known to occur in only 9% of their past distributional range (Fig. 1). Not only has there been a worrying contraction in global cheetah range, but current range is extremely fragmented. The global population is tentatively estimated at around 7,100 adult and adolescent cheetah distributed across 33 populations (Table 1). More than one-half of the world’s cheetah occur in a single transboundary population stretching across six countries in southern Africa (Table 1). Only one other population comprises more than 1,000 individuals, and most populations (91%) comprise 200 individuals or fewer. Six populations do not even reach double digits. Ongoing population trends are largely unknown; however, of 18 populations where trends could be assigned, 14 were judged to be in decline, 3 were stable, and only 1 was stable or increasing (Table 1). Known cheetah distribution in (A) Africa and (B) Asia. Gray shading denotes historical range, and red shading shows the range where cheetah are known to be resident. Boundaries of PAs under IUCN categories I–IV are marked in blue. Summary of known cheetah distributional range and populations In Asia, the decline of cheetah has been particularly precipitous. Cheetah have been extirpated from 98% of their historical range, and a critically endangered population of Asiatic cheetah Acinonyx jubatus venaticus survives only in Iran (Table 1). This remnant population is tentatively estimated to comprise fewer than 50 individuals distributed across three core areas of range (13). The rest of the world’s cheetah occur in Africa, spread across 30 fragmented populations that are now restricted to only 13% of their historical distributional range (14–16) (Fig. 1 and Table 1). Across their surviving range, cheetah populations vary in the level of threat that they experience. Most resident range (77%) is on unprotected land, which supports an estimated 67% of the cheetah population (Table 1). Here, cheetah face increased pressures from widespread human–wildlife conflict, prey loss caused by overhunting and bushmeat harvesting, habitat loss and fragmentation, and illegal trade (14–16). The species thus faces spatially heterogeneous threats that are higher outside than inside PAs, whereas much of the data available for threat assessment comes from within PAs, which support the highest reported densities of cheetah (∼0.02/km) (17, 18). Populations on unprotected lands and in small or poorly managed PAs, where they are exposed to multiple threats, are likely to be in decline. However, because of the considerable survey and monitoring effort required, particularly for a wide-ranging and elusive species like the cheetah, such declines are likely to go undetected.
Spatial variation in threat across protection gradients in a species’ range is expected to affect overall extinction risk. To assess these impacts for cheetah, we used scenario modeling to (i) explore the relationship between extinction risk and population size while varying both the proportion of land protected and the growth rate on unprotected lands and (ii) predict population trends. We assumed that populations were stable when protected, which is observed in large PAs (19). Our model revealed markedly higher extinction probabilities when the percentage of land under protection was low and when growth rates outside PAs were less than replacement (Fig. 2). When there was no migration or medium migration (5% of the subpopulation per annum) between protected and unprotected land, there was a rapid increase in extinction rate when the proportion of land protected dropped below 40% (Fig. 2 A and B). When the migration rate was high (10% of the subpopulation per annum), extinction rate was high, even when 80% of the population was protected and the reduction in growth rate outside PAs was modest (Fig. 2C). Long-term studies of cheetah suggest that migration rates of between 5 and 10% are likely to be realistic (Materials and Methods). Scenario modeling of a population of cheetah living on unprotected and protected lands. Starting population is 200 individuals distributed at a varying proportion between protected and unprotected lands (x axis). Multiplicative growth rate (lambda) inside PAs is 1.0, but outside PAs, it is allowed to vary from this rate down to 0.8. Graphs show estimated extinction rates under three migration scenarios: (A) no migration between protected and unprotected lands, (B) medium migration rate between protected and unprotected lands of 0.05 and SD of 0.025, and (C) high migration rate of 0.1 and SD of 0.05. Results are reported from 1,000 simulations over 50 y. We simulated the global cheetah population by setting the initial population equal to the estimated population of 7,000 individuals, of which 33% occurs in PAs (Table 1). When the population growth rate outside PAs was 10% less than replacement and migration rate was 5% of the subpopulation per annum, simulated populations declined by 53% over 15 y or three cheetah generations (Fig. 3A). When the growth rate outside PAs was 20% less than replacement, then the decline was 70%. Changing the migration rate had little effect on overall population decline (Fig. S1). If the growth rate inside PAs is above replacement, then this slows the rate of decline; however, growth rates need to be high to completely mitigate against declines (Fig. 3B and Fig. S2). Simulated (A) population trajectories over three generations (15 y) of the global cheetah population and (B) sensitivity analysis to changes in the growth rate within PAs. Starting population was the current total estimated global population size of 7,000 individuals, with 33% of the population on protected lands (Table 1). The dashed lines depict results from a multiplicative growth rate (lambda) of 0.9 on unprotected lands, and the solid lines show 0.8. Migration rate was set at 0.05 with SD of 0.025. Results are reported from 1,000 simulations, and all other parameters of the model are as described for Fig. 2. The gray dotted lines depict the 50% threshold for uplisting to endangered status using the IUCN Red List criterion A3b [a population size reduction of ≥50% projected or suspected to be met within the next three generations based on an index of abundance (28)]. Simulated population trajectories over three generations (15 y) for the global cheetah population under different migration rates. Starting population was the current total estimated population size of 7,000 individuals, with 33% of the population on protected lands (Table 1). The dashed lines depict results from a multiplicative growth rate (lambda) of 0.9 on unprotected lands, and the solid lines show 0.8. Migration rates between protected and unprotected lands were set at (A) 0.0 and (B) 0.1 with an SD of 0.05. Results are reported from 1,000 simulations, and all other parameters of the model are as described in Fig. 2. The gray dotted lines depict the 50% threshold for uplisting to endangered status as required by the IUCN Red List criterion A3b. Simulated population trajectories over three generations (15 y) for the global cheetah population with different positive growth rates on protected lands. Starting population was the current total estimated population size of 7,000 individuals, with 33% of the population on protected lands (Table 1). The dashed lines depict results from a multiplicative growth rate (lambda) of 0.9 on unprotected lands, and the solid lines show 0.8. Migration rates between protected and unprotected lands were set at 0.05 with an SD of 0.025. Mean lambda values on protected land were set at (A) 1.025 and (B) 1.05. Results are reported from 1,000 simulations, and all other parameters of the model are as described in Fig. 2. The gray dotted lines depict the 50% threshold for uplisting to endangered status as required by the IUCN Red List criterion A3b. Evidence of recent cheetah population declines is consistent with modeling results. For example, in Zimbabwe, where cheetah distribution is relatively well-known, cheetah were distributed across a contiguous population encompassing 132,931 km in 2007, which contracted to a fragmented population occupying only 49,124 km by 2015 (16, 20, 21). This 63% range contraction over a short period, equivalent to a loss of 11% of distributional range per year, was largely because of the disappearance of cheetah outside PAs associated with major changes in land tenure (22). The Zimbabwean cheetah population is also estimated to have declined by at least 85% between 1999 and 2015 (20), equivalent to an annual decline of 13%. Similarly, there have been recent large-scale extinctions of cheetah across western and central Africa (23, 24). Ongoing rapid change is likely across the African continent because of changes in land tenure (22), large-scale fencing (25), land grabs (26), and political instability (27). However, cheetah status in areas where they are most threatened is usually uncertain, because those areas lack data. On this basis, in line with the precautionary approach and in the absence of alternative information, our analysis suggests that cheetah should be uplisted to endangered under IUCN Red List criterion A3b (28).
Our model is generic, depending primarily on data on the mean and variance of the growth rate, and shows that extinction risk can be seriously underestimated if differences in population growth rates on protected and unprotected land are not taken into account. We assumed two panmictic subpopulations: one protected and one unprotected. In reality, populations are likely to be much more fragmented, which increases extinction risk, because small isolated populations are more extinction-prone than large connected ones (29). We also assumed that the PA subpopulation was stable and hence, unable to compensate for pressures on unprotected populations. This assumption may hold for many large mammal species. Indeed, given widespread evidence of wildlife declines in many PAs (30), our assumption of stability may even be overly optimistic. If populations are able to grow inside PAs, this increase will help mitigate against declines outside PAs; however, growth rates in excess of 8% per annum inside PAs are needed to counteract a decline of more than 10% per annum outside PAs (Fig. 3B). There is growing evidence that many populations are subject to source–sink dynamics, whereby protected source populations may supplement declining sink populations (31). Our results show that, when sources are unable to mitigate against declines, then there may be catastrophic consequences on populations. Populations of wide-ranging species are particularly vulnerable to edge effects on PA boundaries, which will damage their capacity to act as sources and compensate for sinks outside (32). Worryingly, there is also increasing evidence for exacerbated sink effects or “ecological traps,” where species are attracted to sinks or “traps” that may be outside PAs, either because they harbor important resources or to avoid competition or predation (33). Accordingly, our modeling scenarios are not unrealistic, and results may be generalized to those other large mammal species that are assessed to be protection-reliant. Such species may have substantial range outside PAs but are vulnerable to rapid anthropogenic change, which results in populations outside PAs acting as sinks. Our analysis shows that assessment of threat may be underestimated for protection-reliant species, requiring urgent reassessment of extinction risk. We provide a decision tree to assist this assessment process based on our simulation results that takes account of the proportion of distribution or population outside PAs and evidence on threats (Fig. 4). The term protection-reliant differs in important respects from the conservation-dependent subcategory within the lower-risk category used in the IUCN Red List until 2001 (34). Conservation-dependent species are not threatened but might be so if conservation measures are withdrawn. By contrast, protection-reliant species may often be threatened and additionally, face elevated risks of extinction because of increased pressures outside PAs, where a substantial proportion of their population persists. Clearly, an accurate assessment of threat is a key step in identifying those protection-reliant species that are most vulnerable to extinction; however, for some species, the PA system may be insufficient to secure long-term survival. In the case of cheetah, PAs support only an estimated 2,360 individuals, and many PAs are too small to sustain populations that are viable in the long term. For such protection-reliant species, a different approach may be needed to halt declines outside PAs and reduce impacts of edge effects on populations inside PAs to maintain connectivity and secure long-term viability of populations across large multiple-use landscapes. Although some have advocated fencing to reduce edge effects, such interventions are likely to have considerable negative impacts on ecosystems and communities, whereas the massive areas required for wide-ranging species, like cheetah, make the costs prohibitive (25). Our analysis shows that growth rates within PAs have to be unrealistically high to fully compensate for declining populations outside PAs (Fig. 3B); thus, protection-reliant species are likely to respond better to an approach focused on increasing their growth rates on unprotected lands. Thus, safeguarding protection-reliant species, like cheetah, may require a paradigm shift in conservation away from a primary focus on protection toward a holistic framework that additionally incorporates incentive-based approaches (35). For this shift to occur, new policy, management, and financial tools are needed that promote coexistence between people and wildlife outside and adjacent to PAs (36). This innovation will require concerted action from governments and effective cross-sectoral engagement across the conservation and economic development communities. Securing sustainable solutions for wildlife and people will not be easy, particularly where threatened species may share their range with marginalized and vulnerable communities and where human development challenges are substantial. However, unless this transformation is achieved, the future of wide-ranging and highly threatened species, such as cheetah, is in doubt.