Discovery of fairy circles in Australia supports self-organization theory
Pattern-formation theory predicts that vegetation gap patterns, such as the fairy circles of Namibia, emerge through the action of pattern-forming biomass–water feedbacks and that such patterns should be found elsewhere in water-limited systems around the world. We report here the exciting discovery of fairy-circle patterns in the remote outback of Australia. Using fieldwork, remote sensing, spatial pattern analysis, mathematical modeling, and pattern-formation theory we show that the Australian gap patterns share with their Namibian counterparts the same characteristics but are driven by a different biomass–water feedback. These observations are in line with a central universality principle of pattern-formation theory and support the applicability of this theory to wider contexts of spatial self-organization in ecology.
Vegetation gap patterns in arid grasslands, such as the “fairy circles” of Namibia, are one of nature’s greatest mysteries and subject to a lively debate on their origin. They are characterized by small-scale hexagonal ordering of circular bare-soil gaps that persists uniformly in the landscape scale to form a homogeneous distribution. Pattern-formation theory predicts that such highly ordered gap patterns should be found also in other water-limited systems across the globe, even if the mechanisms of their formation are different. Here we report that so far unknown fairy circles with the same spatial structure exist 10,000 km away from Namibia in the remote outback of Australia. Combining fieldwork, remote sensing, spatial pattern analysis, and process-based mathematical modeling, we demonstrate that these patterns emerge by self-organization, with no correlation with termite activity; the driving mechanism is a positive biomass–water feedback associated with water runoff and biomass-dependent infiltration rates. The remarkable match between the patterns of Australian and Namibian fairy circles and model results indicate that both patterns emerge from a nonuniform stationary instability, supporting a central universality principle of pattern-formation theory. Applied to the context of dryland vegetation, this principle predicts that different systems that go through the same instability type will show similar vegetation patterns even if the feedback mechanisms and resulting soil–water distributions are different, as we indeed found by comparing the Australian and the Namibian fairy-circle ecosystems. These results suggest that biomass–water feedbacks and resultant vegetation gap patterns are likely more common in remote drylands than is currently known.
Pattern-formation theory (1) and the influence of Alan Turing’s work on understanding biological morphogenesis (2) are increasingly recognized in environmental sciences (3). Vegetation patterns resulting from self-organization occur frequently in water-limited ecosystems and, similar to Turing patterns, show pattern morphologies that change from gaps to stripes (labyrinths) to spots with decreasing plant-available moisture (4
Banded or striped vegetation patterns such as tiger bush or mulga are well known from remote sensing (4, 11, 12), but landscape-scale evidence for gap patterns with circular bare-soil patches is very rare. The archetype of such a gap pattern is that of the fairy circles (FCs) of Namibia, which cover vast areas in a narrow range of climatic conditions (13, 14). However, the origin of the Namibian FCs is still unknown. Several competing hypotheses exist ranging from vegetation self-organization (13
According to pattern-formation theory, the large-scale order that emerges from a uniform state obeys a universal pattern whose particular form is dictated by the instability that the uniform state undergoes (8, 22). The fairy-circle gap pattern observed in Namibia (15) is likely an example of a universal hexagonal pattern that, according to pattern-formation theory, is induced by a nonuniform stationary instability (3, 21
Here, we report on the discovery and analysis of such a hexagonal gap pattern, 10,000 km away from Namibia in the remote outback of Western Australia. Using a comprehensive approach consisting of fieldwork, remote sensing, spatial pattern analysis, and process-based mathematical modeling we reveal in the following that this gap pattern is the consequence of a pattern-forming biomass–water feedback that differs from the feedback that drives the formation of FCs in Namibia.
The Australian FCs exist on flat terrain in the sparsely populated Pilbara region, encircling a radius of ∼10–20 km from east to southeast around the small mining town of Newman (Fig. 1). According to the dynamical definition of aridity (6), the Pilbara region (with an aridity index <0.2) can be classified as arid because of the bistability of bare soil and vegetation patterns implied by the coexistence of large bare-soil domains next to patterned domains (Fig. 1B). The area around Newman experiences strong long-term rainfall fluctuation (37–619 mm) around the 327-mm mean annual precipitation, and the annual evaporation is 3,200–3,400 mm (26). Monthly mean maximum air temperatures range from 22.9 °C in June to 39.2 °C in January, but daily maxima may exceed 45 °C in the summer months. Elevation of all analyzed plots in the area (fieldwork and aerial image analysis; SI Appendix, Fig. S1) ranged from 513 to 522 m. On that flat area, the FCs prevail on soils with loamy-sand to silt-loam textures being dark reddish brown in color.
The Australian ecosystem is special in that it shows in a single region, with the dominant spinifex grass Triodia basedowii E. Pritz, the spectrum of vegetation states (Fig. 2) that are normally seen in different regions along the rainfall gradient. These include gaps, stripes, spots, bare soil, and transient patterns such as rings (27), suggesting an inherent multiplicity of stable states that has become visible due to local state transitions (28) induced by frequent fire disturbances (29, 30).
Spatial pattern analysis of aerial images (Fig. 3) demonstrates that the Australian FCs (plot C1) show nearly identical spatial characteristics to the Namibian FCs (plot G1; cf. ref. 15). They are best depicted by the pair-correlation function g(r), a neighborhood-density function that reveals strong regularity with g(r) = 0 for smallest scales, a clear peak at r ∼ 10 m radius, which is the approximate mean nearest-neighbor distance of FCs, damped oscillation of g(r) around the null model distribution of complete spatial randomness, and large-scale homogeneity of the pattern with g(r) and its cumulative counterpart, L(r), remaining inside the simulation envelopes. The first pronounced peak of g(r) with high amplitude above the upper simulation envelope of the null model indicates a hexagonal spatial arrangement where each FC has six nearest neighbors located at approximately the same distance from the focal circle. The second significant minimum of g(r) at around 17 m distance reflects the radius with “empty space” behind the first (nearest) neighbors. As shown in detail for Namibian FCs (16), these spatial characteristics lead also to two fundamental properties of the Australian FCs: a hexagonal spacing with an extraordinary degree of spatial ordering (regularity) at small scales r < 50 m and homogeneity at large scales (Fig. 3 B and E and SI Appendix, Fig. S2 and Table S1). The Australian FCs have a mean diameter of 4 m and the size of neighboring FC areas is negatively correlated up to r ∼ 9 m distance (Fig. 3H and SI Appendix, Tables S1 and S3). As also reported for Namibia (16), this below-average size of closely located FC areas is equivalent to a significant increase in the vegetation coverage, because the grasses then benefit from the higher density of the water-supplying gaps. Finally, it is remarkable that the proportion of Voronoi tiles with six corners is in all analyzed plots the largest, 46.9% on average, which is nearly identical to the 43–46% found in three different regions of Namibia. This also indicates the dominance of hexagonal FC spacing in both ecosystems (16).
Our field results strongly support the existence of a pattern-forming biomass–water feedback, where water transport is in the form of overland-water flow induced by significant edaphic differences between the bare-soil gaps and the vegetation matrix. Significant differences among the three environments, gap center, gap periphery, and vegetation matrix were found for particle size distribution (clay, silt, and sand contents), hydraulic conductivity, and initial and final infiltration (SI Appendix, Table S2). Gap centers have significantly higher amounts of clay and lower infiltration rates than the vegetation matrix. A clay-rich mechanical crust is developed in the topsoil following the impact of rain drops that cause particle dispersion and a classified deposition of the fine particles on the surface. Compared with the more sandy soil textures in the vegetation matrix, this layer of the gap is compact and hard. The initial infiltration rate (I) of the gaps in dry soil is 0.07 mm/min, decreasing quickly to a final infiltration rate (I) of 0.03 mm/min. Thus, rainfall events in the arid area around Newman with rates exceeding 0.03 mm/min (26) cause excess rain to flow as runoff water over the gap surface toward the vegetation matrix. The runoff is induced by the sharp infiltration contrast between the gaps and the matrix, which makes the hardened gaps an important additional source of water for the vegetation matrix.
While supporting the grasses at the periphery and the matrix, the overland-water flow acts against seedling establishment and growth in the gaps by reducing the amount of infiltrated water there (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). Additionally, the hard soil crust in the gap causes plant death because root growth is hampered and high soil-surface temperatures, which can reach 75 °C, and the associated high evaporation rates provide a hostile microenvironment for plant survival. In contrast, the shading within the vegetation matrix and its periphery reduces surface temperatures by more than 20 °C and thus the evaporation rates, and thereby further facilitates the grass growth.
We complemented our empirical findings with numerical and mathematical analyses of a process-based model for water-limited vegetation introduced by Gilad et al. (31). The model was extended to account for the high ratio of evaporation rate to infiltration rate of surface water in bare soil and was further adapted to account for species with confined root zones such as T. basedowii (32). Model simulations produced FC patterns that agreed in all essential spatial characteristics with the observed Australian FC pattern (Fig. 3 C, F, and I). These patterns, which approach periodic hexagonal gap patterns at long times, appear as a result of a nonuniform stationary instability of the uniform vegetation state (Fig. 4A, Inset). The confined root zones of T. basedowii rule out water conduction by laterally spread root systems as a significant water-transport mechanism (22). Transport by soil–water diffusion is also unlikely due to the low infiltration rate and hydraulic conductivity in the gaps. These conclusions leave overland-water flow as the dominant mechanism (8). This is consistent with the observed infiltration contrast between vegetated and bare areas and implies in-phase spatial profiles of biomass and soil water (7) (i.e., higher water content in the vegetation matrix compared with the gaps). A direct model prediction resulting from the high ratio of evaporation rate to infiltration rate is a large stability range of the bare-soil state, even at relatively high precipitation values, as the bifurcation diagram shows (Fig. 4A). This accounts for the existence of large bare-soil patches next to vegetated areas as the model simulation and the aerial image in Fig. 4 A and C show (see also Fig. 1B). Altogether, these results strongly support the view of the Australian FCs as a self-organization phenomenon driven by a positive feedback between local vegetation growth and overland-water flow toward the growth location induced by differential infiltration (“infiltration feedback”) (8, 22).
To test whether termites or ants play a role (18, 33, 34) in the formation of Australian FCs, we studied their presence in the gaps in the field. The majority of FCs lacked any signs of termite or ant activity and the proportion of gaps with termite signs (either clear mounds, low pavement mounds, or foraging holes in flat surface) were very variable, with 47%, 60%, and only 33% in the three field sites C1, L1, and L2, respectively. Furthermore, the characteristics and the number of termite signs per gap did not correlate with the size of the gaps (R = 0.0064, P = 0.6; SI Appendix, Table S3 and Fig. S4). We also mapped the spatial distribution of all termite and ant nest locations with a GPS in the field site C2 whose vegetation was totally burnt just a few weeks before field measurements were taken. After the fire, signs of insect activity and round clay pans of fairy circles were clearly visible, making their identification easier (SI Appendix, Fig. S5 A and B). Based on an earlier orthophoto from 2014, we counted in the unburnt plot 328 fairy circles, but only 50 termite signs were found in the field. In contrast to the even spacing of fairy circles, termite or ant nests were typically aggregated and heterogeneously distributed (Fig. 5 E and F) and thus cannot explain the extremely regular FC pattern spreading homogeneously over the landscape (Fig. 5D). The spatial cross-correlation analysis with the L-function confirmed our observations from the field. If they were present, termite and ant nest locations tended to be located at the edge or partly outside of fairy circles. Because both termites and ants were similarly attracted to the gap edges (Fig. 5 G–I), we assume that these areas are favorable microenvironments for the insects, possibly because the edge interface between bare soil and vegetation matrix receives more water from runoff, and spinifex vegetation along the edge can be particularly dense and rich in shade (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). In summary, we found that neither the presence–absence data of termites and ants nor their nest position along the gap edge or their spatially variable density patterns can explain the distribution of the Australian FCs and their large diameters, which may exceed 6 to 7 m. Moreover, insect activity can also not explain the transitions of circular bare-soil patches to typical labyrinthine vegetation patterns or the large bare-soil areas that coexist together with fairy circles in the same area (Figs. 1B and 2B).
Overall, our results demonstrate a remarkable congruency in the patterns between Australian and Namibian FCs, suggesting that spatial self-organization, driven by scale-dependent biomass–water feedbacks, is the causal agent of both phenomena. However, the particular feedbacks at work in the two ecosystems are different, because the mechanisms of water transport from gaps to vegetation matrix are different (see illustration in Fig. 6). As observed in field experiments (13, 18) and predicted by model studies (21), the soil–water content in the Namibian FC gaps exceeds the content in the vegetation matrix, but the opposite is found in the Australian FCs. This is because the mechanism of water transport in the Namibian ecosystem with porous sand is soil–water diffusion, whereas in the Australian ecosystem with hard clay pans, it is overland-water flow. The sandy gaps in the Namibian ecosystem form large below-ground water reservoirs that sustain the surrounding water-consuming vegetation by soil–water diffusion (13, 15, 16). By contrast, the Australian FC gaps act as above-ground hard clay pans that produce runoff toward the surrounding vegetation matrix. As shown in model studies (7), the different mechanisms result in opposite biomass–water relationships; in-phase spatial biomass–water distributions in Australia and antiphase distributions in Namibia (Fig. 6). Antiphase distributions in Namibia have indeed been observed in field studies (13, 18). Our field results for the Australian FCs are so far less conclusive; however, our irrigation experiment and detailed soil analyses (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 H and I and Table S2), as well as field observations of reduced infiltration rates and increased runoff on crust layers in different T. basedowii regions (32), are consistent with the model prediction of in-phase spatial biomass–water distributions.
An open question is to what extent hybrid states and hybrid-state transitions, manifested as birth and death of FCs and observed in the Namibian ecosystem (21), exist also in the Australian ecosystem. Hybrid states have not been identified in the model-parameter range used in this study and have not been studied yet in the field. This may suggest a significant difference between the responses of the two ecosystems to rainfall variability (21, 28), which is more stochastic in Namibia, but further model and empirical studies are needed to clarify this point. Upcoming research on the Australian vegetation patterns should also investigate the time scales over which FCs emerge, expand, and die, and how edaphic factors influence the transitional pattern morphologies from gaps to labyrinths and large bare-soil areas. Recurrent fire disturbances play a key role in these spinifex systems (30), and their potential effect on revealing the inherent multiplicity of stable vegetation states and on inducing transient patterns such as spinifex rings needs to be studied in future.