Mercury crossing the sun is rare phenomenon which only happens 13 times every century
Mercury grabbed the world's attention yesterday during its seven and a half hour journey across the face of the sun.
This rare astronomical phenomenon, called the Transit of Mercury, only occurs 13 or 14 times every century, and the next time we will be able to see it is in 2019.
For those who missed the show, Nasa and Esa have released two stunning timelapse videos of the event, showing the transit in all its glory. 
Mercury grabbed the world's attention yesterday during its seven and a half hour journey across the face of the sun. Now Nasa has released a stunning timelapse of the event. Mercury is the tiny black dot that begins center left and travels right
'As the smallest planet in the solar system crossed the face of the sun on Monday 9 May, one of Esa's smallest satellites was watching,' the European Space Agency wrote.
'Proba-2, smaller than a cubic metre, monitors the sun from Earth orbit with an extreme ultraviolet telescope called Swap.
'It was able to spot Mercury's transit of the sun as a small black disk roughly four pixels in diameter.' 
Nasa's video, meanwhile, shows several different views from the Solar Dynamics Observatory was launched in 2010 to study the sun’s solar atmosphere.
It studies the sun in a number of different wavelengths, which Nasa has included in the timelapse.
Different wavelengths convey information about different components of the sun's surface and atmosphere, so scientists use them to paint a full picture of our constantly changing and varying star.
Yellow light, for example, generally emanates from material of about 10,000 degrees F (5700 degrees C), which represents the surface of the sun. 
Extreme ultraviolet light of 94 Angstroms, which is typically colorized in green in SDO images, comes from atoms that are about 11 million degrees F (6,300,000 degrees C) and is a good wavelength for looking at solar flares, which can reach such high temperatures.
Skywatchers were warned against looking at Mercury with with the naked eye or binoculars, but astronomy groups worldwide offered the chance view it through telescopes. 
Images from around the world show Mercury as a tiny black circle slowly moving across the sun's giant yellow disc.
Although Mercury - which is the planet closest to the sun - passes between the Earth and the sun every 116 days, it normally does so at the wrong angle for us to see it.
In essence, the sun is being eclipsed, although only very partially, as the diameter of Mercury is 158 times smaller than that of the Sun. Which is why it shows up as nothing more than a black pinprick. 
The first person to predict the Transit of Mercury was the renowned German astronomer, Johannes Kepler, who informed the world that it would take place on November 7, 1631. Unfortunately, Kepler died in 1630, and so he was never able to witness it.
The first person to see the planet pass in front of the sun in that 1631 transit was instead a French astronomer called Pierre Gassendi, from his observatory in Paris.
Gassendi almost missed the event because the sun was obscured by mist and clouds. However, at around 9 o'clock that morning they cleared and he saw it. The next transit would not be seen for another 20 years. 
Back in the 17th and 18th centuries, observing transits of Mercury - and indeed transits of Venus – was vital in measuring the distance between the Earth and the sun, and also in establishing the size of the sun itself.
The first part of the transit was captured in this video clip from Nasa, showing the inner most planet passing in front of its parent star
The mathematics is somewhat tricky, but the same sorts of measurements are used by astronomers today. 
During the last Transit of Mercury in 2006, scientists from Brazil, California and Hawaii measured the size of the sun with immense accuracy by establishing precisely how long the planet - which travels at 30 miles a second - took to pass across it. 
The team established that the sun's diameter is 865,374 miles, compared to the Earth's 7,918 miles.
As Mercury is a relatively small planet, with a diameter of just 3,032 miles, it shows up as a very tiny speck against the surface of the massive sun.
Indeed, when Gassendi first saw the 1631 transit, he thought that the speck was merely a sunspot - a dark irregular patch on the sun's surface - because astronomers in the 17th century reckoned that Mercury was ten times larger than it is. 
It was only when the 'sunspot' appeared to move that he realised that he was looking at Mercury – just as Kepler had predicted.
It's important to remember that the Transit of Mercury is not as spectacular as when the sun is eclipsed or partially eclipsed by the Moon, as happened over the UK in March last year.
Nasa scientists have combined data from the Messenger probe to create the first topographical map of Mercury, showing the highs and lows of the closest planet to the sun 