Maria Sharapova v Simona Halep, French Open 2014 women's final: live
WRAP: For all the talk of this being Halep's first ever grand slam final, the Romanian looked at home on the big stage and against a lesser opponent would've picked up a maiden major title today. But Sharapova raised her level when she needed too, outmuscling and outpowering her opponent despite suffering with her service game and gifting the No 4 seed a number of points with her high number of double faults. It was the women's final the Parisians craved, one that went the distance for the first time since 2001 when Halep managed to dig deep in the second set tie-break with Sharapova two points from clinching the match in straight sets. Despite Sharapova's superior experience of finals, the match continued to ebb and flow in the third. A crucial hold in the fourth game looked to give Sharapova the edge only for Halep to break back for 4-all. With the chips down this past fortnight, Sharapova has showed her resolve, and she did it again here, breaking straight back and comfortably holding at the death to wrap up a match which lasted over three hours. Thanks for joining us today, please come back tomorrow as we bring you coverage of Novak Djokovic against Rafael Nadal.
"I never thought seven, eight years ago that I would win more Roland Garros titles than anywhere else. I'm so emotional right now, I can't even talk."
Sharapova* 6-4, 6-7, 6-4 Halep A fifth straight point for Sharapova puts her closer to her fifth grand slam title. Make that six as she volleys home and Halep drags the next return into the tramlines. It's three match points for Sharapova, and she only needs one as she drills a deep forehand into the corner. Halep gets on the end of it, but she lifts it high and it lands wide. SHARAPOVA BEATS HALEP TO WIN FRENCH OPEN.
Sharapova 6-4, 6-7, 5-4 Halep* Sharpova is pinned to the baseline again but this time manages to claw a forehand from behind her and load it with enough topspin that moves it out of Halep's reach as she races to three break points. She manages to get enough on a first serve return which Halep manages to retrieve but Sharapova picks up the short ball and dispatches it to leave her serving for the match and a second French Open title. SHARAPOVA BREAKS.
Sharapova* 6-4, 6-7, 4-4 Halep Jekyll and Hyde from Sharapova again on her serve with a double fault on the second point followed by a third ace to bring the game all square at 30-all. Another great defence from Halep keeps Sharapova behind the baseline. The Russian thinks she's spotted an opening and tries to edge to the net, but Halep fires a deep return and Sharapova can't get the ball out from under her feet and it's another break point shot to the Romanian. Another double from Sharapova and Halep has a break back, all too easily again. HALEP BREAKS.
Sharapova 6-4, 6-7, 4-3 Halep* At 30-all Sharapova goes for a big winner but her forehand hits the tape and this time she doesn't get a lucky bounce. Halep comfortably takes the next two points and the pressure is back on Sharapova.
Sharapova* 6-4, 6-7, 4-2 Halep That break has given Sharapova an extra lift and she bulldozes her way to three successive points for three game points. When Sharapova has been on her game today, Halep has been outpowered. It's an easy hold as Sharapova leaps on a short return and the focus and momentum is back with the 2012 champ.
Sharapova 6-4, 6-7, 3-2 Halep* Halep is caught cold again at the start of her service game and slow to react to one return as Sharapova steals a march at 30-0 and then makes it three break points with some great defensive play. The pair exchange a series of backhands on the next before Sharapova's forehand misfires and Halep saves one break. A second is saved, but she can't survive a third as she slaps the ball into the bottom of the net. SHARAPOVA BREAKS.
Sharapova* 6-4, 6-7, 2-2 Halep A series of first serves is just the tonic for the former world No 1 who attempts to shorten the rallies and deny her busy and ever-efficient opponent a look in. It appears to be paying off as she moves to 40-15 but she's pegged back to 40-all when she can't get up and over a regulation backhand and the nerves start to settle in again. Her trusty friend the net cord comes to her aid as Halep watches as her return lands back in her half, but luckily she's given another shot at deuce when Sharapova gets her court dimensions slightly off again. A third deuce later and Halep whallops a volley home and manages to stop herself from sliding into the net to bring up a second break point. Sharapova saves the day again with a forehand return which stops dead, leaving Halep unable to get underneath it as the game moves past seven minutes. A strong first serve which kicks up and throws Halep off allows Sharapova time to breathe a sigh of relief again and she finally secures a vital hold when she gets on top of the next rally and forces Halep to hit wide. Sharapova looks to her corner shaking both fists, boy did she like that.
Sharapova 6-4, 6-7, 1-2 Halep* Sharapova is trying to outmuscle her way past Halep but the Romanian just won't lie down. Halep hangs in one rally but Sharapova finally wears her opponent down to edge 30-15 up. Halep is level when she has time to load a forehand with spin and sends it spining out of Sharapova's reach. And it's soon game point when Sharapova finds the tramlines while leaning back again. Halep bides her time on the next, advancing to mid court to execute another perfect forehand which the outstretched Sharapova takes a swing at but misses.
Sharapova* 6-4, 6-7, 1-1 Halep Sharapova looks more dangerous when she hasn't got to serve. Two more double faults and Halep is handed a 30-15 advantage. It's two break points when Sharapova stumbles into a backhand and crashes the ball into the net. Sharapova thinks she's done enough when she punches one forehand into the corner, but Halep gets enough on the return and when the Russian attempts a drop shot, it drifts wide and Halep has the break back. HALEP BREAKS.
Sharapova 6-4, 6-7, 1-0 Halep* After a lengthy, lengthy toilet break from Sharapova which Halep spent sheltering under an umbrella and mildly jogging on the spot, the third and final set is finally underway. The break has done Sharapova wonders, she has a spring back in her step and has soon forgotten that missed chance in the tie-break at 5-3 up as she moves to two break points. She works Halep from side-to-side and forces her to go long and the break is hers. SHARAPOVA BREAKS.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Ben Rothenberg - Sharapova has won her last 19 straight three-setters on clay. Halep has won 10 of her last 11. The one loss was to Sharapova. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23RG14" target="_blank"&gt;#RG14&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
Sharapova 6-4, 6-7 Halep TIE-BREAK: A nervous forehand from Sharapova puts her two points from a second Roland Garros title but she stutters with her service game on the next point, taking an age at the ball toss and it costs her as she drags a forehand into the tramlines after Halep jumps on a slow serve. Halep just won't be beaten and makes Sharapova work for every point and forces her to overhit another forehand for 5-5. And it's quickly 6-5 and set point Halep when Sharapova makes another error. Sharapova struggles with her ball tossing some more and hits into the tramlines on the return, handing Halep the set. HALEP WINS TIE-BREAK TO TAKE MATCH INTO DECIDER.
Sharapova 6-4, 6-6 Halep TIE-BREAK: Sharapova edges back in front for 3-2 when Halep can't get enough lift on another return, and then sneaks a 4-2 advantage for the changeover. Over two hours now and the clock and Sharapova is pulled back to 4-3 when she pushes a forehand just inches over the baseline.
Sharapova 6-4, 6-6 Halep TIE-BREAK: Halep absorbs some more Sharapova power for a mini-break but slaps into the net on the next point and then can't get her racket head over a quick-fire return from Sharapova on the next to trail 2-1.
Sharapova 6-4, 6-6 Halep* My oh my how this match is fluctuating now as Sharapova races to three break points. The clear sound of a string pinging mid rally puts Halep off as Sharapova wraps up the break when the Russian fires a volley straight into her opponent's feet and Halep can't retrieve the ball. She heads over to her corner to fix her racket before preparing for the tie-break.
Sharapova* 6-4, 5-6 Halep Sharapova turns up her grunting levels again as she slips a mini-break down, she tries to force the issue on the next, injecting some pace, but Halep is equal to it, comes to the net when the chance presents itself and dispatches a volley for three break points. Sharapova sees off the first with a strong first serve down the T, and then forces Halep to hit long with an outswinging first serve. She can't prevent a third as, leaning back, she sends her return long, well beyond the baseline and Halep is serving for the set again. HALEP BREAKS.
Sharapova 6-4, 5-5 Halep* It's a nervous opening as Halep puts too much power on one return and is then out-manoevred on the next point. Halep attacks on the next to hang in the game but she can't quite control a deep forehand return from Sharapova and is staring at two break points. Sharapova hasn't been able to convert many of her break points today but gets a huge, huge slice of luck with one break point saved as the ball clips the tape and lands close to Halep's side of the net. That's touch on the Romanian. SHARAPOVA BREAKS.
Sharapova* 6-4, 4-5 Halep Halep digs deep to get back from 30-down, but Sharapova is giving it everything now and moves to two game points. The good and bad side of Sharapova's game are evident as a 30th unforced error brings Halep back to 40-30 and it's quickly deuce as Halep makes Sharapova play one more point. A fantastic rally ensues at deuce, probably the best of the match as both players match each other punch for punch and forehand for forehand. Sharapova looks to have worked her way into a point-winning position, but Halep pushes one return deep and Sharapova hits tamely into the net. The break is Halep's when Sharapova drags her next return into the tramlines and she'll be serving to square the match. HALEP BREAKS.
Sharapova 6-4, 4-4 Halep* Halep loves to strike her groundstrokes early and it pays off, catching Sharapova cold and forcing her to hit long. Halep mixes it up on the next with a drop shot and then curling a passing winner round and behind Sharapova who is an imposing figure at the net. Sharapova drags Halep back to 30-all by working Halep's forehand and then punching a forehand into the advantage court and catching the Romanian out. And a third successive point brings up a break point but Halep sees off the danger when she rushes to net and dances into a forehand. In a flash, Sharapova is back all over Halep, carving out a second break point - but again Halep pushes a backhand deep into the corner. A couple of strong first serves later and Halep survives.
Sharapova* 6-4, 4-3 Halep What's this from Sharapova. An ace? Wow. That's a rarity this match. It sets her up nicely for 30-0, which soon becomes 40-0 when Halep can't get enough lift on a return. A strong first serve looks to set the game up nicely for Sharapova, but Halep isn't going to roll over and makes Sharapova play one more point and the Russian cracks. Sharapova didn't enjoy being given the runaround and gives Halep a taste of her own medicine as she wraps up another important hold.
Sharapova 6-4, 3-3 Halep* Halep is doing just about enough to keep in touch, but you just feel that Sharapova won't be far away from raising her game again. Halep is brought back to 30-15 when the umpires stretches his legs to check on one overhit return. But the No 4 seed levels when she catches a return on the half volley and the ball skims the line.
Sharapova* 6-4, 3-2 Halep It's all a little too loud for Sharapova who has a word with the umpire to tell the unruly fans off. The crowd is deadly silent, though, as she delivers back-to-back double faults and Halep has another mini-break. Sharapova gets back into the swing of things with a forehand winner and pulls level when Halep overeggs a return. Sharapova, her dusty pink and orange dress soaked in sweat, takes control of proceedings by coming to net and seeing off her rival. A fourth double fault this set gives Halep hope at deuce, but when her opponent slaps the net failing to return, Sharapova squats and lets out a 'come on' which turns into an even bigger 'come on' when Halep can't stay in the next rally.
Sharapova 6-4, 2-2 Halep* Halep has been let off the hook here by Sharapova as her concentration levels have taken a drastic dip and Halep surges to 40-0. The crowd find their voice and help to spur the young Romanian on. Halep does her best to respond but can't get across to make one return but thankfully Sharapova over hits on the next and the set remains level.
Sharapova* 6-4, 2-1 Halep Sharapova suffers the service yips again, a fifth double fault handing a mini-break to Halep. Halep appears to give up on the next rally, but swings and hits a forehand which is too good for Sharapova. Despite having the luxury of two break points, she has the break back when Sharapova hits wide. HALEP BREAKS.
Sharapova 6-4, 2-0 Halep* Halep still has a spring left in her step but at 30-15, Sharapova's class is telling as she works Halep from side-to-side and opens up just the slightest of windows to send a forehand fizzing past Halep again and the Romanian can't chase it down despite her best efforts. Great movement around the court again from Sharapova brings her back to deuce as her power and precision is proving just too good for Halep. A loose shot from Halep gives Sharapova break point, but Halep averts the danger, whipping a forehand winner deep in the corner. Sharapova bullies her way to a second break point, but Halep keeps her head again to force her opponent into an error. A second double fault of the match gifts Sharapova break point No 3 and after hitting a first serve wide, she hits the next return into the tramlines and an early break goes to the 2012 champion. SHARAPOVA BREAKS.
Sharapova* 6-4, 1-0 Halep An hour on the clock and Sharapova's service game picks up, a couple of first serves helping her charge before a forehand across court brings up 40-0. A backhand return on the next point proves too strong for Halep and it will be interesting to see if Halep can respond here, or if the big occasion will swallow her up.
Sharapova 6-4 Halep* Now it's Halep's turn to suffer with her first serves and the nerves are setting in - she is, after all, yet to drop a set these championships. Halep manages to peg Sharapova back to 30-all but the Russian sets up a first set point when she moves Halep from side to side and forces her rival to attempt a lob which lands outside the baseline. Halep survives, rushing the net and dispatching a short return. She's staring at a second set point down when Sharapova leaps on a second serve and this time she wraps it up when Halep hits wide. SHARAPOVA BREAKS AND WINS FIRST SET
Sharapova* 5-4 Halep For all Sharapova's experience of the big occasions, she still struggles when it comes to the big points and big moments. Halep jumps on her insecurities and races to two break points. She can't convert the first, but when Sharapova gets her footwork wrong on the next and fires into the tramlines, the set is still alive. HALEP BREAKS.
Sharapova 5-3 Halep* Halep takes advantage of the new balls, whipping a forehand back loaded with top spin on her way to charging to 40-0. She wraps it up in a flash and now Sharapova serves for the set.
Sharapova* 5-2 Halep Sharapova has been slow to get going her past three matches heading into the final and while she's starting to build momentum and focus, her first serve remains her flaw. The stop-start nature of her service game seems to be upsetting Halep's concentration levels and a lucky net cord hasn't helped as Sharapova moves to 30-15. Some more heavy groundstrokes from Sharapova, and she's edging closer to the opening set.
Sharapova 4-2 Halep* Sharapova produces one of the shots of the match with Halep exerting the pressure on the net as she lobs from the baseline and has the No 4 seed scampering back but without a hope. She races to two break points and takes it on the first with a classy backhand winner down the line. SHARAPOVA BREAKS.
Sharapova* 3-2 Halep Sharapova has a little mutter to herself in her corner after losing the opening point and her little pep talk does the trick as she works the angles, advances to net and puts the ball into the empty half with Halep still puffing from chasing the last return down. Halep starts to join in with Sharapova's grunting now as she starts to feel the pace of these rallies. But after one deuce, Halep stays toe-to-toe with Sharapova to force a second. A third double-fault gifts the Romanian a look at a break. But Sharapova responds in the best way possible, slamming home a stupendous forehand which lands flush on the line. Sharapova lifts both arms to the sky as she whips a backhand winner home on the next but an air-shot at the baseline on the next not only leaves her red-faced but brings up a fourth deuce. A slight slip from Halep and an overhit return see Sharapova edge in front for the first time in the final.
Sharapova 2-2 Halep* At 15-all both players use the width of the court, pulling each other from side-to-side along the baseline but it's Sharapova that can't keep a backhand in. Sharapova makes amends on the next, sending down an inch-perfect forehand which skids off the baseline and when she sends down a second successive fizzing forehand, she brings up a first break point. Halep isn't having any of it, catching Sharapova out with an injection of pace on a backhand which sets up her winning forehand. She's forced to save a second, and does so when she steps into a short return and pushes a classy winner past Sharapova's outstretched racket. Halep mixes it up on the next with her first attempt at a drop shot, but it's not executed well and Sharapova leaps on it for a third break point. With the game approaching seven minutes, Sharapova works the line perfectly again for break point No 4. And when Halep spins one backhand wide, the break is back. SHARAPOVA BREAKS.
Sharapova* 1-2 Halep Sharapova's service game has yet to get going and a second double fault brings up 15-all. Luckily she's starting to find her range on the forehand side and chases down a return to fizz one inside the line which has Halep beaten. At 30-all, Halep thinks about going on the attack and coming to net, but thinks twice, retreats and it costs her dear as Sharapova take control and hits another forehand winner for game point. Halep digs deep on the next point and this time charges the net, but Sharapova holds firm to get a first game on the board.
Sharapova 0-2 Halep* Halep's corner are all donned in red 'Allez Halep' T-shirts and look quite an imposing bunch on Chatrier. Her cheer squad are helping her calm her nerves from the off as errors from Sharapova continue to hand the Romanian free points. Sharapova pegs Halep back to 30-all when she puts away a volley in the empty half of the court after Halep retrieved a strong forehand. But Halep keeps Sharapova pinned behind the baseline to take the next point. After being pulled back to deuce, Halep works Sharapova left and right before finding room to float a backhand winner down the line. She wraps up a two-game cushion when she jumps on a short service return.
Sharapova* 0-1 Halep (*denotes next to serve) Sharapova opens up strongly punching away a forehand after a second serve for the opening point but Halep steals an early march when Sharapova hits long and wide on the next two. Halep can't get enough lift and spin to sneak an early break point shot but still has a fighting chance of something from this opening game when Sharapova double-faults for deuce. Halep brings up a first break point when Sharapova goes long and a second successive unforced error hands her rival the game. HALEP BREAKS.
14.10 Players are just finalising their warm-ups and we'll be go, go, go...
14.05 Conditions are good in Paris today. It's not looking so good for the men's final tomorrow with our thunderstorms heading over the Channel later tonight.
13.58 Here come the players onto Philippe Chatrier court, Sharapova strolling out with no sign of nerves given this is her ninth slam final. Halep looks slightly tense as he bounces up and down on the red stuff awaiting the umpire's coin toss.
13.50 Reaching a first slam final and letting her tennis on the court do the talking might finally put to bed one of the main talking points surrounding Halep - how a breast reduction has improved her game.
Halep underwent surgery five years ago when she was 17 and said at the time of the operation: "I don’t like them in my everyday life, either. I would have gone for surgery even if I hadn’t been a sportswoman”.
Halep's tennis coach Wim Fissette said: “I did not know her then, but I have seen some photos. She took that decision and it was a good one. I understand that it’s what a lot of people know her for: in the Belgian newspapers it is same thing. But let’s hope she will win a grand slam and then they will start talking about that instead.”
13.45 Reigning Wimbledon champion Marion Bartoli believes Sharapova has the edge today against grand slam debutant Halep.
“Because she struggled so much during those last three matches, I favour Maria to find a way to win,” Bartoli said.
“I think she can carry on this momentum. Especially in that third set against Bouchard, she played really well. And Simona will not play like Bouchard, stepping inside the court and trying to fire winners. So I think Maria will feel less pressed by her opponent. She will have more time and that will help her to feel more relaxed.”
13.30 Sharapova's route to the final has been a story of fighting until the death having lost the opening set of her last three matches and coming within a handful of points of being knocked out. Judy Murray tweeted after her comeback win over Spaniard Garbine Muguruza (Serena Williams's conqueror) that: "Sharapova is like a tea bag. Put her into hot water and you'll find out how strong she is", to which a bamboozled Sharapova replied: "I'm sorry, but I don't know who she is".
First Round - def. Ksenia Pervak, 6-1, 6-2. Second Round - def. Tsvetana Pironkova, 7-5, 6-2. Third Round - def. Paula Ormaechea, 6-0, 6-0. Fourth Round - def. Sam Stosur (19), 3-6, 6-4, 6-0. Quarter-finals - def. Garbine Muguruza, 1-6, 7-5, 6-1. Semi-finals - def. Eugenie Bouchard (18), 4-6, 7-5, 6-2.
13.15 If it wasn't for Halep it could be our very own Heather Watson lining up in today's final. Ok, ok, that might be stretching it. Watson was beaten in the second round by the No 4 seed but managed to take six games off her - two more than that of Svetlana Kuznetsova in the last eight. Only Andrea Petkovic has come close to taking a set off the Romanian though.
First Round - def. Alisa Kleybanova, 6-0, 6-2. Second Round - def. Heather Watson, 6-2, 6-4. Third Round - def. Maria-Teresa Torro-Flor, 6-3, 6-0. Fourth Round - def. Sloane Stephens (15), 6-4, 6-3. Quarter-finals - def. Svetlana Kuznetsova (27), 6-2, 6-2. Semi-finals - def. Andrea Petkovic (28), 6-2, 7-6 (4).
13.00 Afternoon tennis fans. While one man dominates the red stuff in Paris and looks set to extend his reign as King of Roland Garros on Sunday, the women's title has been somewhat of a hot potato with Halep potentially becoming the eighth different winner in eight years.
Since Justine Henin won a third successive French Open title in 2007, the title has been shared among a number of players floating in and around the top 10 and incredibly, the last time the final went the distance was back in 2001 when Jennifer Capriati beat Kim Clijsters 12-10 in the decider.
Here's the full list of previous champions from the last seven years. Will Sharapova buck the trend and scoop a second Coupe Suzanne Lenglen?
10.45 Morning all. It's women's final day at Roland Garros and while there's little surprise to see Maria Sharapova lining up for what will be her third successive French Open final, few would have backed Simona Halep to progress to the final weekend in Paris.
Outside the top 50 this time last year, Halep has stormed into a first ever grand slam final without even dropping a set. The last player to waltz into the last two without a blot on her copybook was Lindsay Davenport at the 1998 US Open final and she went on to beat Martina Hingis 6-3, 7-5 to clinch a first major. Could Halep repeat the feat?

Join me from 1pm for build-up before live game-by-game coverage. And please let me know your thoughts on today's match, email vicki.hodges@telegraph.co.uk with your predictions.