Ricoh Women's British Open, Inbee Park, Shanshan Feng, Suzann Pettersen, Laura Davies, double-bogey, tie, American
Two years ago, Ernie Els won an Open on a Lancastrian range, so Mo Martin is in good company. With a play-off looming, she had headed to the Royal Birkdale practice ground to keep her swing supple, but in the end she need not have bothered. Her rivals fell away down the stretch, and Martin was the Ricoh Women’s British Open champion.
It was an improbable victory for a player who had never finished better than 29th in any previous major. And a heart-warming victory as well, for it was only four months ago that Martin’s grandfather, Lincoln, passed away at the age of 102. Almost to the last, he had been her biggest supporter, a common presence at tournaments in the United States.
Lincoln would wear a badge emblazoned with the words ‘Go Mo’. She followed his advice at Birkdale. The leader after two days, Martin had fallen back badly with a round of 77 on Saturday, but she more than recovered that ground, her level-par 72 equalling the lowest score of the final day.
Even as she played the par-five last, it seemed that Martin was chasing a cheque rather than a trophy. But with her second shot she hit a full-blooded three-wood that chased up the green, rattled off the flagstick and settled six feet from the hole. Martin rolled in the putt, and moved into a three-way tie for the lead. Her tournament was back on again.
The other two were Korea’s Inbee Park, the overnight leader, and Shanshan Feng, of China. Major winners both, but that experience counted for nothing as both dropped shots coming in. Park fell back when she double-bogeyed the 10th, went through the green at the 14th and took a six at the last. Feng’s slip was at the par-four 16th, where she hit too strong an approach and then took three to get down for the back of the green.
Park, who won three of the five women’s majors last year, finished with a 77 and fell to fourth place. Feng, on 75, shared second with Norway’s Suzann Pettersen, who carded two double-bogeys but then produced a birdie-birdie finish to match Feng’s score.
Martin is known as the straightest hitter on the LPGA Tour, and she used her gifts to the fullest on a day when Birkdale finally bared its teeth.
All week, the players had been predicting that a tough course, fringed by ferocious rough, would become brutal if the wind got up, which is exactly what happened on the final day. It was a rare achievement for a player to return a card unsullied by a double-bogey or worse.
Martin, though, did just that, serenely threading her way through the Birkdale dunes with almost other-worldly accuracy. When the new Rolex Rankings are calculated, it is expected that she will have moved from 99th in the world to 26th.
Dame Laura Davies, making her 30th consecutive appearance in the tournament, dished up a round that was almost as impressive as Martin’s. The putting woes that had dogged her in the build-up disappeared, and she marked her return to the scene of her 1986 Open triumph with a 73 that was moved her into ninth place, the best finish by a Briton.
However, the axis of the women’s game seems to have tilted to the west again. The first three majors of 2014 have now been won by American players. None more joyfully than this one.