Invictus Games closing concert, Olympic Park, review: 'heroic endeavour'
"I'm almost done," said Prince Harry, 10 minutes into his closing speech. "I've got Dave Grohl screaming at me from behind." It is probably the first time The Foo Fighters have ever had a royal introduction but otherwise it was business as usual for the American rockers, delivering a thunderous, muscular, headbanging, triple guitar riffing set to 26,000 fans, albeit this time outside a stadium rather than inside.
With Prince Harry as its patron, the Invictus Games is a new international sporting event for wounded, injured and sick Servicemen and women. It may not have quite caught the imagination of the nation the way the Paralympics did but it has been the scene of some heroic endeavour and brought out heavyweight pop and rock names for a good cause.
The bill for the closing ceremony concert had the slightly odd feel you get when you put together a coalition of the willing. Where else would you find fresh faced electro pop head girl Ellie Goulding supporting grizzled American grunge rockers, or anthemic Britpop belters Kaiser Chiefs sharing a stage with the Military Wives Choir? Everyone came out all guns blazing, Goulding demonstrating that modern digitally concocted pop can be every bit as epic and dynamic as the old school rock of the headliners. The reinvigorated Kaisers were riotously good fun, perhaps emboldened by the knowledge that if a riot had broken out the right people were on hand to deal with it.
Soldiers in uniform milled about the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, enthusiastic participants at a rock event and not a last line of defence after things have got out of control. Wheelchairs and crutches were a conspicuous presence, para-athletes greeted with a warmth and inclusiveness our society perhaps doesn't always show the differently abled. Performers, who also included Ryan Adams, Bryan Adams, The Vamps, Rizzle Kicks and James Blunt, may have appealed to very different tastes but this was the kind of concert where the occasion was more significant than the stars and audience and performers alike were were keen to show their appreciation.
"Prince Harry, this song is for you," announced James Blunt before launching into his tremulous ballad You're Beautiful. It may have been a bit of an odd dedication but I am sure the fourth in line to the throne took it in the spirit in which it was intended. Not that anyone would want to argue with Blunt about it. As a former Captain in the Household Cavalry, he is probably the only sensitive singer-songwriter who could kill you with his bare hands
Pop loves a man in uniform but usually one worn in ironic disregard for the military. With his highly unusual combination of army background and mainstream pop appeal, Blunt was perhaps the ideal musical icon for the occasion. The British housewives favourite showed courage under fire by diving off stage for a spot of crowd surfing. Foo Fighter fans clearly hold no fear for a man who helped liberate Kosovo.