United States Wins FIBA World Cup Title in a Rout of Serbia
“A lot of guys caught on fire, and it just went on down to everyone,” Derrick Rose said.
Klay Thompson added: “They said we were undermanned, they said we didn’t have any stars. I’m so proud of these guys right now.”
The victory earned the United States an automatic berth in the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro. Some, if not most, of the missing American stars may return to the roster for that tournament — the teams for the world championships have traditionally skewed younger — but Coach Mike Krzyzewski, who has led the United States to gold medals at the 2008 Olympics, the 2010 world championships, the 2012 Olympics and here, certainly saw plenty of positive performances from this team to give him selection options in two years’ time.
Krzyzewski said he was particularly impressed because Durant’s late withdrawal from the team, after the injury to George, forced the Americans to essentially redo their offense at the 11th hour.
“This has been a great group to work with,” Krzyzewski said. “They stayed focused on the team they were going to play next. They respected the process, and as a result the process turned out really well.”
Sunday was a typical performance: The Americans started slowly and struggled with fouls early on, just as they did against Lithuania in the semifinal. Davis picked up two fouls in less than three minutes and Serbia led by 15-7. The crowd, which largely cheered for the underdog Serbs, roared at a timeout as Krzyzewski stamped his foot and shouted at the officials.
In the huddle, he told his players that they were being outmuscled by the Serbs and implored them to find their mettle.
He need not have worried. The Americans steadied themselves, led by a stalwart defensive effort from Cousins. With the United States playing more stoutly on defense, Irving scored 7 straight points as the United States finished the first quarter on a 28-6 run to lead by 14. The game was never very close after that.
“We had spurts of dominance” during the tournament, Krzyzewski said. Then he chuckled. “Tonight we had about a 35-minute spurt.”
Serbia, which did not have a current N.B.A. player on its roster, was scrappy throughout the game, even as the margin grew. The Serbs were just 2-3 in pool play but pulled off knockout-round wins over Greece, Brazil and France to win a surprising silver medal. Point guard Milos Teodosic was silky with the ball, with 10 points and 7 assists, and Nemanja Bjelica and Nikola Kalinic each had 18 points.
“In the beginning, we showed we could play with them,” said Miroslav Raduljica, the 7-foot Serbian center. “But then they just started making crazy 3s and we could not match it.”
In the final seconds, the Americans bounced on their bench as Jerry Colangelo, the chairman of USA Basketball, smiled widely. They may not have had their brightest lights, but they still finished as champions.
“This is as good, for me, as anything,” Krzyzewski said. “National championships, Olympics — this is a special group all on its own.”