Hawthorn edges out Port Adelaide, sets up flag tilt with Sydney
As Alastair Clarkson later noted, this was the fourth consecutive preliminary final for the Hawks that was decided by under a goal, the 2013 premiers having pipped Geelong last year and surviving a similar scare against Adelaide in 2012. True to its relentless form under Ken Hinkley, the Power outran the older team in the final term, when a lead of 29 points very suddenly was reduced to three - the final margin. Andrew Moore had an angled shot to secure Port the lead with about two minutes remaining, but couldn't nail it. Port was pressing throughout the final minutes, as Chad Wingard – quiet throughout – made a dramatic entrance into the match (9 last quarter disposals). His goal and others to Jared Polec and Angus Monfries had the Hawks hanging on by a claw. Hawthorn was not safe until skipper Luke Hodge made a timely smother on Brad Ebert and then received a tough holding the ball free with less than a minute remaining. In that first quarter, when Port burnt the Hawks all over the field, the Power seldom missed an opportunity to miss an opportunity. It was only late in the game, when the Power charged, that the cost of that waste became retrospectively evident. Jarryd Roughead's six goals was the decisive contribution from an individual, and while Roughie is a big man who takes big marks, his goal spree was due to his quickness of foot and mind. This was never more evident than in the third quarter, when he booted three – one from clever consecutive soccer kicks, another from 55m after a centre break.
Will Langford's father made his name by curtailing champions such as Stephen Kernahan in grand finals. Langford the younger also played a critical role in Hawthorn's victory. He was sooled on to Port skipper Travis Boak, who had been as influential as any player in the opening half. Langford, a marginal player earlier this season, did more than restrict Boak – he had career highs for disposals, clearances (10) and contested balls. The match turned in the second term when the Hawks booted six goals and grabbed a lead that Port would never win back. Port's opening quarter dominance was staggering. Happily for the Hawks, the Power's profligacy – it managed 3.9 – kept the margin to a highly manageable two goals when it could have been at least double that number. Port's supremacy in the first quarter began in the contest, where it simply smashed the Hawks, who – unusually for the more finals hardened and seasoned side – had the jitters and lacked their trademark attack on the ball and surety of hands. The contested ball differential was embarrassing for the Hawks, who were almost doubled on this score by a more committed Port, 41 to 21.
The inside 50 count was likewise lopsided (17-7). In many ways, Hawthorn was as dominated as the Tigers were a fortnight earlier, when Port dismembered them in the first 20 minutes. One difference was the degree of difficulty of the shots – a number were from tight angles. Nontheless, 3.9 ought to have been at least six goals. Hawthorn was uncharacteristically inept when kicking in after Port's numerous behinds - two of the visitors' three goals, to Robbie Gray and skipper Boak, were scored from botched kick-ins. Only that other Hawthorn trait - kicking efficiency - kept it thereabouts in the opening 10 minutes. This enabled goals to Roughead and Langford that, remarkably, had the Hawks momentarily snatch the lead at 2.0 to 1.3. The extent to which Port had blown it in that opening quarter became apparently from the outset of the second term, as Mitchell, Matt Suckling, warriors Jordan Lewis and Hodge lifted in unison.
A subdued Gunston converted a free, then Taylor Duryea was the recipient of a 50-metre penalty for another quick goal. When Suckling finished off a brilliant possession chain that began in defence, the Hawks had an unexpected lead. As per usual, Hawthorn had struck suddenly, and the momentum shift was abrupt. Roughead was enjoying his contest with Alipate Carlise, in what a mobility-based mismatch. Roughead would finish the half with 3.0, as the Hawks began to win some contests, to spread through Suckling and Brad Hill, thus evening up the inside 50 count somewhat (27-22 at half-time). There is no substitute for conversion, and where Port had missed, the Hawks scored - their 6.1 to 2.2 meant a two goal deficit was transformed into an 11-point lead at half-time.