Germany 1 Republic of Ireland 1, Euro 2016 qualifier: John O'Shea secures point after Toni Kroos' opener
Germany’s crown has slipped since they won the World Cup and Republic of Ireland gave it another nudge with this magnificent draw secured in the final minute of stoppage time by the man wearing the captain’s armband, John O’Shea.
The Sunderland defender is not known for his goalscoring prowess – this was only his third international goal – but when Jeff Hendrick hooked Wes Hoolahan’s cross back into the area, O’Shea nipped in front of Mats Hummels and scored with the outside of his right boot.
It was the predatory finish of a ­centre-forward rather than a centre-back and it will be replayed for years. Not many people can say they scored an equaliser away from home against the world champions. O’Shea has that honour, the goal the perfect way to remember his 100th appearance for his country.
The result will sit highly in the achievements of manager Martin O’Neill and his clean shaven assistant Roy Keane. Germany may not be the team they were a few months ago – only five of the team in Gelsenkirchen started the World Cup final against Argentina – but they should still be the side to beat in 2016.
This result, combined with the ­victories over Georgia and Gibraltar in their opening two group games, gives Ireland a wonderful chance of reaching the finals in France.
“It is a fantastic achievement,” said O’Neill. “I’m delighted with the players because it would have been easy to have accepted a 1-0 defeat, but we gave it a go and got our reward.
“We could have taken 1-0 as a moral victory, but I don’t want those, I want to compete. When you come to the home of the country that won the World Cup only a few months ago ... I’m absolutely delighted.
“People will say they have one or two injuries, but so do we and I’d argue injuries hurt us more. We’re without the best right-back in Britain [Seamus Coleman].”
It had taken the laser-like precision of a Toni Kroos shot to break ­Ireland’s defiance with 20 minutes left to play, but for all of their visible distress at conceding, O’Neill’s men kept going. They threw off their defensive shackles and, only minutes before O’Shea scored, Hoolahan was denied an equaliser a scored by a magnificent block by Erik Durm.
At times, Ireland frustrated Germany with a line of seven players on the edge of the area. It gave the world champions very little room and, for the majority of the game, they played in front of Ireland’s centre-backs.
They eventually scored, but although Kroos’s finish was millimetre-perfect, he got the chance because Ireland’s legs were tiring.
Weary limbs cause mental fatigue and Stephen Quinn stood off the Real Madrid man for a split second too long, which allowed him to get his head up and curl a shot beyond the dive of goalkeeper David Forde, the ball clipping the inside of the post.
Germany might have extended their lead, Forde made one excellent save to keep out Mario Götze and he had also tipped a swerving shot from Kroos over before he scored, but on the whole this was a sluggish display from the hosts.
Durm hit the crossbar with a long-range volley and Antonio Rüdiger put a free header wide after that, but Germany lacked sparkle. “It was to be expected that we would fall into this post World Cup hole,” said their manager Joachim Löw. “You can see that they are knackered, mentally and physically. The players only had a short break after the World Cup and they look tired. It is extremely annoying not to have won the game.
“Ireland basically had one chance, but in the final seconds of the game they have managed to equalise. We only have ourselves to blame, but people see us differently now, every time we are under pressure to win.”
This is a German team in transition, searching for new heroes, while also trying to maintain the form that turned them into the world’s best. They are far from weak, but they are more vulnerable than recent achievements suggest.
That was certainly the attitude O’Neill was keen to nurture in his players in what was precisely the sort of challenge he thrived on as a club manager.
For all Keane’s brooding presence alongside O’Neill has tended to dominate headlines since he accepted his first international job almost 12 months ago, this is his Ireland and it shows. He has already turned them into a well-drilled unit, with players who stand a little taller through his encouragement. This will not be the last impressive result under him.
“We wouldn’t have expected to win our first three games but I had a good feeling about this one,” he said. “I said to the players if we had six points after four games we’d probably be relatively pleased, now it’s seven from three.”