Buffalo Bills' home game against New York Jets won't be played Sunday
The Bills' home game against the Jets will not be played in Buffalo on Sunday afternoon, the NFL announced, as another storm Thursday brought the area's paralyzing three-day snowfall total to at least 6 feet.
The teams hope to hear from the NFL by Friday morning, at the latest, about an alternate site and date for the game.
"We don't really have a say, but we have a voice," Bills team president Russ Brandon said, adding that he would like a decision by Thursday night. "When I know it, you guys will know it. I want to put this behind me as well."
Initially, the Bills hoped to clear the stadium in time for Sunday's scheduled kickoff, offering $10 per hour and free game tickets to fans who could help shovel out Ralph Wilson Stadium.
"It is not practical to play a game in Orchard Park in the condition that our community is in," Brandon said. "It really wasn't an option to try to play the game at any point Sunday, Monday or even potentially Tuesday based on what the forecast is."
Possible alternate locations, according to sources, include Detroit, Pittsburgh and Washington, D.C. The Lions and Redskins are on the road this weekend; the Steelers have a bye. It's 215 miles from Buffalo to Pittsburgh, 256 miles from Buffalo to Detroit, and 389 miles from Buffalo to Washington.
Coaches for the teams are preparing with the belief the game will be moved to Monday evening in one of those three cities, sources said. The Bills have been unable to practice for the past two days and will have to leave Buffalo to do so.
Under consideration for the Bills is flying to the alternate site Friday and holding their first practice of the week in that city. However, about 85 percent of players live in the towns south of Buffalo, hit hardest by the storm.
"We're working through that right now," Brandon said. "The logistics are very difficult. We've had a lot of brainstorming sessions, and really trying to target all of our guys that are in very difficult situations. Some of the guys have been in apartment complexes that are not plowed in any shape or form and very difficult to get out."
While Brandon said there is "certainly a disadvantage" for the Bills after not practicing this week, the Jets had similar feelings about not knowing where they will play this weekend.
"It's called inconvenience," Jets linebacker Calvin Pace said. "That's the word I would say. But I mean, you can't do anything about Mother Nature."
The Jets' next game is Monday, Dec. 1., so they would have a full week of rest if they play the Bills on Monday night.
"It wouldn't affect us," Jets coach Rex Ryan said on the possibility of switching sites. "We'd just aim our plane in a different direction, I guess."
The status of Ralph Wilson Stadium also is still up in the air for the Bills' next home game Nov. 30, against the Browns.
"It's going to be an all-hands-on-deck exercise for our staff," Brandon said, adding that the Bills could practice elsewhere next week if their facility is not available.
At least 4 feet of snow fell in the area around the Bills' stadium from Monday evening through Thursday.
Bills officials said Wednesday that it takes about three days to remove 1 foot of snow from the stadium and surrounding areas. At the rate the snow has fallen, the cleanup would take 18 days.
According to the Elias Sports Bureau, the only teams in the Super Bowl era (since 1966) to play consecutive games on Mondays are the 2010 Vikings in Weeks 14 and 15 and the 1996 Raiders in Weeks 8 and 10 (they had a bye in Week 9). If Sunday's Jets-Bills game is rescheduled to Monday, the Jets would become the third team to play consecutive Mondays, although Elias will recognize only the scheduled Ravens-Saints game as the official Monday night game.
ESPN.com's Mike Rodak and Rich Cimini contributed to this report.