Jameis Winston is NFL draft No. 1 overall pick by Buccaneers
Jameis Winston won’t have to carry his baggage very far.
The Tampa Bay Buccaneers kept the former Florida State quarterback instate when they selected Winston with the No. 1 pick in the NFL draft Thursday night. He was not in attendance at the Auditorium Theatre in Chicago, but his shadow loomed over the entire draft process as teams debated the depth of his legal issues and weighed off-field risk against on-field success.
Buccaneers coach Lovie Smith welcomed Winston on a phone call, telling the quarterback that he was worth it.
“You’re exactly what we need to get it done,” Smith said.
Winston, 21, watched the draft from a family friend’s house in his hometown of Bessemer, Ala. He emerged as the top choice after months of being compared to and contrasted with quarterback Marcus Mariota, a fellow Heisman Trophy winner. The Titans drafted Mariota, a dynamic athlete from Hawaii who led Oregon to the national championship game in January, with the second pick. Jacksonville bucked the quarterback trend by taking Florida pass rusher Dante Fowler with the third pick, and the Oakland Raiders claimed Alabama wideout Amari Cooper at the No. 4 slot.
RELATED: NFL DRAFT'S 1ST ROUND: WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW ON ALL 32 PICKS
No prospect received as much pre-draft scrutiny as Winston. Under center, he led the Seminoles to the national championship as a freshman, establishing himself by leading Florida State’s run with clutch late-game performances.
Off campus, red flags were raised as he was accused of sexual assault after he allegedly raped a female Florida State student in December of 2012. Authorities declined to file charges, citing a lack of evidence to prosecute him. Winston was later cleared by Florida State after a student conduct hearing, but the victim filed a civil lawsuit last week. She is seeking damages in excess of $15,000 to be determined in a jury trial. Winston has maintained his innocence throughout the legal process.
“I can’t talk about negatives,” Winston said, according to the Tampa Bay Times. “I’m so elated to be a Buccaneer, so ready to play. I’m looking forward to earning everything.”
Winston met with NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell in New York before the draft. Throughout the vetting process, Winston faced questions about his character, ranging from the crab legs he carried out of a Publix supermarket without paying for them in Tallahassee to the time he was suspended for shouting a vulgarity on campus. He maintained that he matured after those incidents, and was suspended for one game by Florida State coach Jimbo Fisher. Smith asserted in recent weeks that he was willing to bring Winston on board Tampa Bay’s roster.
“Soon as I got the call, I was thinking about ways to serve my teammates,” Winston said.
At 6-foot-4, 231 pounds, Winston offered the Buccaneers a physical presence accustomed to being the center of attention. He gained fame early with his Heisman campaign as a freshman, proving difficult for tacklers to bring down and completing 66. 9% of his passes that season. He also threw for 40 touchdowns and limited his giveaways to 10 interceptions.
Those numbers glistened in comparison to last season’s regression, though, as Winston threw 25 TD passes and 18 interceptions. Despite the turnovers, Florida State escaped a number of close calls to remain unbeaten until being blown out by Oregon in a national semifinal at the Rose Bowl.
Winston went 26-1 as a starter in college. Tampa Bay was 2-14 last season. Smith was hired in January of 2014, charged with rebuilding a team that has struggled to win since Jon Gruden led the organization to a Super Bowl victory in 2003.
“It’s all about working hard,” Winston said. “Actions speak so much louder than words.” 