Marv Albert confused by Indians history and Tristan Thompson learns from the best: Game 4 broadcast diary
The Cavaliers routed the Hawks on Tuesday night. Look back in the game in broadcast form.
The pregame crew all pick the Cavs. Kenny Smith says it will be tough, though.
Matthew Dellavedova checks in and Marv Albert is taken aback a bit by the reception he receives from the crowd.
Reggie Miller criticizes Jeff Teague for fouling Dellavedova in the open floor out of frustration. Says the Delly is in the Hawks' head. A replay a few minutes later shows Teague jawing in Dellavedova's ear.
LeBron James hits a three and as he backpedals down the floor, according to Miller, he looked at them and said, "It's about time."
Rachel Nichols reports that David Griffin told her that it was important to get Kyrie Irving a rhythm before the Finals and doctors said he could do no further damage to the knee.
On his team's first quarter defense and how they get better: "Taking care of the ball first. A couple easy baskets in transition hurt us early."
Miller peeks ahead to Golden State a little and talks about the athleticism the Warriors will throw at them. Webber responds that, while it may be true, the Cavaliers aren't scared of anyone.
Albert admits he's a fan of "Entourage" and he's disappointed Jeremy Piven isn't in attendance tonight at The Q.
Webber says if he's David Blatt, he's sending Kyrie home at halftime. You made your last shot. Now go home and ice up.
Mozgov's dunk broke Chris Webber's brain. It was probably a harrowing few seconds for the guys at that table.
Charles Barkley says the Cavs shouldn't be playing Kyrie Irving. Kenny Smith says the whole thing about gaining confidence doesn't matter. Irving doesn't lack confidence.
Reggie Miller theorizes that Kyrie Irving doesn't look "78 percent." Not sure where he pulled that number from. Well, I have an idea. ...
Miller and Webber debating whether Irving got "peer pressure" to play tonight. Miller says Cavaliers won't be able to hide Irving against Golden State if he's still banged up.
Tristan Thompson dunks off an alley-oop. One theme throughout these broadcast diaries: Thompson star is rising. Big-time.
Cavs all but on their way to the Finals. TNT reminds us all how long it has been since a Cleveland title. He also says the Indians last reached the World Series in 1955 and lost to the Braves in six. It's OK, Marv. It's been a long playoffs for all of us.
Irving blocks a shot. Webber says no is a good time to tell him to go home. You've gotten everything you need to out of him.
Nichols reports that Tristan Thompson has been watching tapes of Dennis Rodman and trying to learn some of Rodman's tricks.
Dellavedova hits a stupid one-handed putback with 7:02 left. Reggie Miller: "They're clowning out here."
Broadcast crew all rightfully gushing about the Cavaliers and the moves made in-season to improve the roster. Miller impressed with how "big" of a team the Cavaliers have become.
David Blatt mic'd up to LeBron: "After everything you've done for this team, for this city, you deserve this."