French Open 2015: Stan Wawrinka upsets Novak Djokovic to win men's final
I want to say congratulations to Stan and it is not very easy for me to speak now, there are things that are more important in life than victories and that is character and respect - Stan you are a great champion with big heart. I want to say thank you to my team, my wife and the French public. I will be back next year to try again to win the title."
I want to say thank you to the crowd. It was an incredible atmosphere on court and I felt emotion like I never have before. I would also like to thank Magnus Norman my coach you played in the final twice without winning but this victory is yours as well as mine."
Djokovic takes to the presentation stage for the first time and receives a fantastic ovation from the crown. He's smiling, he's smiling, oh know the smile is changing to tears. What a reation from the Parisians, fair play to them for that. It is after all, only the third time he has lost this year.
Stan almost looks embarrassed as he watches on from the side of the court. He finally takes to the stage to accept his applause and have his deserved moment in the sun. Well played, Stan, well played.
Wow. Who saw that coming? Wawrinka briefly accepts the applauds and handshakes from his camp in the stands before heading down the tunnel to take a toilet break - wouldn't you? Wawrinka deserves his second grand slam title after powering his way past Djokovic. The world No 1 had some sticky moments, but a drop in his service level from the second set onwards allowed the Swiss an opportunity, and he didn't look back.
Wawrinka picks up the opening point but drills a backhand into the tramlines as the crowd crank up the volume once more. He can't get under and over a regulation forehand to hand a slight advantage to Djokovic at 15-30 but then draws level and lets the fist-pumping action begin. Djokovic flashes a backhand past Wawrinka, but it's wide and Wawrinka has a match point. He sends down an ace, but the umpire is out of his seat in a flash to call it long. He scoops up a deep return from Djokovic on the baseline, and is taken to deuce. Djokovic strikes a return which loops up off the net. Wawrinka sends a reply back but it's bread and butter for Djokovic who sets up his own break point. A nervous forehand from Djokovic takes the game back to deuce and a solid first service moves Wawrinka back to match point. He secures the win with a forehand which flashes straight past Djokovic. GAME, SET, MATCH WAWRINKA.
It's tippy-tappy stuff from both players at the net as their little exchange ends in Wawrinka's fashion when Djokovic cuts his return wide. Wawrinka lets fly with a backhand winner which takes him to 15-30 and then almost pulls off an cracking winner off the other wing but it lands the wrong side of the line. He's all over him on the next rally and hits through a beautiful backhand which passes an outstretched Djokovic at the net. He has another break point. A fizzing first serve shoots off the line and is just what Djokovic needed to save the danger and take his rival to deuce. Djokovic rushes the net on the next, but he can't get low enough to Wawrinka's return and the Swiss has a second break point this game. A first serve is slapped into the tape but Wawrinka incredibly makes the break when he swings and strikes a perfect backhand which lands flush on the line. Wawrinka will be serving to win the French Open? Crazy scenes. WAWRINKA BREAKS.
Oh dear. The heat is on Wawrinka now as Djokovic turns the screw and has a mini-break at 0-30. Djokovic is turning up the volume on every wail as he strikes every ball. An unforced error gifts Djokovic three break points. The first is saved with some good aggressive play from Wawrinka, working the opening and hitting a volley to win the point. A drilled backhand inside the line saves a second. And with the clock approaching nearly three hours, he saves a third with a strong first serve down the T which the umpire has to come down to double check. Fantastic play from Wawrinka pins Djokovic behind the baseline and the world No 1 sends a hopeful lob back, but it's not good enough. Ditto on the next point as Wawrinka digs himself out of real trouble to secure an almighty hold. Phew.
Wawrinka unleashes his big guns again and is bullying Djokovic from the back of the court as he moves 15-30 up. A couple of booming forehands, the second which flashes past Djokovic who is caught in no-man's land brings up two break points. He scampers down a drop shot but Djokovic easily strikes a volley into the empty court. He looks like he's snatched the break when he flashes a backhand past Djokovic, but the world No 1 isn't world No 1 for nothing and at full stretch he makes a volley which his coach Boris Becker would've been proud of. A third straight point takes him to game point and a fourth one with a forehand out wide secures an all-important hold. You have to hand it to Djokovic, he showed real nerves of steel.
Wawrinka is winning the majority of the baseline rallies but Djokovic proves he's not going to go down without a fight as he swings and hits a superb service return down the line. It's only a consolation point as Wawrinka holds quite comfortably. He retreats to his chair to change his racket.
Wawrinka gives his thigh a good slap or two as allows one forehand return go right past him. He'll have bruises in the morning, no doubt about that. A blistering backhand takes him to 15-30 and puts the pressure back on Djokovic's serve. Djokovic is leaning back as he hits through a forehand, and it's called long - Wawrinka has two break points to his name. Wawrinka is being pulled side-to-side, but he stays toe-to-toe with Djokovic and finally forces the world No 1 into an error. WAWRINKA BREAKS.
A great service return low to Wawrinka's feet is too good for the Swiss but he steadies himself to two game points with a couple of unforced errors from Djokovic. The world No 1 hands the game to Wawrinka when he strikes an easy volley into the net and this match is seemingly heading to a five set as both players appear to be conserving their energy.
Wawrinka continues his rush-net approach and it pays dividends as he bats away a return off the opening service point. Djokovic draws Wawrinka in and sends a half-hearted lob back which Wawrinka deals with easily but then he lets out a massive cry when he strikes into the net to allow Novak back at 30-all. Djokovic patiently bides his time before running round and loading a forehand with topspin down the line for game point. It's a third straight game when Wawrinka hits long.
Djokovic is stretched to the limit but spins and gets a backhand back which Wawrinka should easily deal with. He doesn't, he sends it into the tramlines and then over-strikes a forehand to allow Djokovic in at 15-30. He rushes the net on the next point, but need not have used up the energy as Djokovic can't get a return back over. Another rush to the net sees him push the ball into the net and allow Djokovic a break point. He's rushing things and needs to slow down. He can't get a first serve in but slaps a second serve return into the tape. DJOKOVIC BREAKS.
Wawrinka takes a more conservative approach this game as Djokovic dictates the rallies and points to move 40-15. It's game when Wawrinka slaps into the net.
Wawrinka sends down his ninth ace of the match to edge closer to the set and three straight points later present him with three set points. Djokovic sends long and that's the set to Wawrinka. WAWRINKA WINS THIRD SET TO TAKE TWO SETS TO ONE LEAD.
Djokovic has to wait for a Mexican wave to come to its conclusion before he shapes to serve. He's rushing his shots and serves now (if that can ever be the case for Novak). But Wawrinka is loving life on Chatrier as he runs round the post to send a sublime backhand past Djokovic. The world No 1 seems to have lost most of his concentration which is just not like Novak. Yes, this is the third day in a row he's been forced to play, but it doesn't usually appear to fluster him. Djokovic hangs in to quell Wawrinka's resolve and edges to 40-30 and makes the Swiss serve for the set.
Incredible composure from Wawrinka as he stays focused on the job in hand and concentrates on every point. Djokovic flashes a passing winner back for 30-15 but then allows Djokovic back to 30-all when he fizzes a forehand inches long. Djokovic can't make the most of a little opening as he strikes long but then Wawrinka tightens up as he serves a third double fault of the match to allow the world No 1 back at deuce. The Swiss gifts Djokovic a second straight point to stare at break point, the first time in a long time that Novak has been in this position. A booming first serve down the T does the job as he dispatches a volleyed winner. And three straight points later, he digs deep to cement the break.
Wawrinka thought about a medical time-out during that interval to have a hand problem looked at but thought better of it. He doesn't want his momentum disrupted. The issue doesn't appear to be anything visible as he matches Djokovic shot-for-shot and then forces Djokovic into an error after a short 24-stroke rally. Wawrinka has a mini-break when he pushes a forehand inside the line and Djokovic looks to his corner muttering something or other. That's now 20 forehand winners for Stan, who really is the man. He flicks a backhand inside the line to bring up THREE break points and the walls are coming in on Djokovic as a tame drop shot is easily dispatched by the No 8 seed. WAWRINKA BREAKS.
It's a sublime service game from Wawrinka as he races to 40-0 and when Djokovic hits his service return long, it's a game to love. The Swiss is looking comfortable and strong in his surroundings. The same can't be said of Djokovic.
Crafty stuff from Djokovic at the start of the game as he sends a well-disguised drop shot over to the net to perfection. But his confidence takes a knock on the next as he attempts a similar shot only to see it loop and drop at the base of the net. Djokovic stays toe-to-toe with Wawrinka on the next point and forces the Swiss out wide and he can't quite get his racket head around a forehand return. But he's soon back level at 30-all when Djokovic gets his footwork all wrong. The Serb gathers his composure to send down a decent first serve and he finally has a game on the board when he hasn't been taken to break point.
Wawrinka is physically the more confident player out there as he sends a volley into the advantage court. But his over-eagerness has a tendancy to get the better of him as he over-hits a ground stroke. Djokovic hits long with a lob on the next as Wawrinka edges to 40-15 and then makes it game with a strong first serve.
Djokovic looks like he's swallowed a wasp as he strikes a regulation forehand into the net. His first serve percentage dropped in the second and he'll be desperate to claw it back. Another sloppy error presents Wawrinka with two break points. Another first serve goes begging, but he's back on the frontfoot in the rally on a second serve and wins it with a delicate drop shot. That's one break saved, now for the next. It will have to be on a second serve and he does as he finally wears Wawrinka down. Djokovic ran him side-to-side before finally dismissing him with a volley at the net. Wawrinka sets up a third break point and has a look at another second serve but Djokovic sends him packing again by rushing the net and putting the pressure on the Swiss. A first serve finally steers him to game point and the danger is finally averted - for this game at least. The world No 1 is clearly feeling the strain.
Djokovic took out his frustrations on his racket as he made his way to his chair and smashed it to pieces. The boos ring round again for the world No 1 and Wawrinka is their new favourite. How fickle this Parisians are. Djokovic's new weapon of choice serves him well for the first point, but Wawrinka, with a spring in his step, sends him the wrong way on the next. Wawrinka dances into a short return to fire a volley past Djokovic for 30-all and then fizzes an ace down the T en route to sealing the game.
Djokovic serving to stay in the net makes Wawrinka work for the points and forces the Swiss into an error for 30-0. He's been pushed all the way on his serve this set and it's no different this game as he's pulled back to 30-all with some great aggressive play from the No 8 seed. Djokovic sends a loose backhand out wide and Wawrinka has a big, big chance to level the match. Djokovic is bouncing the ball like crazy now as the umpire warns the crowd to keep quiet. It 's a nervy rally, Wawrinka finally makes his move but Djokovic stays in touch just. Wawrinka keeps him working and Djokovic hits long. WAWRINKA BREAKS TO WIN SECOND SET.
Wawrinka uses that anger to good effect as he swings and sweetly makes one forehand into the corner. That's won the crowd back over. The Swiss edges to 30-15 when Djokovic sends a second serve long and then sets up game point when Djokovic struggles to return a first serve. It's a comforable fifth game on the board as he swings another groundstroke out of Djokovic's reach.
Anyone missing Nadal? The Spaniard said he'd probably be on a boat today if he didn't reach the final but I'm sure he'll have one eye on the latest goings on at Roland Garros. Djokovic is pulled back to 30-all but then a kicked serve out wide moves him to game point. Djokovic thinks he's sealed it on the next with a whipped forehand, but Wawrinka wants the umpire to take a look at the mark and the ball is called out. A sloppy forehand hands Wawrinka a break point for his third service game running. He hasn't been able to make the breakthrough as yet, what can he do here? Mmmh, pretty much what he did in the previous two as he strikes long. That was risky from Djokovic to let it go. The umpire retreats again to check over the mark. Wawrinka does his best to set up another break point when he angles a drop shot back across court, but it's into the tramlines. He chases down another short ball, but hits his reply into the tape. He slaps his racket into the net a good three or four times. The boos ring round Chatrier again for the Swiss. He holds his racket up this time to say sorry. Djokovic holds.
Wawrinka lets fly from both wings and punishes Djokovic when he blasts a forehand into the corner which beats Djokovic hands down. An ace lands him a third straight point before Djokovic gets on the board this game with a backhand winner down the line while at full stretch. A third straight point for Djokovic allows the world No 1 to hang in the game and now the pressure is all back on the Swiss. He can't find a first serve when it matters most. He finds a second and he forces Djokovic behind the line and into an error. A timely first serve and he holds. It's nip and tuck this set.
An hour and 10 minutes on court now and Djokovic still has the edge despite Wawrinka's best attempts to disrupt him with some heavy groundstrokes. The Swiss No 2 hangs in a long rally and forces Djokovic to blink first for 30-all and then has another break point shot when Djokovic surprisingly pushes a backhand into the tramlines. That was very un-Djokovic like. Wawrinka has a look at a second serve but he's pinned behind the baseline as Djokovic advances to the net and swipes a volley across court. A strong first serve moves the Serb closer to the game, and after some great aggressive play from Wawrinka, a volley out wide hands the world No 1 his third game of the set.
Wawrinka shows great hands at the net to get down low and put a delicate drop shot back which Djokovic can only admire from the baseline. Wawrinka forces Djokovic to lob on the next rally and the world No 1 can't control his stroke in the blustering wind. When Djokovic slaps into the net, it's a third game of the set.
The world No 1 has been munching on some dates at the changeover and the added fuel edges him to 30-15 before Wawrinka stays toe-to-toe with a deep grounstroke into the corner. Djokovic looks on as a return flies off the tape and out wide to hand Wawrinka a break point. Wawrinka goes for the big up and under on his trusty backhand, but it's millimetres long. Not to worry, he's back at break point again when Djokovic's timid lob is dispatched at the net by Wawrinka after a wonderful rally. But nerves get the better of him as he over-eggs a backhand and we're back to deuce. Djokovic finally saves the danger and wins a third straight point to hold - just.
Djokovic throws in an uncharacteristic unforced error on his forehand and then strikes the net as Wawrinka holds to love.
Djokovic wins three straight points, the third by throwing in a drop shot which Wawrinka chases down to send his own drop shot back but one Djokovic is able to respond too. A fourth straight point, and it's an easy hold.
Wawrinka recovers from dropping that opening set by flashing a forehand winner and forcing Djokovic to strike long for 30-all. But a loose groundstroke slaps the tape to hand Djokovic an early break point in the second set. He answers it in the best possible way, with a fizzing ace which Djokovic can't even swipe his racket head at. Another strong serve, this time a body-serve sets him on the way in the rally and he hangs in the point to edge to advantage. A backhand out wide followed up with a volley at the net seal the game.
Djokovic hasn't been beaten since back in February (by Federer) and already doesn't look surrendering his 28-game winning streak. He moves Wawrinka from side-to-side, working an opening and the Swiss No 2 is pinned behind the baseline and finally sends a reply wide. Wawrinka changes things up on the next point and rushes the net. Djokovic lobs, but lobs long. Wawrinka draws level at 30-all by stepping into a forehand and sending down the line. Djokovic wants the umpire to come and have a look at. The umpire does and rules it out. Hawk-eye tells us it was good, ouch. Two sets points for Djokovic now but Wawrinka denies him on the first with a cracking volley down the line - that was good and was called good. He stops a second with a cracking exchange of drop shots at the net. Djokovic sends Wawrinka back to the baseline and Wawrinka powers a backhand into the body of Djokovic. His wrists aren't strong enough to hit a reply, it's deuce. Djokovic drops a third straight point and affords himself a slight grin as the crowd try to spur on Wawrinka. A booming first serve out wide puts paid to the Swiss's hopes of breaking. And when he sets up a third set point, he's a third of the way towards becoming the French Open champion. DJOKOVIC WINS FIRST SET.
Wawrinka gathers his composure and gets his service game back on song for two points before another wild groundstroke allows Djokovic back in the game. A deep put away leaves Djokovic quizzically staring at the line before walking away and Wawrinka makes Djokovic serve for the set with a flashing forehand winner across court.
Djokovic, serving with new balls, keeps up the momentum with his seventh straight point when Wawrinka can't get up and under a forehand. He can't make it an eighth but he hangs in the next rally and forces Wawrinka to strike long for 30-15. A serve out wide sets him up nicely for a volley into the corner which Wawrinka chases down but can't get in. An ace cements the break.
Wawrinka pulls a backhand into the tramlines and wildly sends another backhand long. The crowd sense there might be something doing this game. A third straight loose backhand gifts the world No 1 three break points and he has work to do here. The pressure tells as he throws in a double fault, the first of the match. DJOKOVIC BREAKS.
Wawrinka catches Djokovic cold with a deep service return which the Serb scrambles to get back but hits the court post for 30-15. A couple of strong serves and it's another comfortable hold.
Both men are standing so far behind the basline that the cameraman has to pan out just to keep them both in shot. Wawrinka is underpressure at 0-30, but pulls out another lethal forehand which sends Djokovic the wrong way. Another pressure point here but Wawrinka comes up with the goods again, hitting a deep groundstroke to the corner which Djokovic sends back, but it's long. A drooping backhand loops into the net to hand Djokovic break point. Wawrinka copes remarkably well with the pressure again, as he did in the first game, to force the world No 1 into an error first and we're at deuce. A second deuce later and Wawrinka secures the hold.
Wawrinka strikes a deep return which is called good and then edges a mini-break up when Djokovic hits a forehand long. Wawrinka senses an opportunity and steps into one forehand to cut short a rally, but his precision is off. Djokovic keeps his composure to edge to game point with an ace down the T which Wawrinka glances over. And Wawrinka attempts to bat the next first serve back, but hits wide.
Wawrinka has settled into a steady service rhythm as he races to three games points. Two successive aces seal a love game.
Wawrinka chases down a drop shot but sends his reply long as Djokovic moves to 30-15. An ace sets up two game points, the first of which goes begging when he strikes into the net. A solid first serve down the T is too good for Wawrinka and it's a reasonably comfortable hold.
It's perfect conditions for the final, bright sunshine and a temperature around the 22C mark as Wawrinka opens the serving. He serves volley for the opening point to ease the nerves and smashes a thunderbolt of a forehand down the line before Djokovic gets on the board with a flashing backhand winner. At 30-all, Wawrinka saves any danger of a break point with an ace but a couple of unforced errors later and he is staring at that very situation. A strong first serve which Djokovic can't control keeps the world No 1 at bay and a baseline slug-fest later with some booming groundstrokes from both men goes Wawrinka's way when Djokovic hits long. There was 39 shots in that last rally. It sets up advantage Wawrinka and the game is his with a second blasted forehand winner.
ITV's decision to move final to ITV4 hasn't gone down well with some viewers.
Djokovic wins the toss and opts to receive first.
Wawrinka walks out onto Phillipe Chatrier first to a polite applause - in contrast to the boos and jeers he experienced during his semi-final win over Frenchman Tsonga on Friday. The world No 1 follows him out 30 seconds later to a much bigger roar from the local Parisians. Chants of 'Novak, Novak' ring round the stadium briefly as the players get ready for their warm-up.
Strap yourselves in. We could be in for a long ride this afternoon. Yes, yes, Novak has an superior head-to-head record, claiming 19 of their 22 contests, but have a look at five of their most recent clashes. There's been some right ding-dong battles and some lengthy ones at that.
It was the third year running Djokovic and Wawrinka had gone to a fifth set in Melboune but neither player was at their best during a nervy semi-final. The result could have been different had Wawrinka taken a break point in the opening game of the decider and Djokovic made him pay, winning six games in succession to seal a place in the final, where he beat Andy Murray to clinch the title.
Wawrinka ended Djokovic's 25-match winning run in Melbourne with a sensational five-set victory. Djokovic looked on course for a comfortable afternoon when he raced through the opening set but Wawrinka came roaring back, overcoming a short rain delay and cramp to go through in just over four hours.
Fresh from his victory over Murray in the last eight, Wawrinka twice led Djokovic by a set but on both occasions was unable to make his advantage count. It was a bad-tempered affair that saw both players warned by the umpire, Djokovic for coaching and Wawrinka for hitting a ball into the crowd, with Wawrinka later taking a point penalty for snapping his racket. Djokovic was never at his best, particularly during a nightmare first set, but he saved his best for last to scrape through.
Djokovic came from 6-1 5-2 down to beat Wawrinka in a five-set epic that would set the Serb up for his third straight Australian title. Wawrinka outplayed his opponent for the first hour but Djokovic battled back on Rod Laver Arena before claiming a nailbiting decider after five hours and two minutes in what was arguably the most exciting match of the year.
The pair have met six times on clay and Wawrinka has only won once, with their most recent meeting on the surface coming in Madrid in 2012. There was little to separate the pair as Djokovic was made to work hard for a tight victory that featured only three breaks of serve. Djokovic was victorious but lost to Janko Tipsarevic in the next round.
Djokovic would join an elusive group of seven men to have won a career grand slam. They are Fred Perry, Don Budge, Rod Laver, Roy Emerson, Andre Agassi, Federer and Rafa Nadal.
But the world No 1 has even greater ambitions in sight - victory today would put him halfway to a calendar grand slam, a challenge so daunting that only Budge (1938) and Laver (1962 and 1969) have managed to pull it off.
"It is obviously very encouraging knowing that I have won all of the big events from last October, and playing some of my best tennis," said Djokovic, who has lost just twice in 41 matches in 2015, is on a 28-win streak and has already claimed a fifth Australian Open as well as Masters at Indian Wells, Miami, Monte Carlo and Rome this year.
Here's the full rundown of his record this year. It's a little bit special.
Wawrinka has been doing his best to play down his chances ahead of today's showdown
Maybe he's gonna play his best tennis and beat me in straight sets."
That's confidence for you, right there, hey?
Although for many of the neutrals that doesn't appear to be an altogether surprising outcome.
Wawrinka must do everything is his power to disrupt Djokovic and play "heavy tennis" as he likes to refer to it. If he strikes the ball from both wings like he did against Federer, it certainly won't be plain sailing for Djokovic.
The No 8 seed would become only the second Swiss to win Roland Garros (after Federer in 2009) and would be the first boys' champion (2003) to win the title since Mats Wilander in 1988.
Aahhh, look at his face...
Afternoon all and welcome to coverage of the men's French Open final as Novak Djokovic aims for a piece of history by becoming only the eighth man ito complete a career grand slam.
Standing in his way today is a man who obliterated Roger Federer in the quarter-finals. Stan Wawrinka blew the 17-grand slam champion off the court and has pushed the current world No 1 to breaking point on a couple of occasions in their recent head-to-head showdowns.
Two marathon matches which stick in the memory came in successive years at the Australian Open. Wawrinka defeated Djokovic over five last January en route to clinching a maiden slam. Djokovic gained revenge in Melbourne this year with a five-set victory of his own on his way to a fifth Aussie Open title and since that moment the Serb has proved almost unstoppable, unbeatable, unplayable - he is quite simply in the form of his life.
In six meetings on the red stuff, Djokovic has won all but one with Wawrinka's lone victory coming all the way back in 2006 in their first contest on clay.
But with Djokovic now just one win from history, will the nerves finally start to show and affect his performance? Amelie Mauresmo, Andy Murray's coach suggested the world No 1 could yet suffer a case of the yips today.
Djokovic finally defeated Murray in their semi-final which stretched over two days and lasted over four hours but held his nerve and composure at the right moments to stay on track.
“He is very tense there, very tense,” Mauresmo said. “It is therefore going to be interesting to see how Sunday will go. Everyone sees it. In his attitude, in his shots. But it is not illogical either.”
How can Wawrinka beat Djokovic today? Send your thoughts and predictions to me at vicki.hodges@telegraph.co.ukor tweet me at @VickiHodges_tel