2016 NFL Playoffs: Broncos beat Patriots with defense; Panthers rout Cardinals
The Broncos defense got the better of Tom Brady and the New England Patriots in the AFC championship game, and that sends Peyton Manning to a fourth Super Bowl appearance. Meanwhile, MVP favorite Cam Newton and the Carolina Panthers routed the Arizona Cardinals to join the Broncos.
Panthers rout Cardinals in NFC title game Cam Newton uses his arm and legs to send Carolina to a dominant win over Arizona on its way to Super Bowl 50. (Read More)
Broncos beat Patriots to advance to Super Bowl 50 Peyton Manning throws two touchdown passes and gets a huge lift from his defense. (Read More)
Broncos’ ferocious defense makes life miserable for Tom Brady in AFC title game In Brady-Manning 17, Denver’s defenders are the biggest stars of the AFC championship game. (Read More)
The Patriots pushed for a longer extra point. It may have cost them their season. It’s an ironic twist. (Read More)
Remember when Peyton Manning looked done? Well, now he’s back in the Super Bowl. This season was a really tough one for No. 18. (Read More)
Broncos are indeed the best defense Tom Brady has ever faced in the playoffs Brady had never before encountered at Top 10 all-time defense. (Read More)
Cam Newton channels Odell Beckham Jr. with one-handed catches This guy can do it all. (Read More)
Once again, the NFL’s slippery concrete around the field proves to be a danger The solution seems breathtakingly simple. (Read More)
Steph Curry drains jumpers in a custom Panthers jersey We know where the NBA MVP’s allegiance lies. (Read More)
Denver police department absolutely destroys Patriots with masterful troll job At least they used a smiley face emoji. (Read More)
Conspiracy alert: Patriots experience issues with their tablets Maybe if they turn them off and then on again… (Read More)
Broncos’ pass rush is proving too much for Tom Brady and the Patriots And they made Brady bleed. (Read More)
Mike Carey makes a really bad call on CBS, then takes a beating on Twitter over it He’s a former game official, for crying out loud. (Read More)
Taiwanese animation of Brady vs. Manning goes for the jugular Among other things, Brady is a crybaby and Manning is old. (Read More)
Reggie Wayne throws shade at Peyton Manning over Tom Brady rivalry A favorite former target dares mention the word “legacy.” (Read More)
You may not like Cam Newton’s dancing, but his new ad makes it clear he doesn’t care Cue the letters to the editor. (Read More)
Tom Brady as Darth Vader? That’s how this championship game “Star Wars” mashup sees it. (Read More)
Cam Newton faces a rare adversary: Cold weather Panthers QB will confront conditions that he’s almost never faced in his career. (Read More)
The Panthers, and their fans, appear to be really hyped for NFC title game Lots of rapping. (Read More)
In the beginning there was Brady-Manning Part 1 The first meeting between the two future hall-of-famers launched Brady’s career. Could Sunday’s meeting end Mannings? (Read More)
A car crash could have killed Cam Newton, instead it fueled his joy When the Panthers QB saw photos of his accident, he thought he should have died, a realization that has made him better appreciate each day he spends playing the game he loves. (Read More)
Jenkins: Manning and Brady are a peerless party of two Throughout the rest of the NFL, the rivals are unrivaled in their excellence. (Read More)
Want to understand Bruce Arians? Ask those who have known him for 40 years. (Read More)
Playoffs prove QBs’ pivotal importance So, what does that mean for the NFL draft? (Read More)
Josh Norman is no stranger to drama While he was an unheralded prospect in both college and his early pro career, Norman’s passion for the arts always helped him exhibit star potential. (Read More)
Jared Allen won’t play Sunday. And he’s not happy about it. The defensive end isn’t please he’ll be held out of the game with a trip to what would be his first-ever Super Bowl on the line. (Read More)
Fancy Stats: The Panthers are toxic But we mean that in the best way possible. (Read More)
Fancy Stats: Brady has the big edge over Manning The numbers favor the Patriots QB, even on the road. (Read More)
Jared Allen, DE, Panthers (foot) … Head Coach Ron Rivera ruled out Allen with a broken foot on Friday.
Chris Harris Jr., CB, Broncos (shoulder) … Harris was a full participant in practice Thursday and is expected to play.
• Championship Game Picks: The best bets this weekend
• ATS Trends: See where the money is going in Vegas