Tennis match fixing scandal: authorities announce probe into anti-corruption unit after BBC, Buzzfeed allegations
Tennis's governing bodies have announced an independent review into their anti-corruption unit following recent allegations of failing to pursue evidence of alleged match-fixing.
The announcement comes in response to a BBC-Buzzfeed reportreleased just before the Australian Open that claimed authorities failed to thoroughly pursue evidence of alleged corruption in the sport and irregular betting patterns.
"The Independent Review Panel will review and report on the appropriateness and effectiveness of the Tennis Anti-Corruption Program and make recommendations for change," a statement from the governing bodies read.
"In conducting the review, the IRP will take into account public commentary regarding the processes, procedures and resources of the Tennis Integrity Unit (TIU)."
The governing bodies said they expected the independent review to address how the TIU could be more transparent, additional resourcing of the unit, and governance changes that enhance the unit's independence.
The governing bodies have committed to fund and implement the review's recommendations and make those recommendations public.
"Let me just say that it is unprecedented that the seven stakeholders of tennis have come together so quickly with one purpose, and that is with the sole aim to restore public confidence in our sport," ATP president Chris Kermode told a news gathering.
"All of us, all seven bodies in our sport, believe that with everything in the news and the serious allegations that have been thrown at our sport, that the last thing anyone wants is another sports body investigating itself, which is why we have taken this very bold step to commission a completely independent review.
"This will be an open review, nothing is off the table. Adam Lewis QC and the review panel can look at anything, they can talk to anyone, investigate anything, and the four important points are there is no deadline to this review, it will take as long as is needed. It will cost what it costs.
"There have been record crowds here at the Australian Open, and at all the grand slams, all the ATP events, all the WTO events around the world, we have the best generation of players that I've ever seen and tennis is one of and, if not the best sports entertainment products in the world, leaders in integrity and we aim to keep it that way."
Kermode denied tennis authorities were lagging behind the changing landscape of sport and betting, saying the time was right to investigate any claims of fixing.
"I don't think it automatically means we are behind the curve, but I think it has provided an opportunity to take a good look," he said.
"The landscape has changed, we are in a different world and this is clearly the time to have a look."
Kermode said articles naming players linked to the scandal was "irresponsible", saying only irregular betting patterns had been identified, not evidence of actual fixing.
"I have seen more lists in the last week of various names and matches. It's important to point out that having lists which are mainly compiled by suspicious betting patterns ... do not mean corruption," he said.
"They are a red flag and they are investigated.
"Personally, I think it's irresponsible for anyone to publish names, verging on libel and we believe any player, until they are proven guilty, should be allowed to play and shouldn't have their reputation damaged at all.
"So as I said, the lists purely come from irregular betting patterns and that is not evident."
Meanwhile, one of the players embroiled in a suspected match-fixing controversy at the Australian Open, David Marrero, has appeared on a secret blacklist of professional tennis players who have played in matches bookmakers deemed to be suspicious.
The blacklist, seen by the ABC's Four Corners as part of a wider investigation into match-fixing in the sport, is maintained by one of Europe's biggest bookmakers. The program handed the list to tennis authorities on Monday.
On the weekend, bookmaker Pinnacle Sports suspended betting markets on an Australian Open mixed doubles match pitting Marrero and his Spanish compatriot Lara Arruabarrena against Polish player Lukasz Kubot and Czech Andrea Hlavackova.
At least 19 other bookmakers including Ladbrokes also cancelled their betting markets on the match, according to historical betting data available online.
In the immediate aftermath of the BBC-Buzzfeed release, the Tennis Integrity Unit (TIU) rejected claims it had suppressed evidence of match-fixing.
A notorious 2007 match between Martin Vassallo Arguello and former world number three Nikolay Davydenko was of particular interest in the report, a match that attracted millions of dollars' worth of highly suspicious bets from Russian-based accounts.
Former player Daniel Koellerer - currently serving a life ban for alleged fixing - also came forward, saying he was offered tens of thousands of dollars to throw matches, but denies he ever took up the offers.
World number one and Australian Open favourite Novak Djokovic revealed he "felt terrible" about being approached to fix a tennis match when he was a teenager in 2006, but stressed he had never spoken to the fixer.
Several high profile players have demanded proof of the BBC and Buzzfeed's allegations, including 17-time major winner Roger Federer, while recently-retired Australian star Lleyton Hewitt slammed a blog post that linked him with the fixing scandal.
"I don't believe [the BBC-Buzzfeed report] did reveal anything new, but I think the program was aired, it was widely written about and it has changed the environment," Tennis Integrity Board chairman Philip Brook said.
"We are very determined to make sure that we demonstrate to all of you today and to everybody around the world that we take this matter very seriously, and that the integrity of our sport is paramount."