Eight Russians Flunk Doping Tests in New Look at 2012 London Samples
He said the use of performance-enhancing drugs went far beyond Russia’s track and field athletes, and that Russian medal contenders had doped leading up to Beijing and London, and throughout the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi.
“They don’t know how to train without doping,” Rodchenkov said. “It’s like driving your car without gasoline. Sometimes it moves — downhill.”
The I.O.C. retested the doping samples from London and Beijing, the past two Summer Games, focusing on athletes with a chance at competing in Rio, officials said this month. The roster of athletes competing for each country will be determined in late July.
In its reanalysis, the I.O.C. found a total of 55 drug positives: 32 athletes from 12 countries who competed in Beijing across six sports, and 23 athletes from six countries who competed across five sports in London.
Officials have not yet identified the Olympians, who have the right to request a re-examination of their “B” samples — doping samples taken at the same time but stored separately for quality control.
In a statement Friday announcing the results of the London retests, Thomas Bach, the president of the I.O.C., said he had appointed a disciplinary commission with full power to rule on the athletes’ cases.
Global track and field officials are set to meet on June 17 to decide whether Russian athletes will be allowed to compete in Brazil. Hoping for the athletes’ reinstatement and promising clean competition, Russian officials said this month they would not allow athletes with a history of drug violations to compete at the Rio Games.
WADA, meanwhile, has commissioned an investigation into Rodchenkov’s account, centered on his oversight of the Sochi testing lab, where he said he substituted the tainted urine of top Russian athletes with the help of the country’s intelligence service. That inquiry is expected to conclude by July 15.
Bach said that if Rodchenkov’s account proves true, other Russian sports federations could be barred from global competition.
The United States Justice Department is also investigating government-supported doping in Russia, scrutinizing government officials, athletes, coaches and antidoping authorities. Among the people prosecutors are focused on is Rodchenkov, who fled to the United States last fall.