Russia doping in Sochi was state-dictated with secret service backing, WADA report finds
Calls are growing for Russia to be banned from the 2016 Rio Olympics after a damning report found state-sponsored involvement in a widespread doping program that began in 2011.
The report found evidence of an elaborate sample switching program under which athletes would provide clean urine samples which were stored in freezers.
The athletes would then resume doping and any subsequent contaminated samples would be smuggled out of testing laboratories by agents working for Russia's FSB secret service and replaced with the clean samples.
The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) report found the Russian Government operated "a state-dictated failsafe system" of doping, including at the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics.
Canadian law professor Richard McLaren said the FSB had backed the doping cover-ups at anti-doping laboratories in Moscow and Sochi under orders from the country's Sports Minister Vitaly Mutko.
"The Moscow laboratory operated, for the protection of doped Russian athletes, within a state-dictated failsafe system," Professor McLaren said.
"The Sochi Laboratory operated a unique sample swapping methodology to enable doped Russian athletes to compete at the Winter Olympic Games."
Russian President Vladimir Putin staked his reputation on the Sochi Games, which at around $US50 billion ($66 billion) was the most expensive in Olympic history.
Russia topped the medal table with 13 gold medals and 33 overall.
The report found: "The Ministry of Sport directed, controlled and oversaw the manipulation of athletes' analytical results or sample swapping and the active participation and assistance of the FSB [Russian Federal Security Service], CSP [Centre of Sports Preparation for Russian athletes] and both Moscow and Sochi laboratories."
Among the findings, the report said doping failures by athletes at the 2013 world athletics championships in Moscow were swapped before being sent on for testing by the sport's ruling body the IAAF.
The Kremlin rubbished the report, saying the findings were based solely on the testimony of a former official wanted in Moscow.
"The accusations against Russian athletes are based on the testimony of one person. A person with a scandalous reputation," the Kremlin said, referring to Grigory Rodchenkov, who was head of Moscow's anti-doping laboratory before fleeing to the United States and is under criminal investigation in Russia.
Mr Putin said Russian officials named in the WADA report would be temporarily suspended, but asked the WADA Commission for more detailed and "objective" information.
WADA had Professor McLaren investigate allegations made by Mr Rodchenkov in a May article in The New York Times.
Mr Rodchenkov had told how Russian secret service agents helped the operation to get Russian samples away from international inspectors at the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics.
"I'm unwaveringly confident in our report," Professor McLaren said, noting the two Russian government-backed groups were "directly involved in the state-overseen program".
Professor McLaren said the report was "credible and verifiable" and called Mr Rodchenkov "a credible and truthful person".
Mr Rodchenkov said Russia's Sports Ministry was actively involved in doping — an accusation Russian officials have denied. He said an intricate doping program was "working like a Swiss watch" and helped at least 15 Russian medallists.
International Olympic Committee (IOC) president Thomas Bach said the findings of the report showed a "shocking and unprecedented attack" on integrity of sport and the Olympic Games.
Mr Bach said the IOC would not hesitate in taking the toughest sanctions available against any individual or organisation implicated in the cheating.
After the report was published, WADA recommended that the IOC and International Paralympic Committee consider banning all athletes entered by the Russian Olympic Committee for next month's Rio Olympics.
"Shamefully, the McLaren Report corroborates the allegations, exposing a modus operandi of serious manipulation of the doping control process in the satellite laboratory set up in Sochi for the 2014 Games; and, the Moscow laboratory since 2011 and after the Sochi Games," WADA president Sir Craig Reedie in a statement.
The German Olympic body (DOSB) called for all Russian competitors to be excluded from the Rio Games next month.
The United States and Canadian anti-doping agencies had already called for a potential ban of all Russian competitors from Rio, which start August 5, if the McLaren report was damning enough.
US Anti-Doping Agency chief executive Travis Tygart said the report revealed "a mind-blowing level of corruption".
WADA appointed Professor McLaren in May to lead the probe after some observers voiced concerns about a conflict of interest given that the allegations related to the Sochi Olympics and that WADA is funded by the International Olympic Committee.