Lawrence: Durant stands between 'Bron and ring
MIAMI — The LeBron James who dropped jaws across the NBA with a performance for the ages in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals apparently was unavailable for duty early in Game 7. But James and the Miami Heat didn’t pay the ultimate price. They still emerged with a hard-fought 101-88 victory over the Celtics, setting up a Finals battle against the Oklahoma City Thunder. But it was somewhat confounding to see James go from an unstoppable force, bent on willing his team to play in a deciding game of this series, to a player who didn’t look to score on Saturday night and was all for having teammates help him beat the Celtics for the first three-and-half quarters. Now, can James win four games in the Finals and finally get his first ring? It’s the burning question that weighs on James’ broad shoulders, and it will be asked again and again starting Tuesday in Oklahoma City, when the Heat plays  the Thunder in Game 1. To get there, James had a break-through victory, winning his first Game 7 in three tries as he sent Boston’s Big Three into summer with questions whether we’ve seen the last of Paul Pierce, Kevin Garnett and Ray Allen as a unit. But even with a night that goes in the books as a success, it’s still a little baffling that James didn’t go at the Celtics as he did up in Boston two days ago, when he dominated with 45 points. He still had 31 Saturday night — not a bad night, by any stretch. But not a monster night, either. “I always try to be in attack mode,” James said. But this was night-and-day compared to Game 6. Only at rare times did James look to take over and that was one of the chief reasons the Heat found itself in a battle until the final minutes, when the Celtics could not find the basket during an anemic 15-point fourth quarter. Doc Rivers didn’t find James’ approach strange, since it was good enough to get the desired result. “I thought he played a very smart game and he let the game come to him,’’Rivers said.“And down the stretch, he took the game over and that’s what great players do.’’
When the final horn sounded and the Celtics went to the Heat to offer congratulations, Rivers had a little conversation with James about what lies ahead for the NBA’s most scrutinized player. He’s is in his third Finals and still looking for his first ring, after losing once in Cleveland in 2007 and last June when the Heat blew a 2-1 lead against Dallas, collapsing in the final three games. “I basically told him to go do it,’’Rivers said. “He gets too much heat.’’ Actually, James brings the heat on himself. He was the one who came down here to win not just one title, as he reminded everyone when he made his infamous Decision, but to win multiple championships. He talked about winning two, three, four, five, six, rather cavalierly, as if he was going to merely walk into a South Beach boutique and buy them with his new max-money deal. Game 6 was a signature moment for the three-time MVP. But in Game 7, he played for the majority of the night as if he didn’t remember what he had done in Boston. He might have had found a lot of heat here, on this night, if the Celtics hadn’t run out of gas That was the gamble James took, a big gamble, because he it was imperative he walk off the American Airlines Arena floor a winner, and by now everyone here and across the NBA landscape knows why. Because James, and no one else, set the bar. He finally seemed to remember Game 6 when he looked to score during several key possessions midway through the final quarter. His dunk with 8:00 to play put the Heat ahead for good and back in the Finals. But after that point, James didn’t keep attacking. Instead, the Heat went to Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh. Together, the Big Three scored all of Miami’s 28 points in the fourth, with Wade hitting several key baskets and Bosh finishing with 19 points. “We’re happy to be back in this position,’’James said.“We look forward to the challenge.’’ He does have a challenge, a big one.He didn’t give us a replay of Game 6. Didn’t really try, either. But the bottom line still reads in his favor: He gets to go to Oklahoma City, where Kevin Durant stands between him and the elusive ring.