Justin Rose Outduels Henrik Stenson for Golf Gold Medal
Rose and Stenson arrived at the 18th hole tied at 15 under. Rose hit his third shot about three feet from the hole and then watched as Stenson three-putted for bogey. Rose made his birdie putt to claim the gold.
Matt Kuchar of the United States carded the day’s lowest round, a 63, to claim the bronze at 13 under.
As he came off the 18th green, Kuchar pulled his wife, Sybi, into a lingering embrace. When they separated, he told her, “I’ve never been so happy with a third-place finish in my life.”
Despite not winning a medal, Watson, a two-time Masters champion, said: “This is the greatest sporting event I’ve ever been a part of. I get to go to the Masters for the rest of my life, but it’s just golf.”
The sport’s return to the Olympics got off to an inauspicious start, with many of the best players, including the top four in the rankings, opting out because of health concerns, security fears and scheduling issues. Those who came appeared prepared to leave with lasting memories and no apparent regrets.
“Once we got down here, we realized what a great experience it was,” said Rose, who was inspired to win a medal for his wife, Kate, a former member of the British acrobatic gymnastics team. She was a European champion who rose to fourth in the world before retiring at age 17 without having had a chance to compete in the Olympics because her sport was not included in the Summer Games.
“I was very excited about golf in the Olympics,” Kate Rose said. “At least one of us will get to the Olympics. So from the beginning, he really embraced it.”
While golf’s so-called Big Four — Jason Day, Dustin Johnson, Jordan Spieth and Rory McIlroy — stayed home, Rose and his wife ventured out to watch gymnastics. Watson turned up at diving, swimming, women’s field hockey and men’s basketball sessions. Stenson checked in at handball matches.
When golfers talk about their team, they typically mean their caddies. At the Olympics, Rose’s support group included all the athletes competing for Britain and every fan on the course waving the Union Jack.
A sellout crowd of 12,000 flocked to the course Sunday. The spectators’ full-throated support for their countrymen dispelled the notion that golf is an individual sport.
“With the flags and everything, it’s as emotional as I’ve ever felt about a win,” said Rose’s caddie, Mark Fulcher.
“Honestly, bless athletics,” he added, referring to track and field. “It looked great, but it was a half-empty stadium. There was nothing half-empty about this place today. It was an amazing atmosphere.”
At the start of the week, Rose and Fulcher added an app to their phones to receive alerts whenever a British athlete wins a gold medal.
“It’s going to be pretty amazing seeing the gold flip up with Rosie,” Fulcher said.
During his down time, Kuchar attended a bronze medal tennis match featuring the American doubles team of Jack Sock and Steve Johnson. He watched the Americans finish off their Canadian opponents and run toward the players’ box, shouting giddily about getting to wear their “podium jackets.”
The scene stuck with Kuchar, who said he got to thinking about how nice it would be to wear the United States jacket that was reserved for the medals ceremony. On Sunday, his eyes welled up as he talked about his podium jacket moment.
“It was just an overwhelming feeling of pride,” he said.
Kuchar’s caddie, John Wood, stood by his man all day only to be separated from him for the medals ceremony. Wood did not care that the caddies do not get medals. He choked up and took several seconds to compose himself.
“Being a part of this,” Wood said, “I don’t need anything else.”