Americans finally break through to end Ryder Cup frustration
CHASKA, Minn. — This was not eight years in the making. It was two decades.
Two decades worth of frustration was pent up inside the American team room when it arrived to Hazeltine National this week for the 41st Ryder Cup. And two decades worth of relief was released with the force of popping champagne corks when the Americans put the finishing touches on a 17-11 rout of the Europeans Sunday, capturing the Ryder Cup for the first time since 2008 and only the third time since 1999.
After eight losses in the last 10 Ryder Cups, including the last three, the Americans decided enough was enough.
“We got kicked around for so long,’’ U.S. captain Davis Love III said. “You keep losing and you feel like you’ve got to do something different.’’
Massive changes had been made. A “task force’’ was formed with a goal in mind to right all the wrongs that had been supposedly holding back the Americans, who entered the week having won the Ryder Cup only twice since 1993.
The Europeans publicly and privately snickered at the Americans, seeing the task force as an act of desperation. If we’re being honest, they had an arrogance about them when they crowed about how “flattered’’ they were that Americans were “copying’’ their formula for success. The Europeans acted as if they had all the answers.
Well, this week in a suburb about 30 minutes west of the Twin Cities, it was the Americans who had more answers. They took a 9 ½ to 6 ½ lead into Sunday’s 12 singles.
There was not a single player or captain on the U.S. side who had taken victory for granted overnight considering the fact that the Europeans stunned the Americans in 2012 after trailing 10-6 entering the singles.
Certainly not U.S. captain Davis Love III. He was, after all, also the captain of that 2012 team and had felt the sting of that European comeback ever since … until Sunday.
With all the pressure on them, the Americans extended their lead and won 7 ½ of the 12 singles points, extended the lead to a lopsided win — their second-largest margin of victory, behind only 1981, when they won 18½ to 9½.
There were so many elements to the week that made this U.S. victory monumental beyond the fact that for at least these next two years before the Ryder Cup is contested again, in France in 2018, they put an end to the European dominance.
The task force, until further notice, has been validated. So, too, has Phil Mickelson. His public undressing of 2014 captain Tom Watson right after the matches ended in U.S. defeat in Scotland was the catalyst to the changes made.
New stars were born on the U.S. team, too, with Patrick Reed, who was a revelation at Gleneagles as a rookie, taking over as “Captain America.’’ Reed has not won a major championship, but he has asserted himself as the best U.S. Ryder Cupper. He’s now is 6-1-2 in his two Ryder Cups, and he was the top points earner for the Americans this week with a 3-1-1 record.
It was Reed who Love sent out in the opening match against Rory McIlroy in an effort for the U.S. to stave off any early European comeback. And he defeated Europe’s best player 1-up in an utterly scintillating 18 holes of golf in which the two players should have been playing in a steel cage with boxing gloves on, because it was full-contact golf.
“Yeah, it does hurt,’’ McIlroy said. “We would definitely like to be feeling what the Americans are feeling right now. But saying that, they haven’t felt this in awhile.It’s been eight years since they felt this feeling. They deserve their moment. We’ll come back better and stronger in Paris.’’
The clinching point could not have come from a more fitting player, Ryan Moore, who was the 12th and final player selected to the team. Moore, one of two rookies on the U.S. team, did not even arrive to Hazeltine until Monday afternoon. It was his 1-up victory over Lee Westwood that closed out the Euros.
“This is unbelievable right now to actually get the point that clinched it for us, I guess you can say it was fitting,’’ Moore said.
“I’m just so proud of these guys,’’ Love said. “They had a lot of pressure on them for the last two years. I’ve never seen a team come together like a family like this. So much has happened over the last week. Unbelievable golf. The Europeans played just some stunning golf.’’
But, as European captain Darren Clarke put it: “The Americans played better than we did.
“They holed putts when they had to and we lipped out. But that’s happened the other way around for quite some time.’’
Eight long years to be exact.