Bledisloe Cup: All Blacks beat Wallabies 37-10 for record 18th straight win
New Zealand has survived a huge scare to beat Australia 37-10 in Auckland and record a world-record 18th consecutive Test victory.
Against all odds, the Wallabies had the All Blacks under pressure on Saturday night for the first time all year before a controversial no-try ruling cruelly denied the underdogs the chance to break a 30-year Eden Park hoodoo.
Winger Henry Speight appeared to have locked up the match at 15-all in the 45th minute — with Bernard Foley's conversion attempt to come — only for the television match official to intervene.
Fellow Wallabies winger Dane Haylett-Petty was deemed to have changed his line and taken out Julian Savea as his opposite number was pursuing Speight.
The decision left the Wallabies fuming, with the All Blacks rubbing salt into the wound 10 metres later with an 80m try to Savea against the run of play to turn the Test.
Powerhouse Savea completed a try-scoring double later on, with the final 27-point winning margin no reflection of the enthralling contest.
The victory in front of 47,744 mostly delirious All Blacks fans completed an 18-match winning streak that began in 2015 against the Wallabies at the same venue — where New Zealand are unbeaten since 1994.
After falling to England earlier in 2016, the loss also consigned the Wallabies to 3-0 series defeats against two nations in a single season for the first time.
The Wallabies nevertheless showed vast improvement after 42-8 and 29-9 losses to the world champions in the Bledisloe Cup clashes in Sydney and Wellington.
After a rare lineout steal, the Wallabies should have opened the scoring four minutes in, only for Foley to miss a penalty goal from in front.
The All Blacks were swift to punish the Australians for the let-off, with Israel Dagg finishing superbly out wide after some signature razzle-dazzle from the world champions.
The All Blacks were in again almost immediately, with Anton Leinert-Brown strolling over after an error in judgement from Speight, who left a gaping hole after a failed intercept attempt.
The Wallabies looked like deers in headlights, trailing 10-0 after as many minutes, but clawed their way back after dominating territory and possession for the next half-hour.
A Rory Arnold try in the 28th minute, Foley's conversion and a 50m penalty goal attempt from Reece Hodge gave the Wallabies the chance to drawl level at 10-all.
But then All Blacks half-back TJ Perenara charged down a Hodge kick after a Wallabies scrum win deep in their own quarter to score and give the hosts a 15-7 half-time advantage.