Euro 2012 England 1 Ukraine 0 Oleg Blokhin fumes at ghost goal Roy Hodgson happy to get rub of green
Roy Hodgson and Steven Gerrard savoured England’s warm embrace with Lady Luck on a night of Ukrainian fury and Andy Carroll’s hairspray.
Both Hodgson and Gerrard were happy to admit they were fortunate to beat the co-hosts here and set up a quarter-final against Italy after Ukraine were denied a goal which crossed the line.
Wayne Rooney nodded England ahead, early in the second half, but John Terry’s intervention, when he hooked clear a shot from Marko Devic in the 62nd minute, was equally important.
Television replays showed the ball was in before Terry’s clearance and Oleg Blokhin was furious. The defeat also led Andriy Shevchenko to retire from international football.
Hodgson said: ‘This was an away game with a capital ‘A’. There were only 4,000 brave England fans. When we needed a bit of luck and, when the ball may have crossed the line, we got a bit of luck and went on to win the match.
‘The important thing was John Terry did so well to hook the ball off the line. People can’t be 100 per cent certain. We’ve  suffered bad luck in those areas before.’
Captain Gerrard added: ‘To be successful in these tournaments, with the quality of teams you have, you need a bit of luck along the way. Two years ago with Frank Lampard’s goal it didn’t go our way. If you keep fighting and stick at it you earn that bit of luck.’
Blokhin took his rage into the press conference where he offered a Ukrainian reporter to step outside for a ‘man conversation’.
‘The ball crossed the line by over a metre,’ said the Ukraine manager. ‘There are five refs on the pitch and the ball was over the line. Why do we need five refs then?’
Devic said: ‘If I’m honest, I didn’t see it at the time. But it was a big game, and it’s very sad. I think everyone in the stadium would like to have seen what would’ve happened if it had been 1-1 with not long to go.’
There was fortune too in England’s goal. Gerrard crossed low from the right and defender Yevhen Khacheridi, stretching to intercept, only succeeded in diverting it past his own goalkeeper to Rooney, who applied the finish from a yard.
It was his first goal in a major tournament for eight years and, after scoring, he celebrated by pretending to spray his hair, which is growing after a transplant.
‘I’d used Andy Carroll’s hair products and before the game he asked me to do it if I scored and so I did it,’ said Rooney. ‘Hopefully I’ll end up with hair like him.’
In the TV studio, Jamie Carragher said: ‘A boy from Croxteth should not use hair product!’
Italy await in Kiev on Sunday and Rooney believes the change of luck could help England beyond the quarter-finals for the first time since 1996. He said: ‘It’s a difficult game and will be quite evenly matched but we’re feeling confident. We’re difficult to beat and we’ve got players in the team who can score goals. It’s going to be a tight game but hopefully we can come out winners.
‘It’s always a great feeling to score. My overall game could’ve been a bit better but it was difficult because it was my first game for a while. Towards the end I felt a little bit tired. That’s natural and I’ll benefit from that time on the pitch.’
Gerrard was superb and Rooney added: ‘He’s a world-class player and I thought he was brilliant. He drove us on at times. His delivery has been exceptional. We’re lucky to have a player like that in the team.’
England have not beaten Italy since 1997 but Cesare Prandelli will be without key defender Giorgio Chiellini who has a thigh injury. Ashley Young will be a doubt too after limping out of the Donbass Arena last night with a sore ankle.
‘I haven’t given Italy much thought,’ said Hodgson. ‘Most people didn’t think we’d get out of the group. Luckily we’ve proved that wrong. I’m pleased about that.’