Live updates: Tapwrit wins 2017 Belmont Stakes
Tapwrit won the Belmont Stakes on Saturday, overtaking favorite Irish War Cry to win the final of 2017's Triple Crown races.
Tapwrit had finished sixth in the Kentucky Derby on May 6 and did not run in the Preakness.
Tapwrit becomes the third Belmont winner in the past four races who is a son of Tapit. Tapit's sons Tonalist won the Belmont in 2014 and Creator won last year's race. The only break in Tapit's recent success as a Belmont sire is American Pharoah, who won the Belmont in 2015 to become the first Triple Crown champion since 1978.
Tapwrit is overtaking Irish War Cry. Looks like another favorite is going down in the Belmont Stakes.
It's a two-horse race with Irish War Cry and Tapwrit, with Gormley and Patch the only horses in the picture, but too far back to challenge.
Heading into the stretch, Irish War Cry has the lead, with Tapwrit in pursuit.
At the mile mark - in 1:38.95 - Irish War Cry has started to pull away.
Halfway through the race, it's still Irish War Cry and Meantime. They've gone three-quarters of a mile in 1:14.01.
The first half-mile went by in 48.66 seconds with Irish War Cry and Meantime still out front.
The first quarter was 23.88, a pretty fast pace, with Irish War Cry and Meantime setting the pace. 
A clean start for all the horses.
The 11 horses are in the starting gate and ready to break in the 149 Belmont Stakes. The winner will be draped with white carnations, following the roses of the Kentucky Derby and the black-eyed susans of the Preakness Stakes.
Irish War Cry is going off as the favorite with bettors at his lowest odds of the date. He's dropped to 3-1 from 7-2 over the past half-hour.
Hollywood Handsome will be the long shot at 21-1, a jump from 18-1.
Singer and songwriter Andy Grammer gave the "Riders, up!" command, and the horses are headed for the post parade.
The horses are facing a 1.5-mile trip over the big curves of Belmont Park, nicknamed "The Big Sandy" because of the consistency of its racing surface. The track is covered by dirt that's a mixture of 88 percent sand, 7 percent silt and 5 percent clay.
The winner's share of the $1.5 million purse is $800,000. The NBC Sports race simulation had Irish War Cry taking home the money, sweeping past expected early leader Meantime to win.
The 11 horses in the field for the Belmont Stakes are on their way to be saddled.
Belmont Park's big day of racing has reached the point where the Belmont Stakes is next on the card.
In the race preceding the Belmont Stakes, 27-1 long shot Ascend won the Woodford Reserve Manhattan. Ascend was trained by Graham Motion, who is the trainer for Belmont Stakes favorite Irish War Cry. Of course, it could portend something for Jose Ortiz, too. The Manhattan's winning jockey is on Tapwrit for the Belmont.
Tapwrit was the favorite of voters in an AL.com readers poll to pick the winner of the 149 Belmont Stakes. Tapwrit received 20.75 percent of votes to outdistance Irish War Cry.
Irish War Cry has been the favorite with bettors to win Saturday's race, but the colt garnered 18.11 percent of the vote to come in as runner-up to Tapwrit.
Only one other horse received more than 8 percent of the votes - Gormley at 13.21 percent.
Trainer Todd Pletcher had this year's Triple Crown hopeful when Always Dreaming won the Kentucky Derby on May 6. But Always Dreaming isn't Pletcher's entry in Saturday'sBelmont Stakes.
The 149 Belmont Stakes has a scheduled post time of 5:37 p.m. CDT Saturday. NBC will televise the race.
The 11-horse field doesn't include Always Dreaming after the Kentucky Derby winner threw out the anchor during the Preakness Stakes and dropped to an eight-place finisher.
Cloud Computing, one of the horses that ran past Always Dreaming at Pimlico, won the Preakness Stakes. But he's not at the Belmont either.
Classic Empire, the nation's top 2-year-old in 2016, and Epicharis, who came from Japan to run in the Belmont, aren't in Saturday's race either after injuries changed the plans for them.
That has made for a wide-open race, one in which Irish War Cry, which finished 10 in the Kentucky Derby, has been tabbed as the favorite to put a victory in an American classic on his racing resume.
Pletcher already has two Belmont winners - Rags to Riches in 2007 and Palace Malice in 2013 - and is still in this year's race. He has Tapwrit and Patch ready to run at Belmont Park. Tapwrit finished sixth and Patch 14 in the Kentucky Derby. Neither ran in the Preakness.
Two of the previous three Belmont winners have been sons of Tapit, who also sired Tapwrit.
"I think he ran a sneaky good race in the Derby," Pletcher said of Tapwrit. "I don't think it would be a surprise if either of them ran well."
Irish War Cry also skipped the Preakness after the Kentucky Derby, as did Gormley and J Boys Echo. Gormley finished ninth and J Boys Echo finished 15 in the Kentucky Derby.
Lookin At Lee will be the only horse to campaign in all the Triple Crown races this season. The colt finished second in the Kentucky Derby and fourth in the Preakness.
Two of the Belmont horses ran in the Preakness, but not the Kentucky Derby. Senior Investment came in third and Multiplier finished sixth in the Preakness.
The other three horses in the race are making their Triple Crown debuts on Saturday. Twisted Tom enters Belmont with three straight victories, Hollywood Handsome probably will go off as the long shot and Meantime has been tabbed as the "speed" horse in a race that seems to be any horse's to win.
At a rare and demanding 1.5 miles, the Belmont always is that way deep down, but usually there's a horse or two that should inspire confidence at the surface - false as it has proven to be. The post-time favorite has won twice in the past 20 years - Point Given in 2001 and American Pharoah in 2015 - and has finished out of the money in six of the previous nine Belmonts.
"This thing is wide open, completely wide open," said Ken McPeek, who has trained Senior Investment for Saturday's race. "It will be interesting to see it unfold."
McPeek ought to know something about wide-open Belmonts since he trained Sarava, which won the race as a 70-1 long shot in 2002.
The horses will break from these post positions:
This can be seen as only a good omen by the colt's handlers. Last year, Flay brought a minority stake in Creator in the days before the Belmont Stakes, and the colt won the race after finishing 13 in the Kentucky Derby.
"He called on Sunday, and (trainer) Dale (Romans) called me," said Jason Loutsch of Albaugh Family Stable, "and we thought about it for a day and said, 'Hey, let's hope that lightning strikes twice.
"The horse is doing good, and we feel there is no real downside to doing this. Bobby is a guy who has had some luck, and, hopefully, everything works out well."
The 149 Belmont Stakes comes one day past the 44 anniversary of the most remarkable performance in the race's history. Secretariat ran away with the Belmont Stakes on June 9, 1973, setting a still-standing dirt-track record by covering a mile and a half in 2 minutes, 24 seconds to become the first Triple Crown winner since Citation in 1948.
A few extra dollars might be bet on Patch on Saturday than the colt's record might warrant. That's because Patch usually draws some extra support as he gamely races without a left eye.
Before Patch had ever raced last year, handlers arrived one morning to find his left eye swollen and teary. Two weeks of treatment failed to clear up the inflammation, leading to the decision to remove the eye.
Patch has raced only four times, with one victory. He's coming off a 14-place finish in the Kentucky Derby. Patch earned his Derby spot with a second-place showing in the Louisiana Derby on April 1.
"Tough assignment for him -- a lightly raced horse and draws the far outside post," trainer Todd Pletcher said of Patch's Kentucky Derby experience. "He got a decent trip out of it. I don't think he relished the sloppy track."
Patch broke from Gate 20 in the Kentucky Derby, and he also drew the outside gate for the Belmont, but that will be Post 11.
Patch's father, Union Rags, won the 2012 Belmont, and his mother's father, A.P. Indy, won the 1992 Belmont.
"There's a lot of pedigree there to suggest that he's bred to get the mile and a half," Pletcher said, "and I think his style should fit the race well."