US Open: Brooks Koepka wins at Erin Hills, claims first major ahead of Brian Harman
American Brooks Koepka has held firm against buffeting winds and crushing pressure to claim a sensational four-shot victory at the US Open and become the latest in a growing line of first-time major winners.
The muscular American, who started the day one back off the lead, tamed his nerves and a wind-whipped Erin Hills carding six birdies, including two to kick-start his round, against a single bogey for a 5-under-par 67 to finish four clear of compatriot Brian Harman (72) and Japan's Hideki Matsuyama (66).
Australia's only player to make the cut, Marc Leishman, finished at 1-under overall after shooting a 75 in the final round.
Leishman was 5-over for the day after nine holes but his recovery was capped with a birdie on the last.
Koepka's winning total of 16-under equals the lowest score to par for a US Open, matching Rory McIlroy's victory at Congressional in 2011.
It also marks the seventh consecutive major that has crowned a first-time winner.
Koepka, who had just one PGA Tour win on his resume coming into the championship, inherits the trophy from good friend and world number one Dustin Johnson.
After days of being humbled, Erin Hills turned nasty for the final round as heavy winds pummelled the links-style layout, adding an intriguing wrinkle to the year's second major.
The day started with journeyman Brian Harman leading on 12-under and Justin Thomas — who broke the all-time US Open record with a 9-under 63 in the third round — Koepka and Briton Tommy Fleetwood one shot back on 11-under.
Koepka, the 27-year-old big-hitter from Florida, birdied the opening two holes to grab the outright lead.
As the wind picked up at Erin Hills, Fleetwood briefly made it to second place, but things settled down with Koepka and Harman clearing away from the pack.
The pair were level at 13-under, before Koepka birdied the eighth to go one shot clear.
The leader made his first real mistake of the day on the 10th, however, three-putting for a bogey to drop back to 13-under with Harman.
None of the leaders were taking control, although a late flourish from Japan's Hideki Matsuyama gave him the clubhouse lead on 12-under.
But it was on the final six holes of the back nine that Koepka took control.
A birdie on the long par-four 14th was followed by an excellent approach shot to the hardest hole on the course, the 15th.
Koepka's birdie putt never looked like missing, and suddenly he was well clear as Harman bogeyed 12 and 13.
The overnight leader made two birdies back on 14 and 16, but when Koepka birdied the 16th to make it three in a row, the title was all but his and he completed a 5-under round of 67 to share the US Open record total with McIlroy.
Harman (72) had an expensive bogey on the last, giving up sole control of second place to join Matsuyama on 12-under 276.
Fleetwood finished fourth on 11-under, with three Americans — including Rickie Fowler — tieing for fifth on 10-under.