Oscar Pistorius storms to 400m gold to bring an end to athletics action at the 2012 Paralympics
“It was very, very special to me,” he said. “It was the 11th time I came out on the track [this summer]. And I wanted to give the crowd something to remember.”
He did that all right. As he broke his own Paralympic record, he left his rivals in his wash, staggering and stuttering to the line. And how the crowd loved his demonstration of superiority. Pistorius may not have won his usual cabinet-full of golds, but he remains the Paralympian we all want to see. His full-beam smile, his surfer boy charm, his determination in battling his way into the Olympics, these are things that easily outweigh a couple of injudicious bad loser comments made in defeat.
There was a cunning bit of stage management in putting his race last. How appropriate that the man who bestrode both competitions in this stadium, who electrified this place with his audacious demonstration of ability, should bring the summer of glory to its conclusion. What a grandstand finale.
“I’ll admit I was a little nervous coming into this because of what this race meant,” he said. “I want to thank everyone for this week, this month. I’m so proud, this summer has been a dream come true. The most amazing Olympic and Paralympic Games, this is one of the highlights of my life. It’s been a blessing.”
Indeed the finish he provided was a rather better ending than the choice of act to bring down the curtain on the media centre’s programme of evening entertainment. Last night Joe McElderry was playing. At the exact moment Ellie Simmonds was swimming for gold, no more than a couple of dozen representatives of the world’s press turned out to hear the man who won X Factor three years ago. And 23 of them were there to ask how it felt to have fallen so far from celebrity.
Actually, McElderry’s booking was nicely indicative of the cultural shift we might hope this sporting summer has induced. The victories of Bradley Wiggins and Andy Murray, Mo Farah and Jess Ennis, Sarah Storey and now Oscar Pistorius have come not through the overnight lottery of a television talent contest, but through years of sacrifice, work and determination. There has been nothing instantaneous about their fame. The lesson that reward is most valuably achieved through effort may well prove to be these two Games’ most significant legacy.
And effort was being acknowledged all evening here on the track and in the field. The crowd roared their delight at the extraordinary feats of the one-legged high jumpers. They yelled with pleasure at the sight of Raoua Tlili the Tunisian dwarf shot putter winning gold with a world record of over nine metres (though how much more they would have cheered had Mike Tindall been on hand to present the dwarf thrower with her medal).
What they were waiting for, though, was Pistorius. On his arrival, the stadium lit up with a fusillade of camera flashes. To add to the drama, he was set to run inside Oliveira; the hero and nemesis side by side. The Brazilian looked somewhat discomfited in his warm-up, as if he were carrying an injury, perhaps caused by his new superlong blades. The South African on the other hand – despite being obliged to wait on his blocks by the medal presentation ceremony for the T52 200m - looked pumped, eager, ready.
He was right to be confident. Belting past Oliveira before the first bend, he was never threatened. The Brazilian, looking more and more unhappy as the race progressed, was left three and a half seconds back, watching the South African’s blades disappear into the distance. By the end, as Pistorius was already home and celebrating, the Brazilian did not even gain a medal.
As for Pistorius, there was clearly relief in his margin of victory. While David Weir, Raymond Martin and Tatyana McFadden have hoovered up the bullion on the Stratford track, the most celebrated Paralympian of them all has had a modest return. Largely it is because he has suffered the penalty of being a pioneer. He has inspired the men who have closed the gap. He will be 29 in Rio and the world’s blade runners will have had another four years to play catch up. Maybe there was unconscious meaning in the power of his performance and the ecstatic nature of his celebration: this could be the last time we see one of sport’s genuine greats on the top of the podium.
And when his delighted medal presentation had finished, that was it, the end. The place that played host to Super Saturdays and Thriller Thursdays, the place that was packed to the rafters morning, noon and night, the place that almost saw its roof lift off when Ennis, Farah, Peacock and now Pistorius cheered up the nation with their victories, is to host no more history this summer.
All that is left is a closing ceremony, the signal for the country to return to normality, cold play indeed. The only thing booked for certain in this stadium is the World Athletics Championship in 2017. This is a sporting theatre that could be dark for a while. But one thing is for sure: the performances it induced will remain bright in our collective memory.