Portugal 1 Northern Ireland 1 match report: Cristiano Ronaldo wins 100th cap
Cristiano Ronaldo reached a personal milestone but was upstaged by a winger of distinctly humbler standing, as Northern Ireland came within 10 minutes of a result to compare with any in their history, here in the Estadio do Dragao.
Ronaldo loooked earmarked for a pivotal role, on his 100th Portugal appearance, but was left staring at a humiliating defeat after Niall McGinn, freed by Celtic in the summer and snapped up by Aberdeen on a two-year contract, fired Northern Ireland into a shock 30th-minute lead.
Former Tottenham striker Helder Postiga finally rescued his side with a scrambled 80th-minute equaliser, but there was no denying Northern Ireland's right to a point that dented Portugal's qualification hopes and made a mockery of the 114 places between the nations in the latest FIFA rankings.
Portugal were made to look third-rate, rather than third best in the world, by a disciplined, determined Northern Ireland side marshalled expertly by a brilliant exhibition of poise and flawless positioning by an inspired Jonny Evans.
Even though Postiga's close-range leveller denied Northern Ireland a famous victory, there was enough about the result and performance to leave manager Michael O'Neill beaming: 'It's for others to say where that ranks alongside what has happened in the past, but I'm just immensely proud of the effort all the players put in.
'Everyone played their part, from Niall scoring a goal worthy of winning the game to Jonny, who looked like he could slot into any team in the world.
'I have had Jonny for four games now, and he has been a joy to work with. He is going to be a leader of men, within any team he plays for. I have seen that recently with his performances for Manchester United, and I thought his composure on the ball and leadership qualities were fantastic. 'The boys are actually very disappointed they only drew the game, after coming so close to winning. We knew we would have to defend for our lives at times, and that was the case in the second half. But then they showed so much character again to hold on for a point at the end.'
Ronaldo's century of appearances was marked in fitting style. A giant banner, draped over the upper tier of a stand, hailed him as the best in the world and stretched from one penalty area to the other, while his 100th cap was presented before kick-off and doffed to all corners.
Eager though he was to remain the centre of attention, his former Old Trafford colleague Evans had other ideas.
The United centre-back was imperious at the heart of Northern Ireland's defence, stretching to cut out a dangerous Nani cross early on, timing tackles to perfection and showing remarkable composure in possession.
Repeatedly, he had the self-assurance to play his way out of trouble, rather than simply clear his lines, and it led to a 30th-minute breakthrough that stunned a capacity home crowd.
Surrounded by opponents near the centre circle, Evans expertly evaded all attempts to disposses him and slid a pass into the path of Kyle Lafferty. When Lafferty immediately relayed it to McGinn, the Aberdeen winger was suddenly in on goal for an opportunity he finished with aplomb.
As Rui Patricio raced from his line, McGinn clipped a shot beyond him, before sprinting to take the acclaim of a 1,300-strong travelling support near the corner flag.
It said much for Northern Ireland's highly-effective containing job that the closest Portugal came to a first-half goal was when Craig Cathcart inadvertently volleyed a Joao Pereira cross against his own bar in the 36th minute.
Sensing the group may be slipping away from them, after Russia beat Azerbaijan earlier in the day, Portugal finally found some urgency in the second half, but still left Roy Carroll untested until the 59th minute.
The Olympiacos keeper was up to the task, as he instinctively stuck out a boot to block a low shot from Ronaldo, following a right-wing cross by Nani.
Cathcart was living dangerously at times and went perilously close to an own goal again in the 63rd minute, slicing an attempted clearance and seeing the ball loop over Carroll and land on the roof of the net.
Mounting home pressure at last yielded its reward in the 80th minute, as substitute Varela headed back a deep cross and Postiga forced the ball home from close range.
Portugal may claim their improved second half performance merited as much, but one thing was beyond dispute. Northern Ireland had thoroughly deserved any luck that went their way.