Shamed Lance Armstrong dropped by six more sponsors ¿ including his bike deal ¿ after Nike claims cyclist misled them for more than a decade
Lance Armstrong is set to lose at least $50million in sponsorship deals over the next five years after a string of companies followed Nike's decision to ditch the disgraced cyclist.
Bike sponsor Trek Bicycles and helmet sponsor Giro are among the glut of companies who have distanced themselves from the cyclist
Technology retailer Radioshack has also reportedly decided to have nothing more to do with the 41-year-old as has food maker Honey Stringer and health club franchise 24HR Fitness.
Energy drink manufacturer FRS said Armstrong had been 'on its board for several years but had resigned.'
Just two hours after Nike said it was terminating its contracting with the star yesterday Anheuser-Busch followed suit.
With his career and reputation in tatters the athlete seemingly no longer offers sponsors the image or publicity they desire from a sportstar.
According to projections by the star cyclist will lose at least $50 million over the next five years in big money sponsorship deals.
Sunglasses manufacturer Oakley said it was withholding judgment until the International Cycling Union decides whether to challenge the USADA's findings.
In a statement, 24 Hour Fitness said: 'Given the evidence surrounding Lance Armstrong's alleged actions, we have determined that our business relationship with Armstrong no longer aligns with our company's mission and values.
'Over the coming weeks, we plan to remove the Lance Armstrong brand from our six co-branded fitness clubs and further improve these facilities to enable and inspire our members to achieve their fitness goals.'
Trek Bicycle's said it was disappointed with USADA's findings: 'Given the determinations of the report, Trek today is terminating our long term relationship with Lance Armstrong.'
Honey Stinger added: 'We are in the process of removing Lance Armstrong's image and endorsement from our product packaging.'
Yesterday morning Armstrong was fired by Nike with Anheuser-Busch following suit just a few hours later.
cited insurmountable evidence that he participated in doping and misled the company for more than a decade as its reason for taking the measure.
In a statement the sportswear giant said it was terminating Armstrong's contract 'with great sadness.'
'Nike does not condone the use of illegal performance enhancing drugs in any manner,' it said.
Just minutes before Nike’s announcement, Armstrong revealed he was stepping down as chairman of his Livestrong cancer-fighting charity so that the organization can steer clear of the whirlwind surrounding its founder. Nike has said it will to continue to support Livestrong.
Within a matter of hours, beer maker Anheuser-Busch said it too would end its relationship with Armstrong when his contract expires at the end of this year, although it too would continue to back his charity.
'We have decided not to renew our relationship with Lance Armstrong when our current contract expires at the end of 2012,' said Paul Chibe, vice president of U.S. marketing for Anheuser-Busch, which had used Armstrong in ads to sell Michelob beer.
The move comes a week after the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency released a massive report detailing allegations of widespread doping by Armstrong and his teams when he won the Tour de France seven consecutive times from 1999 to 2005.
The document's purpose was to show why USADA has banned him from cycling for life and ordered 14 years of his career results erased - including those Tour titles. It contains sworn statements from 26 witnesses, including 11 former teammates.
The 41-year-old Armstrong, who overcame life-threatening testicular cancer, retired from cycling a year ago. He announced in August that he would no longer fight the doping allegations that have dogged him for years.
Together with Nike, the Livestrong Foundation has raised more than $80 million through the sale of yellow Livestrong wristbands since May 2004. The company also produces and sells a line of Livestrong-branded products, including shoes and T-shirts.
Nike is also expected to change the name of the Lance Armstrong Fitness Center building named after Armstrong at Nike headquarters in Beaverton, Oregon.
Nike's courting of top celebrity athletes is well known, as are the inherent risks companies assume when doing so.
The exact value of Armstrong's Nike deal isn't known, but the company is the biggest spender on athlete endorsement deals in the world.
Nike's annual report shows it has signed commitments for $3.2 billion worth of endorsement deals over the next five years.
Armstrong made about $17.5 million in endorsements in 2005, the last year his earnings were tracked by Sports Illustrated's Fortunate 50 list of the top paid active athletes. Nike began its relationship with Armstrong in 1996.
Armstrong is only the second high profile athlete whose contract Nike has terminated due to scandal. Nike signed NFL quarterback Michael Vick to a contract during his rookie year in 2001, but ended that pact in August 2007 after he filed a plea agreement admitting his involvement in a dogfighting ring. Vick spent 21 months in prison.
Nike re-signed Vick, who plays with the Philadelphia Eagles, in July 2011. The company said at that time that it didn't condone Vick's actions, but was supportive of the positive changes he had made to better himself off the field.
Nike's announcement followed allegations earlier this week that the U.S. sportswear giant had paid $500,000 to the former head of cycling’s world governing body, Hein Verbruggen, to cover up a positive drugs test for Armstrong.
On Tuesday night the company issued a statement saying they refute the suggestions that they ‘paid former UCI president  Verbruggen $500,000 to cover up a positive drug test’.
The statement said: 'In response to the offensive allegations in today’s New York Daily News, Nike vehemently denies that it paid former UCI president Hein Verbruggen $500,000 to cover up a positive drug test. Nike does not condone the use of illegal performance enhancing drugs.'
Until yesterday Nike had always strongly defended Armstrong. In August Nike said: 'We are saddened that Lance Armstrong may no longer be able to participate in certain competitions and his titles appear to be impacted. Lance has stated his innocence and has been unwavering on this position.'
After stepping down from the Lance Armstrong Foundation, Armstrong said he will remain on its 15-member board. His duties leading the board will be turned over to vice chairman Jeff Garvey, who was founding chairman in 1997.
'This organization, its mission and its supporters are incredibly dear to my heart,' Armstrong said in a statement. 'Today therefore, to spare the foundation any negative effects as a result of controversy surrounding my cycling career, I will conclude my chairmanship.'
Foundation spokeswoman Katherine McLane said the decision turns over the foundation's big-picture strategic planning to Garvey. He will also assume some of the public appearances and meetings that Armstrong used to handle.
Armstrong strongly denies doping, but did not fight USADA accusations through arbitration, saying he thinks the process is unfair.
Once Armstrong gave up the fight in August and the report came out, crisis management experts predicted the future of the foundation, known mainly by its Livestrong brand name, would be threatened.
They said Armstrong should consider stepping down to keep the charity from getting dragged into a debate over doping.
Armstrong's inspiring story of not only recovering from testicular cancer that had spread to his lungs and brain but then winning the world's best-known bike race helped his foundation grow from a small operation in Texas into one of the most popular charities in the country.
Armstrong drew legions of fans - and donations - and insisted he was drug free at a time when doping was rampant in professional cycling. In 2004, the foundation introduced the yellow 'Livestrong' bracelets, selling more than 80 million and creating a global symbol for cancer awareness and survivorship.
'As my cancer treatment was drawing to an end, I created a foundation to serve people affected by cancer. It has been a great privilege to help grow it from a dream into an organization that today has served 2.5 million people and helped spur a cultural shift in how the world views cancer survivors,' Armstrong said.
As chairman, Armstrong did not run the foundation's day-to-day operations, which are handled by Livestrong president and chief executive Doug Ulman.
Ulman had said last week that Armstrong's leadership role would not change. Armstrong's statement said he will remain a visible advocate for cancer issues, and he is expected to speak at Friday night's 15th anniversary gala for Livestrong in Austin.
'My family and I have devoted our lives to the work of the foundation and that will not change. We plan to continue our service to the foundation and the cancer community. We will remain active advocates for cancer survivors and engaged supporters of the fight against cancer,' Armstrong said.
CharityWatch, which analyzes the work of approximately 600 charities, lists the foundation among its top-rated organizations. That status normally goes to groups which 'generally spend 75 percent or more of their budgets on programs, spend $25 or less to raise $100 in public support, do not hold excessive assets in reserve' and disclose of basic financial information and documents.
Livestrong says it had functional expenses totaling nearly $35.8 million last year and 82 percent of every dollar raised went directly to programs, a total of more than $29.3 million.
The foundation reported a spike in contributions in late August in the days immediately after Armstrong announced he would no longer fight doping charges and officials moved to erase his Tour victories.
Daniel Borochoff, founder and president of Chicago-based CharityWatch, said last week it may take some time for donors to digest the allegations against Armstrong.
'Individuals that admire and support an individual who is later found out to be severely tarnished, don't want to admit it, don't want to admit that they've been duped,' Borochoff said.
'People, though, do need to trust a charity to be able to support it.'
1991: Signs with Subaru-Montgomery and becomes US national amateur champion. 1993: Crowned US national champion. Wins first stage in Tour de France but fails to finish. Beats Miguel Indurain to win world championship. 1996: October 2 - Diagnosed with testicular cancer. The disease later spreads through his whole body. Founds Lance Armstrong Foundation for Cancer. 1997: Declared cancer-free after brain surgery and chemotherapy. Signs with US Postal Service team after being dropped by Cofidis. July 29: Becomes only the fifth rider to win three Tour de France titles in a row. 2002: Wins Dauphine Libere and Midi Libre. July 28: Becomes only the fourth person to win four successive Tour de France titles. 2003: Equals the record of five victories in the Tour de France, but is pushed to his limit by German Jan Ullrich, who finishes just 61 seconds off the pace. 2005: July 24 - Wins his seventh Tour de France, two more than anyone else, before retiring. September 6 - Claims he is considering coming out of retirement after being angered by drug allegations against him. 2008: September 9 - Announces he will return to professional cycling and will attempt to win his eighth Tour de France in 2009. 2009: March 23 - Suffers a broken right collarbone when he crashes out on stage one of the Vuelta a Castilla y Leon in Spain. May - Appears in first Giro d'Italia, finishing 12th. Tour is somewhat marred by financial cloud over Armstrong's Astana team and the American is linked to a takeover. June - Astana's financial issues are resolved and Armstrong is named in the Tour de France team, but with 2007 champion Alberto Contador of Spain as leader. July - Contador and Armstrong endure a fractious relationship. Contador claims a second Tour title, while Armstrong finishes third. Armstrong announces he will launch his own squad in 2010, Team Radio Shack. 2010: January - Team Radio Shack make their debut at the Tour Down Under in Australia. Armstrong finishes 25th overall. May - Armstrong's former US Postal team-mate Floyd Landis, who was stripped of the 2006 Tour de France title for doping, launches allegations at the Texan. June 28 - Announces that the 2010 Tour de France will be his last. July - Finishes final Tour in 23rd place, 39 minutes and 20 seconds behind winner Contador. May - Forced to deny claims made by former team-mate Tyler Hamilton that they took performance-enhancing drugs together. 2012: February 4 - An investigation into alleged doping by Armstrong is dropped by federal prosecutors in California. June 13 - The United States Anti-Doping Agency (USADA) confirm they have initiated legal proceedings over allegations of doping against Armstrong. June 30 - The USADA confirm they will file formal doping charges against Armstrong. July 9 - Armstrong files a lawsuit in a US federal court asking for a temporary restraining order against the agency. Armstrong also claims the USADA offered "corrupt inducements" to other cyclists to testify against him. July 11 - Armstrong refiles lawsuit against the USADA after initial lawsuit was dismissed by a judge as being a "lengthy and bitter polemic", designed to attract media attention and public sympathy. August 20 - Armstrong's legal action against the USADA dismissed in court. August 24 - Armstrong announces he will not fight the doping charges filed against him by the USADA, saying in a statement he is "finished with this nonsense" and insisting he is innocent. He is stripped of all his titles banned for life from cycling by USADA. October 10 - USADA claim 11 of Armstrong's former team-mates have testified against him. The organisation say the US Postal Service team "ran the most sophisticated, professionalised and successful doping programme that sport has ever seen", with "conclusive and undeniable proof" of a team-run doping conspiracy.