Doping scandal costs Lance Armstrong sponsors, charity role
Hours later, brewery giant Anheuser-Busch followed suit, saying it will let Armstrong's contract expire at the end of the year. Nike and Anheuser-Busch said they still plan to support Livestrong and its initiatives.
Armstrong founded the Livestrong charity in 1997 after his own successful treatment for testicular cancer that had spread to his brain and lungs. He came back from the disease seemingly stronger than ever, winning the first of his seven Tour de France titles less than three years after he was diagnosed in 1996.
His success inspired cancer patients worldwide, spreading his reach far beyond the insular world of cycling and cementing his place in celebrity culture. He became rich, dated a rock star and appeared in movies. The bright yellow "LIVESTRONG" wristbands distributed by his charity became a potent symbol for perseverance in the face of adversity.
"Lance's devotion to serving others whose lives were irrevocably changed by cancer, as his was, is unsurpassable," Doug Ulman said in a statement issued after Wednesday's announcement. "We are incredibly proud of his record as an advocate and philanthropist and are deeply grateful that Lance and his family will continue to be actively involved with the Foundation's advocacy and service work."
According to Livestrong, Armstrong has helped raise nearly $500 million, including $6.5 million of his own, for cancer research, treatment and support in his role as Livestrong founder and has helped "dispel the stigma and misconceptions about the disease."
Livestrong will need to find a new way to present itself to the world without Armstrong as its face, said Eric Martin, a partner with Boost Partners, a Richmond, Virginia, strategic consulting firm.
"At this point, what they need to do is re-establish the authenticity of their cause and the way to do that, in my opinion, is to reconnect with what people really admire in their heroes," Martin said.
"I personally hope that Livestrong is stronger than Lance Armstrong because they have done -- and continue to do -- amazing work for people with cancer," he told CNN in a telephone interview.
But he said he had little doubt that the impact on Armstrong would be devasating. "It doesn't get any worse than this, OK?" he told CNN in a telephone interview. "Imagine losing the prestige of all your Tour de France titles, millions in endorsements, stepping down from the organization he loves and founded, that's been his public mission -- and, possibly the worst thing of all, which is public humiliation."