Goal surge sees Ireland sweep Scotland aside in Shinty Test
A quartet of goals in a 10-minute spell in the opening half paved the way for Ireland to take a comfortable 28-point win in the second Test of the Senior Hurling-Shinty Internationals at Cusack Park, Mullingar this afternoon.
Scotland started brightly with a point from their scorer-in-chief Kevin Bartlett after just 12 seconds, but once Westmeath's Brendan Murtagh slotted over a sixth-minute point, after a Seamus Callanan score it propelled Ireland into a lead they wouldn't relinquish.
Ireland were simply on fire in attack at this stage, with four goals following in quick succession.
Between the seventh and 17th minute the Scotland defence had no answer as goals flew past their keeper Stewart MacKintosh.
Tipperary's Patrick Maher kick-starting this goal-scoring spree, with a brace of Shane Dooley goals sandwiched by a cracking Brendan Murtagh three-pointer in the 12th minute.
Goal number five arrived exactly midway through the half, with Offaly man Dooley completely his hat-trick.
Scotland upped their game, but Bartlett failed to despatch a 26th minute penalty after an excellent block by Tommy Walsh.
However, the Caberfeith clubman managed to get a point after regaining the ball from the rebound.
Scotland's goal arrived 12 minutes later, after a highly defensive period by both sides which saw some excellent saves in particular by Ireland goalkeeper Bernard Rochford.
Finlay MacRae netting Scotland's lone goal of the opening half three minutes before the break.
However, Ireland finished strongly with a trio of points from play from Seamus Callanan to ensure a 24-point gap, on a 5-6 to 1-2 interval score-line.
Ireland began the second half strongly with a cracking goal from Antrim's Barry McFall.
However, seven minutes later Scotland responded with Bartlett's second goal.
The second half offered a more balanced game, with Murtagh and Bartlett trading goals.
Ireland always held the upper hand with a Callanan goal giving the a 31-point lead with 13 and a half minutes remaining.
A brace of Shane Dooley points late on further extended that lead, but Scotland gained some consolation at the death with a Keith MacRae goal in injury-time ensuring an 8-11 to 4-3 full-time scoreline.
In the presence of Uachtaran na hÉireann Michael D. Higgins and Camogie President Aileen Lawlor, Ireland captain Eoin Price received the Cup from GAA President Liam O'Neill after the game.