Heat will be on at the Australian Open
MELBOURNE, Australia (AP) — Australian Open weatherman Bob Leighton is predicting only two or three days of extremely hot temperatures — close to 100 degrees Fahrenheit — in the first week of the Grand Slam event.
Parts of Australia have sweltered through record high temperatures this month, but Leighton is predicting temperatures mostly around 75 degrees with little rain for the first three days of the tournament which begins Monday.
Leighton, who has worked at the Bureau of Meteorology in Melbourne for 55 years, says the lack of rain is not good news for the southern regions of Australia — Victoria, New South Wales and the island state of Tasmania — parts of which have been affected by raging bushfires for most of the last week.
"They'll be on high alert all of January and probably all of February," said Leighton, who is a lecturer in the weather bureau's training center.
BLAKE FALLS: It was an Australian Open qualifying match that wouldn't have been out of place in the main draw. A few years ago, it would have been.
Former No. 4-ranked James Blake lost his qualifying match Friday to fellow American and one-time prodigy Donald Young 7-5, 6-4 at Melbourne Park. Young, ranked as high as 38th less than a year ago, is now 189th after winning only five matches last year and losing 24, including a run of 17 consecutive defeats.
The loss ended the 33-year-old Blake's attempt at playing one of his favorite Grand Slam tournaments, and where he's enjoyed some of his better moments in tennis before a series of injuries over the past decade — including a broken back, paralyzing shingles and most recently knee surgery — took their toll.
Now ranked 124th, Blake found himself having to qualify at a Grand Slam for the first time in eight years after missing the cut-off mark for direct entry into the main draw due to his knee problems. He had missed the Australian Open the past two years.
Blake, who has 10 career singles titles, reached the quarterfinals at Melbourne Park in 2008 and the fourth round four other times. In 2010, he lost 10-8 in the fifth set of a match against Juan Martin del Potro, who won the 2009 U.S. Open.
"I don't want to be sitting at home when I feel good about my game," Blake told the Australian Open website before the qualifying tournament began. "If I have to play 'qualies,' then so be it."
There has been good news at home for Blake. Last year, he married his publicist, Emily Snider. They have a daughter, Riley Elizabeth, born last June.
COURTING FASHION: Venus Williams has worn her own designs on the tennis court, and now two other players — Britain's Joanna Konta and Australia's Jarmila Gajdosova — are wearing dresses from the American player's apparel brand EleVen By Venus Williams.
Konta and Gajdosova are the first official brand ambassadors to wear the Spring 2013 line in a major. Unfortunately, Konta, a member of the British Fed Cup team, didn't qualify for the main draw. She lost in the third round of qualifying Friday 7-5, 2-6, 8-6 to China's Zhou Yimiao.
For Friday's match, Konta wore the "Break Point Dress" in white, cream, and aqua. In the main draw, Jarmila Gajdosova, who plays 20th-seeded Yanina Wickmayer of Belgium in the first round, will wear the "Oh and Oh Love Tank and Flutter" skirt in peach and white.
An EleVen company statement said Venus Williams, who plays Galina Voskoboeva of Kazakhstan in the first round, will be wearing the "Cross Court Floral dress — a floral watercolor design in aqua, peach, cream, and white with thin black contrast binding at the bust, waistline, and sleeves giving it special detailing."
Copyright 2013 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.