10 story lines for a shortened NHL season
1. Teammates/scoring rivals: Alex Ovechkin and Sidney Crosby once appeared as if they'd be the league's great rivals and compete for the scoring championship each season. They still might be rivals, but it seems more likely that Pittsburgh Penguins teammates Crosby and. Evgeni Malkin will battle for the scoring race. Malkin was dominant playing in the Kontinental Hockey League, and Crosby is finally 100%. Because of their injury history, this could be the first time they play close to the same number of games since 2008-09. No one would be stunned if they each scored 80 to 85 points in 48 games. Crosby averaged 1.68 points per game in 22 games in 2011-12.
2. This isn't 1994-95: Everyone is trying to compare this season to 1994-95 because the league also played 48 games then. But that comparison doesn't work because the NHL is dramatically different today. There were no shootouts, hence no three-point games. There was no salary cap, hence no competitive balance today. With the parity that we now have, this 48-game season could produce the most wide-open race in NHL history.
3. Thomas is Plan B: Tim Thomas has told the Boston Bruins that he wants to sit out this season and play again in 2013-14. But that doesn't mean he won't change his mind. If a high-profile goalie goes down to injury, the Bruins' phone will ring about Thomas. He has 24 shutouts over the past four seasons, and his save percentage was .920 last season.
4. Southeastern flavor: The Southeast Division isn't the NHL's best, but it might have the league's wildest race this season. The Tampa Bay Lightning improved their defense and goaltending. The Carolina Hurricanes improved their offense. The Washington Capitals expect to be a better all-around team. The Florida Panthers are hoping to be as effective as they were last season when they won the division. The Winnipeg Jets could be better. The division looks so competitive that it's difficult to know whether to predict four Southeast teams will make the playoffs or one.
5. Facing the music in Music City: Because of a conference-only schedule, Rick Nash doesn't have to return to Columbus and Zach Parise won't be playing in New Jersey this season. But Minnesota Wild defenseman Ryan Suter will have to go to Nashville on March 9. We can guess he'll be booed for choosing to leave the Predators on July 4.
6. America's choice in net: The 2014 Olympic Games are about a year away, and it's not too early to suggest that tryouts have begun to be the USA's No. 1 goalie. Considering how well Buffalo Sabres goalie Ryan Miller played in 2010, the job could be his to lose. But USA Hockey officials can't overlook how well Jonathan Quick played last season during the Los Angeles Kings' championship run. Plus, the Vancouver Canucks' Cory Schneider and Detroit Red Wings' Jimmy Howard could play their way into contention. Thomas wants to be considered, and the Ottawa Senators' Craig Anderson is also an American.
7. Ducks taking flight? Corey Perry and Ryan Getzlaf both can be unrestricted free agents next summer, and if the Anaheim Ducks can't re-sign them, they will be the hottest names at the April 3 trade deadline. The Ducks could face a messy situation if they are in the playoff race and those two aren't signed. It would be a major setback for the organization if the Ducks lost both without getting something in return.
8. Keeping his bags packed: The Canucks can say there is no hurry to trade Roberto Luongo, but it would make sense to do it quickly. He appears to be a strong fit for the Toronto Maple Leafs or Panthers.
9. Auditioning for 2013-14: With the salary cap going down to $64.3 million next season, teams have to use these 48 games to determine who stays and who goes next summer. Each team has two compliance buyouts that won't count against the salary cap. The Philadelphia Flyers, for example, could buy out goalie Ilya Bryzgalov and start over in net. How well he plays this season presumably will determine the Flyers' direction.
10.Weber polling well: Predators defenseman Shea Weber has fallen just short in Norris Trophy balloting in each of the past two seasons. He's 27 now and in the prime of his career. His team should be strong. This should be Weber's season to win the Norris.