Just retired Alabama Athletics Director Mal Moore dies
Longtime University of Alabama Athletics Director Mal Moore, who stepped down roughly 10 days ago, passed away Saturday at Duke University Medical Center in Durham, N.C. Moore, 73, had been battling pulmonary difficulties.
Moore had been hospitalized in Durham since March 13 and officially stepped down March 20. Bill Battle, the former standout wide receiver under legendary Crimson Tide coach Paul "Bear" Bryant and a teammate of Moore's, was introduced as the AD on March 23.
The folksy, silver-haired Moore, part of Alabama athletics for more than 50 years as a player, coach or administrator, had a hand in 10 of Alabama's national football championships. At one time Moore hoped to succeed Bryant.
"The University of Alabama and the world of intercollegiate athletics have lost a legend, and I have lost a dear friend," Battle said in a statement.
"My heart goes out to his family and close friends in this time of sadness. After a time of grieving, we can begin to celebrate Mal's life, as his legacy will last for generations."
He began as a backup quarterback, played on Bryant's 1961 national championship team, became an assistant coach to Bryant and Gene Stallings, spent five years as an associate athletic director and took over as AD in 1999.
The football and athletic administration building bears Moore's name, but his biggest claim to fame might have been hiring Nick Saban as football coach. Saban has led the Tide to three titles in four years.
Moore was to become a special adviser to Alabama President Judy Bonner.
Moore oversaw an athletic department that made more than $240 million in facilities improvements -- including multiple expansions of Bryant-Denny Stadium -- and won national championships in football, gymnastics, softball and women's golf in 2011-12.
The football building and his own memorabilia-covered office are housed in the Mal M. Moore Athletic Facility, named after him in 2007.
"Mal was truly a special person in every sense of the word. We can talk about all the championships Mal has been involved with, but I think what will be remembered most was the man he was. He always put the best interests of others ahead of his own, he carried himself as a first-class gentleman, and he helped bring out the best in those around him.
"Mal was an outstanding leader in terms of all he did for Alabama athletics. Most importantly, he was a great friend to me and my family. Mal was the number one reason we decided to make the move to Tuscaloosa.
"Our thoughts and prayers are with his family, especially his daughter Heather. There's no question we have lost a great man today. What won't be lost is Mal's legacy in serving our University to make it a better place today and in the future. Nobody genuinely cared more about the Crimson Tide than Mal did. Mal has positively impacted athletics at Alabama unlike anyone ever has or probably ever will."
Moore was a freshman on Bryant's first Alabama team in 1958 then spent 22 seasons as a coach, including a stint with Stallings for the NFL's Cardinals in St. Louis and Phoenix.
He joined Bryant as a graduate assistant in 1964 and coached both the secondary and quarterbacks before becoming the Tide's first offensive coordinator in 1975. He was also Stallings' offensive coordinator from 1990-93 in a tenure that included the 1992 national championship.
Moore interviewed to take over the program after Bryant retired in 1982 but was passed over in favor of New York Giants coach Ray Perkins. That left Moore thinking about getting out of the profession before Notre Dame's Gerry Faust hired him to coach running backs.
"At the time, I kind of felt like a man without a country," Moore said in a December 2012 interview ahead of the BCS championship game with the Fighting Irish. "I was in a strange position that I'd never been in before."
A native of Dozier, Ala., Moore earned an undergraduate degree in sociology and a Master's degree in secondary education from Alabama.
He was married to the former Charlotte Davis of Tuscaloosa for 41 years before she passed away after a long illness in 2010. He is survived by his daughter HeatherCook of Scottsdale, Ariz., a granddaughter, Anna Lee, and a grandson, Charles Cannon. Funeral arrangements are pending.
Administrative career: Associate director of athletics for external affairs, Alabama, Jan. 15, 1994-Nov. 22, 1999; Athletics director, Alabama, Nov. 23, 1999-March 20, 2013; Special assistant to president, athletics director emeritus, Alabama, March 21-March 30, 2013