Rutgers coach fired after abusive video broadcast
"I am responsible for the decision to attempt a rehabilitation of Coach Rice," Pernetti said in a written statement. "Dismissal and corrective action were debated in December and I thought it was in the best interest of everyone to rehabilitate, but I was wrong. Moving forward, I will work to regain the trust of the Rutgers community."
"This was a regrettable episode for the university, but I completely support the decision to remove Coach Rice. It was the right and necessary action to take in light of the conduct displayed on the videotape," he said.
"I can't say anything right now except I'm sorry, and there will never be a time where I'm going to use any of that as an excuse or will there be any excuse," he said, according to the station. "I've let so many people down, my players, my administration, Rutgers University, the fans, my family -- who's sitting in their house, just huddled around because of the fact that their father was an embarrassment to them."
ESPN got the video from former NBA player Eric Murdock, the team's former player development director. He told the network the school fired him for blowing the whistle on Rice. The school says he was let go for "insubordinate conduct" unrelated to the video, according to ESPN.
"From time to time, there's some instances of throwing balls or physically making contact with players, but it only occurred from time to time, it wasn't an everyday type thing," he told CNN. "Obviously, the video shows it happened, but they were isolated incidents. They weren't back to back."
"I think it will affect Mike Rice wherever he goes," Pernetti told the station Tuesday. "It certainly affects his tenure. We're trying to do everything we can to support him. But we also had to penalize him within the process too because there are certain words that are said and actions that are taken that are not acceptable no matter who you are and where you work and certainly not Rutgers."
The video recalled the 2000 sacking of legendary Indiana basketball coach Bobby Knight in the aftermath of a videotaped incident in which he put his hand to the throat of a player. While it was another incident that finally led to Knight's firing, it was the videotaped 1997 incident that prompted strict limits on the coach's frequent physical and verbal outbursts and set the stage for Indiana to let him go.
"What I think is stark here is how we can be surprised, at this point, by this," former NBA player John Amaechi said on CNN's "Starting Point" Wednesday. "You can walk on any sideline almost anywhere in America or Britain, on any given weekend, and see similar behaviors."
Rice had just ended his third year as the Scarlet Knights' coach with a record of 44-51, and was under contract through the 2014-2015 season. He came to Rutgers from Robert Morris University, where he had a 73-31 record, taking the team to the NCAA basketball tournament twice.
Rice's official school bio -- which has since been taken down -- lauded the academic success of his players and credited him for working extensively with cancer and children's charities. The biography also noted "a relentless style that has become his trademark."