Prime-time Daytona 500 could be 'watershed moment' – USATODAY.com
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. – The Daytona International Speedway media center featured an afternoon matinee of Days of Thunder on its myriad TV monitors. Following the campy stock-car vehicle, a prankster placed a placard for Cole Trickle— the starring role played by Tom Cruise— at the seat where this year's Daytona 500 winner will address reporters.
The 1990 movie was one of many moments that catapulted NASCAR into prime time, and Monday's 54th running of the Daytona 500 was another — literally.
The first postponement of the Great American Race also marked the first time a weeknight Sprint Cup race was started and run under the lights, and Fox pre-empted its Monday night lineup (including House and Alcatraz) to show it.
"It's something we've always wondered about — the Monday Night Football effect," said Eddie Gossage, president of Texas Motor Speedway for 15 years and a longtime NASCAR PR/marketing maven before that. "We've talked about his for years, but no one's had the guts to roll the dice to do it."
Gossage said there were clear parallels to the 1979 Daytona 500, the first Cup race televised in its entirety on national TV.
A snowstorm in the northeast was credited with helping juice the TV audience for the race, which ended with Richard Petty winning while a backstretch brawl ensued between Cale Yarborough and Bobby and Donnie Allison. It drew a 10.5 rating — a record for a NASCAR race that stood until 2002.
With Danica Patrick — who was sent to the garage after a multicar wreck on the second lap — making her debut in NASCAR's premier series, many were watching to see what kind of rating the race garnered.
"We just had our best Chase (for the Sprint Cup) ever, and Hurricane Danica has brought gale-force winds of hype," Gossage said. "It was at a fever pitch and set for huge TV ratings (Sunday). But now we'll find out how a weeknight race does. If it does well, it could be a harbinger of things to come with (the Sprint Cup schedule).
"Honestly this could be one of the sport's watershed moments in the way that 1979 was," Gossage said. "That turned the tide in many ways."
The rating, though, might be impacted by viewers having only nine hours' notice for a race originally rescheduled for noon but scuttled by persistent rain. NASCAR announced the move to a 7 p.m. start at 10:15 a.m.
"You won't get an accurate reading tonight because people weren't planning on it," said Gossage, adding that weeknight impact on attendance — a good crowd returned Monday but Daytona's 146,000-seat grandstands weren't full — has made track promoters wary of moving to a weeknight.