Jack Butler, Undrafted Hall of Famer, Dies at 85
Jack Butler, who was ignored in the National Football League draft but became a Hall of Fame defensive back with the Pittsburgh Steelers and was chosen for the league’s all-decade team of the 1950s, died on Saturday in Pittsburgh. He was 85.
The cause was complications of a staph infection that had lingered from the knee injury that ended his career in 1959, his son Mike said.
In his nine seasons with the Steelers, Butler intercepted 52 passes in 103 games, running four of them back for touchdowns. He retired as No. 2 on the league’s career list, behind Emlen Tunnell, who had 79 interceptions for the Giants and Green Bay Packers. Butler shares the league’s single-game interception record with many players, having picked off four passes against the Washington Redskins in 1953.
At 6 feet 1 inch and 200 pounds, Butler was an outstanding end at St. Bonaventure University near Olean, N.Y., then was given a tryout with the Steelers in 1951. He made the team as an end but was switched to defensive halfback, the forerunner of the cornerback position, to replace an injured player. He was a first-team all-N.F.L. player three times, made the Pro Bowl four times and was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2012.
“He was the perfect guy for a defensive back in those days,” Ted Marchibroda, the quarterback who teamed with Butler at St. Bonaventure and with the Steelers before becoming an N.F.L. head coach, told The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. “He did not have the greatest speed, but he had good speed, good size, good hands, and his instincts were tremendous.”
John Bradshaw Butler was born on Nov. 12, 1927, in Pittsburgh. He played sandlot football there, and then studied for the priesthood at a seminary. After deciding against becoming a priest, he attended St. Bonaventure and went out for the football team with encouragement from the athletic director, Dan Rooney, the brother of the Steelers’ owner, Art Rooney, who had been ordained as a Franciscan priest and was known as Father Silas.