Richard 'Dick' Trickle dies at 71
Dick Trickle, a former NASCAR driver whose larger-than-life personality and penchant for fun won him legions of fans despite a lack of success beyond the nation’s small tracks, died Thursday of an apparent self-inflicted gunshot wound, authorities said. He was 71.
According to a release from the Lincoln County (NC) Sheriff’s Office, Trickle died from an apparent self-inflicted gun shot wound. The incident occurred at 12:02 p.m. ET at Forest Lawn Cemetery on Highway 150 East in Boger City.
The release states that the Lincoln County Communications Center received a call apparently from the victim that "there would be a dead body and it would be his." Communications Center workers tried to place a return call to the number but did not get an answer.
The first emergency units arriving on the scene located the body lying near the victim’s pickup truck.
Trickle was a Lincoln County resident and had lived there since the early 1990’s.
Trickle made 303 Cup starts from 1970-2002. He earned 36 top-10 finishes, 15 of them top-fives.
”Our thoughts and prayers go out to the family and friends of Dick Trickle on his passing today,” NASCAR Chairman and CEO Brian France said. ”Dick was a legend in the short-track racing community, particularly in his home state of Wisconsin, and he was a true fan favorite. Personalities like Dick Trickle helped shape our sport. He will be missed.”
Trickle earned his reputation as a successful short track driver before joining the Winston Cup series and earning rookie of the year in 1989 at age 48.
He competed in more than 300 Cup races. Although he never won a Cup race and won just two Busch Series races, Trickle earned cult status. Former ESPN anchor Keith Olbermann would regularly mention where Trickle finished after each NASCAR race.
Former NASCAR driver Geoff Bodine said there was only one way to describe Trickle, a native of Wisconsin Rapids, Wis.
Trickle was never one to be told how to live his life. He was known for cutting a hole in his racing helmet so he could have a smoke break when the caution flags flew.
”He always kept a cigarette lighter in his car,” Bodine said in a telephone interview. ”It’s all just sad. We don’t understand why he would do this. Hopefully we will all learn why he would do that. There was something that triggered him to take his own life. We are all really saddened by this in the racing community.”
NASCAR does not keep track of short-track records, but according to the (Milwaukee) Journal-Sentinel, Trickle won more than 1,000 short-track races throughout the country during his prime. He was a seven-time winner in the regional ARTGO Challenge Series in the late 1970s and mid `80s. Trickle also captured the ASA AC-Delco Challenge Series in back-to-back years in 1984-85 before turning to Cup racing.
Trickle lived in Iron Station, N.C., for more than 20 years. Bodine said Trickle was full of stories and popular because of it.
”People everywhere knew his name,” Bodine said. ”That’s why they used his likeness in that movie `Days of Thunder.’ He was such a character.”
The main character in that popular niche racing movie, played by Tom Cruise, was named Cole Trickle.
Bodine said that a few years ago he had to back out of a celebrity cruise for patients who were on kidney dialysis. He asked Trickle to fill in.
”He made such an impression on people on that ship that everyone wanted to know when Dick was coming back,” Bodine said. ”They loved him. They tell me he was the last man to leave most of the bars on the ship and I believe it.”
Bodine also recalled inviting Trickle to compete in one of his bobsled events in 2004 at Lake Placid, N.Y.
He said Trickle went down the first time and crashed. After being cleared by doctors to continue, Trickle tried again and crashed in the same place.
”They were doing interviews with him on TV and he was like, `I don’t know what happened, I did the exact same thing I did the first time,”’ Bodine said. ”And we’re all looking at him like, hey Dick, maybe that was the problem.”
The Associated Press contributed to this report.