Matt Kenseth edges Dale Earnhardt Jr. to win Daytona 500 – USATODAY.com
DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. – In a race plagued by fire and rain, it was Matt Kenseth who emerged as conquerer of all the vexing elements that emerged at Daytona International Speedway.
Kenseth held off a last-lap charge by Dale Earnhardt Jr. to win the 2012 Daytona 500, which will be remembered as one of the most bizarre events in NASCAR's 64-year history. Greg Biffle finished third, followed by Denny Hamlin and Jeff Burton.
"We had a great horsepower, pretty unbelievable speed and it just came down to whoever was in the front at the end," said Kenseth, who added his second Harley J. Earl trophy to his mantle. He also won in 2009.
Kenseth overcame an early overheating issue and radio problems and joked that his crewmembers "enjoyed their day more because they couldn't hear me on the radio often."
Kenseth led Roush Fenway Racing teammate Biffle and Earnhardt into the white-flag lap. Earnhardt was able to get around Biffle in the final turn, but couldn't catch Kenseth, who also won his Gatorade Duel at Daytona qualifying race on Thursday.
"I think the 16 (Biffle) had one of the strongest cars all week, and ours was right there as well," Kenseth said. "Our car for some reason was a lot faster out front than it was in traffic. It took a long time to get to the front, but like Thursday, once we were in the front it was hard for anyone to get locked on to you.
"I learned a little on Thursday at the last couple laps there of what to do and what not to do and what this car liked. I got to (Turn 3) and saw they couldn't get enough speed mustered up to try to make it move."
The Great American Race, which was the first postponed by rain in the event's 54-year history and the first to be run in prime time national TV on a weeknight. After starting shortly after 7 p.m., the checkered flag fell at 12:56 a.m. — or nearly 36 hours after its originally scheduled start of 1 p.m. Sunday.
"We couldn't ever get to Matt," said Earnhardt, whose winless streak narrowly was upped to 130 races. "I kind of waited until the last minute. I thought it was a great race. I want to thank the fans for sticking around on a Monday night and everyone who tuned in at home. Sorry about the delay and everything."
Paul Menard, Kevin Harvick, Carl Edwards, Joey Logano and Mark Martin rounded out the top 10.
The Daytona 500 nearly featured its second consecutive first-time Sprint Cup winner after Trevor Bayne won the event last year in his second career start. Dave Blaney was leading when the race was stopped on lap 160 of a scheduled 200 because of a Turn 3 inferno that was triggered when Juan Pablo Montoya lost control of his Chevrolet under caution and slid into a truck equipped with a jet-powered dryer.
The impact caused roughly 200 gallons of fuel to spill onto the track, and it took nearly 10 minutes to extinguish. The race was stopped for more than two hours for repairs before the red flag was lifted with 40 laps remainning in the scheduled distance.
The fire capped a bizarre Speedweeks at the 2.5-mile superspeedway. There were fluky winners in the Camping World Truck Series (unheralded John King, who was making only his eighth start) and the Nationwide Series (James Buescher, who was running 11th entering the final corner when he dodged all of the cars that crashed ahead of his).
The return of pack racing at Daytona also brought a plethora of wrecks. More than 60 vehicles were wrecked in the five NASCAR events during Speedweeks, and the crashes started on the second lap Monday.
Five-time champion Jimmie Johnson's spin collected Danica Patrick, who finished 38th in her Sprint Cup debut after her team repaired the damage to her No. 10 Chevrolet.
"I didn't want something to happen to it or break, and at the end, it was very perplexing and I had nothing to gain but nothing to lose," Patrick said. "I think I picked up a lot of good tips. I just wish the beginning of the race could have been a nice single-file line like when I got back out there. Maybe that's my lesson to learn there."
Johnson was uninjured but could be heading into Sunday's race at Phoenix International Raceway with fewer than the two points he earned at Daytona. NASCAR was mulling whether to penalize crew chief Chad Knaus after a failed prerace inspection to start Speedweeks.
The race's bizarre twists were so rich, the mid-race $200,000 prize was an afterthought. But that went to Martin Truex Jr., who wound up 12th.