Cleveland Cavaliers win 2013 NBA draft lottery
The Cleveland Cavaliers owner's son, who has a nerve disorder, has struck the lottery again. And the Cavaliers will pick first overall in the 2013 NBA draft on June 27 after winning the NBA draft lottery Tuesday in New York. This will be the third time in 11 years the Cavaliers pick first.
"It's huge for us," Cavaliers owner Dan Gilbert said immediately after the pick. "For us, it's about the city of Cleveland and giving them more hope as we build the franchise to the level we want to go to."
TOP PICK? Did Nerlens Noel get his wish?
The Orlando Magic, who had the best shot at landing the selection, came in second in the lottery, which gives every team that did not make the NBA playoffs odds based on regular-season records. The Magic will take the No. 2 pick despite their 25% shot at the first pick, compared to the Cavaliers' 15.6% odds.
The real surprise came when the Washington Wizards were selected third. The Wizards were slotted eighth but leaped five spots because of the lottery. The Wizards also picked third last season, and the player they took was their representative.
"We were projected to be in the eighth spot," Wizards guard Bradley Beal said. "The ball fell in our court and it is great to have the third pick in this draft."
The Cavaliers now have many options. This draft remarkably balanced, with at least four players considered potential top picks. Cleveland has its franchise player in All-Star point guard Kyrie Irving, the top pick in 2011 but could use help at several other positions.
Kentucky center Nerlens Noel and Kansas shooting guard Ben McLemore are considered the favorites for the pick, but Cleveland's biggest weakness last season was at small forward, the position of Georgetown's Otto Porter.
"This isn't a draft where there's a clear-cut obvious no-holds barred No. 1 choice," Dan Gilbert said in a teleconference. "Obviously we're going to have workouts between now and the draft. I don't think there's a direction that franchise is leaning."
UNLUCKY: Bobcats better off without top pick
Nick Gilbert was the Cavaliers' representative for the lottery for the third consecutive year. And he's 2-for-3 in getting the first overall pick.
Nick Gilbert has the nerve disorder neurofibromatosis, which causes tumors to grow in his body. He has become a rallying point for the draft lottery in recent years.
"The excitement on his face, that was something special," Dan Gilbert said. "That was probably my favorite part of this process."
The Cavaliers previously selected first overall in 2003, when they drafted LeBron James. When he left in 2010 for the Miami Heat, the franchise was devastated. Two top picks in three years since helps.
"It's been a long three years for the franchise, but we've come through it," Gilbert said. "We said all along that we're going to build this primarily through the draft. We wanted to focus on getting a handful of really strong people ... and build the franchise around them."
Here is the full first-round draft order: