Fans recapture the magic of London 2012 Olympics at Anniversary Games
It all came packaged with the fantastically unappetising title of the Sainsbury’s Anniversary Games 2013 and, instead of athletes hanging desperately on the five rings at the absolute limits of their ambition and performing as if their very lives depended on it, we had a bunch simply enjoying a decent pay day en route to far more significant dates at the World Championships in Moscow next month.
So what? Who the heck cared? This was a moment for 65,000 to relive the time of their lives. Either that, or to enjoy the time of their lives they felt deprived of missing the previous year when they could not land tickets.
All sequels are inferior – apart from Godfather II, naturally – and Olympic sequels are bound to be more inferior than most but here was an illustration of the enduring power of last year’s national celebration.
Naturally, a year on, this has been a week for largely unwinnable arguments about the efficacy of the Olympic legacy or otherwise. For instance, the BBC today produced the results of a survey, suggesting two-thirds of the UK public felt the cost of the Games was worth the money.
What? As if they needed a survey to determine that. This night might have saved them the bother of all those polls. Of course, the Olympics were monstrously expensive and the legacy benefits highly debatable but what has never been in dispute is that they provided a taste of incredible theatre that proved wholly addictive.
What else could explain the extraordinary scenes here at the Olympic Stadium tonight? People forming vast queues for tickets even though both days and all 130,000 tickets had been sold out for this Diamond League fare in 75 minutes in the spring.
It was not the athletics factor at play, here; it was the Olympic factor, it was pure nostalgia.
So it was that they came on this lovely night in their thousands to rekindle the magic. Even the stewards were trying to recapture a touch of the old ‘Games makers’ bonhomie, letting kids use the megaphones to belt out directions to the punters.
Thus, there were the daft souls in their Mo Farah masks, or their Boadicea dresses, waving their “Go GB!” placards and posing, Usain Bolt-lightning style, over panoramas of bulldozers and ugly building sites. It was all slightly surreal, this attempt to recapture the spirit of 2012 amid the wasteland of 2013, but nobody seemed to mind one hoot.
The organisers did their best to recall the fun of 2012 but their choice of the woeful Colin Murray as an early master of ceremonies did not help. Did we really hear him try to get laughs by saying the identikit athlete would have “the stamina of Mo, the speed of Bolt and the bottom of Jess Ennis?”
Once inside the stadium, how the athletes must have savoured the night, though. The mind flashed back to that first Friday of the Olympic track programme when 80,000 were all neatly in place, ready to raise the roof for Ennis at 9am, a morning when every journeyman had his day and was cheered to the echo.
You felt for Sally Peake, a Welsh pole vaulter of no great pedigree who must suddenly have felt like Yelena Isinbayeva for a night.
When she cleared four metres, the sort of occurrence which might have engendered a brief round of applause and a bark from one man and his dog at a league meet for Birchfield Harriers, it was greeted with a roar which must have made her feel she had just struck Olympic gold.
International athletics bosses were sitting here, doubtless purring. Look at the sort of crowds the best athletes in the world attract at their other Diamond League meets. Not bad but no way could they sustain two days of extraordinary interest like this.
How the International Association of Athletics Federations must rub its hands in absolute glee at the prospect of being able to thin out the programme over two days yet still have 80,000 sell-outs.
Athletics comes over as a sport on the ropes, struggling desperately in the face of major doping scandals which just gnaw away relentlessly at its credibility.
Yet here was a night to forget all that and just savour the sight of the man who has sailed through all the controversy and keeps declaring to everyone: “I was made to inspire people and made to run. I was given a gift and that’s what I do. I am clean.”
Yes, another night to remember just what Usain Bolt means to athletics.
They wheeled him out on a motorised spaceship before the action got under way just for the crowd to be able to pay homage. For years, old rocket man has been doing this, carrying the sport on his back like Atlas, not just athletics’ main draw but its main hope.
Now, as he acknowledged his disciples while making his lap of honour, you could not help wondering if he is the sport’s last hope too.