Novak Djokovic wins Shanghai Masters final after thrilling three-set victory over Juan Martin del Potro
Novak Djokovic completed his second successive sweep of the Chinese ATP events on Sunday as he retained his Shanghai Masters title. Despite a shaky period in the second set, where he kept slipping on the concrete court, Djokovic came back strongly to close out a 6-1, 3-6, 7-6 victory Juan Martín del Potro.
This has been a close-fought rivalry over the past 18 months, dating back to Del Potro’s victory over Djokovic in the Olympic bronze medal match in London. Yet Djokovic is a hard man to take down, as he proved by taking revenge in a five-set Wimbledon semi-final this summer.
In the first and third sets of Sunday’s final, the world No2 produced some magnificent tennis, as a final tally of 47 winners and only 26 unforced errors would suggest. For some reason, Djokovic always seems to be at his best in the Asia-Pacific region, where his only defeat in his last 55 matches came against Andy Murray in the 2012 Dubai semi-final.
As for Del Potro, he looked shattered after his third runner-up finish at a Masters event. It is a peculiarity of his record that he has won a slam, the 2009 US Open, but never a Masters title.
But then, you look at the players he has faced in his finals – Murray, Djokovic and Rafael Nadal – and those names serve as a reminder of how difficult it is to win titles in this era. You have to go back to the 2010 Miami Masters, 33 tournaments ago, for the last time a man ranked outside the top five lifted one of these titles.
At least Del Potro could take consolation from the fact that he has qualified for the season-ending Barclays ATP World Tour Finals. The Argentine’s straight-sets victory over Rafael Nadal in the semi-final was one of the finest performances of his career, and suggested that the 2014 season could see him challenging for a place in the top four.
At the moment, Del Potro stands fifth in the rankings but he has a chance of making up ground on David Ferrer, the No4, who has suffered a form slump since losing to Nadal in the French Open final, with not even a semi-final to show for his efforts over the last four months, while Murray is only just beginning rehab after a back operation last month.
On Saturday, the British No1 tweeted a photograph of himself and his fitness trainer, Matt Little, donning wet suits as they prepared for a pool fitness session. “Flattering,” read the sarcastic caption.