In a Bizarre Finish, the Cardinals Stumble Into a Victory
For several chaotic moments, all parties were on the field by home plate, arguing, explaining or celebrating as the Cardinals took a two-games-to-one lead in the Series.
“I think maybe 75 percent of the guys didn’t know what happened,” Cardinals outfielder Carlos Beltran said of his teammates. “I’ve never seen anything like that.”
But once he came into the clubhouse, he asked the coach Jose Oquendo about it, then saw for himself on the video screen.
The play evoked memories of the famous noncall in the 1975 World Series between the Red Sox and the Cincinnati Reds, which also went against Boston. The Red Sox claimed that Armbrister had interfered with Fisk on a bunt play, and pleaded with the home plate umpire Barnett for the call, which never came. The Red Sox lost that game, too.
The setting for Saturday’s ending, which will be added to World Series lore, was a tie game with one out in the ninth inning after the Red Sox scored twice in the eighth to draw even. The Cardinals had Yadier Molina at third and Craig at second, so Boston brought the infield in for Jon Jay, who slapped a grounder up the middle.
Dustin Pedroia made a great play to snare the ball and throw home to catcher Jarrod Saltalamacchia, who tagged Molina out. But for the second time in the series, the Red Sox made the costly mistake of forcing a throw to third base. Saltalamacchia’s throw was wide and forced Middlebrooks to lunge to the second-base side of the bag.
He dived but couldn’t get it, and the ball went into foul territory as Red Sox closer Koji Uehara squatted and put his hands to his head, assuming the game was over on the throwing error. Then Uehara saw left fielder Daniel Nava pick up the ball, throw it back to Saltalamacchia, who applied the tag to the sliding Craig in plenty of time.
It appeared the Red Sox had squeezed out of it and had a reprieve, despite their mistake. But while he was on the ground, Middlebrooks was in the path of Craig, who tripped over him on his way home, got up and scampered home.
Joyce, the same umpire who blew the call at first base to prevent Armando Galarraga from getting a perfect game in 2010, saw the play clearly and immediately made the call. Middlebrooks, on his stomach, lifted up his legs. Whether or not it was intentional didn’t matter. Craig, who called his route home an obstacle course, stumbled over him.
“The base runner has every right to go unobstructed to home plate,” Joyce said. “and unfortunately for Middlebrooks, he was right there. There was contact, so he could not advance to home plate naturally.”
The rule states that if a fielder who is not in the act of fielding a ball — including if he dives for a ball that gets past him — obstructs a runner, he gets the next base, regardless of his intent.
“I don’t see how it’s obstruction,” Saltalamacchia said.
DeMuth did. He saw Joyce’s call, and despite seeing Craig tagged out, he pointed to Joyce and then made the safe call. The left-field umpire and crew chief John Hirschbeck saw the play develop from the outfield, and was certain Joyce made the right call, which also received the endorsement of Joe Torre, baseball’s vice president for operations, including the umpires.
“We’re trained to look for those things,” Hirschbeck said. “It’s out of the ordinary, but when it happens and it’s the World Series, you expect to get it right.”
Farrell didn’t see it quite the same way, echoing Middlebrooks’s claim that there was nothing he could have done differently.
“I don’t know how he gets out of the way when he’s lying on the ground,” he said. “And when Craig trips over him, I guess by the letter of the rule you could say it’s obstruction. It’s a tough pill to swallow.”
Pedroia, who was incredulous in the immediate aftermath, scampering about on the field with his arms held out in disbelief, was asked how he became aware something was amiss.
“The guy at home called him safe,” he said. “He was out by three feet.”
In Game 1, DeMuth made a bad call on a play at second base when he called a runner out when the ball clearly never landed in Pete Kozma’s glove. But the umpires huddled and reversed the call to get it right.
In Game 3, they were all in agreement on what happened, and that the initial call was the correct one. So when the arguments and the celebrations were over, they retreated into their own locker room and held their own form of celebration.
“Immediately after we got off the field and into our locker room, we congratulated Jim,” Hirschbeck said, “and said, ‘Great call.’ “
Only in this World Series, where mistakes are piling up, would the umpires come away having had the best game of all.