Gary Kubiak, Houston Texans coach, released from hospital
Houston Texans coach Gary Kubiak was released from the hospital Tuesday, two days after suffering what has been diagnosed as a transient ischemic attack.
The team updated Kubiak's status in a statement, saying that the 52-year-old is expected to make a full recovery.
The Texans did not say when Kubiak will resume his coaching duties. Kubiak suffered the attack while leaving the field at halftime of Sunday night's loss to the Indianapolis Colts.
A transient ischemic attack, or TIA, occurs when blood flow to the brain is briefly interrupted, typically by a blood clot or narrowed blood vessels.
TIAs are often called mini-strokes and can cause stroke-like symptoms including sudden dizziness, numbness, vision loss or unconsciousness, though symptoms last only a few minutes or a few hours and no permanent brain damage occurs. TIAs are often warning signs for a future stroke.
Kubiak also released a statement Tuesday, thanking Texans owner Bob McNair and the organization.
"I want to thank my family, the McNair family, the Texans organization, the doctors and staff at Houston Methodist and the entire Houston community for all the love and support we have received over the past three days," Kubiak said in the statement. "I've been through an ordeal, and my focus now is to get back to good health.
"Doctors have told me I will make a full recovery, but we have not determined when I will be cleared to return to the office. Again, thank you for the support and concern."
Houston squandered an 18-point lead against the Colts without Kubiak, and the 27-24 setback was the team's sixth straight loss.
The Texans (2-6) have not named an interim coach as they prepare for Sunday's game at Arizona. Defensive coordinator Wade Phillips, a former head coach for Dallas, took over after Kubiak was taken to the hospital, and he ran Houston's practice Monday. The Texans will need to figure out who's calling the plays on offense since that was done by Kubiak.
Kubiak's health problems are the latest blow to a team already in disarray in an underperforming season filled with numerous injuries and the benching of quarterback Matt Schaub. The six-game skid is tied for the longest losing streak in team history.
Now the Texans will try to regroup and adjust to Kubiak's likely absence Sunday. Players said they believe Houston's assistant coaches will prepare them well for Sunday's game.
"I think we're in great hands with whoever has to step up," linebacker Joe Mays said. "You're in great hands because we have a great group of coaches."
Kubiak was the second NFL coach with a severe medical issue this past weekend. Denver Broncos coach John Fox underwent heart surgery in North Carolina on Monday after being hospitalized on Saturday. Fox felt dizzy last week, and doctors recommended immediate aortic valve replacement surgery.
Kubiak was hired in 2006 and is in the midst of a three-year deal that has him under contract through 2014. An eighth-round pick out of Texas A&M, he spent nine years as John Elway's backup in Denver and has made his mark as an offensive guru and quarterbacks mentor.
Information from The Associated Press was used in this report.