Lippi makes history as Guangzhou Evergrande clinch AFC Champions League
The Chinese Super League champions won on away goals after a 3-3 aggregate draw with Seoul as the Italian becomes the first coach to lift both Champions Leagues and the World Cup
Marcello Lippi made history as Guangzhou Evergrande clinched the AFC Champions League on away goals after a 1-1 draw with Seoul at the Tianhe Stadium on Saturday.
The draw was enough to secure Lippi's side the trophy on away goals, after a 2-2 draw in the first leg, with the Chinese Super League champions completing a domestic and Asian double. 
Evergrande also became the first Chinese club to win an Asian title in 23 years and the first from their country to win the competition in its current format, while Lippi becomes the first coach to win Champions Leagues in both Europe and Asia as well as the World Cup.
Dario Conca went close for the hosts after 15 minutes in a low-key opening, hitting the post with an effort after Zhang Linpeng produced a cutback from the right byline. 
Two minutes into the second half, Evergrande threatened again, but Kim Yong-Dae saved well from Muriqui's close-range effort before the goalkeeper made himself equal to Huang Bowen's strike from outside the area. 
Ha Dae Sung almost put the visitors ahead seven minutes before the hour mark, with a chip that needed to be touched over by Zeng Cheng. 
However, Seoul's limited amount of threat was punished by Brazilian Elkeson, who slotted home after taking Muriqui's through ball in his stride after 57 minutes.
It was the Brazilian's third goal in two matches, after clinching a brace in his side's final Chinese Super League game of the season on Sunday - a 5-0 win over Wuhan Zall. 
The lead lasted just four minutes however, when Dejan Damjanovic expertly turned a Sergio Escudero pass home, after dribbling well to carve out an opportunity.
However, the visitors were unable to carve out any further chances as Evergrande finished the competition unbeaten at home, allowing Lippi to add the AFC title to the Uefa Champions League he lifted with Juventus in 1996 and the World Cup with Italy 10 years later.