North Carolina hit with postseason ban, loss of scholarships
The NCAA announced Monday that North Carolina's football program is banned from a bowl game in 2012 and must forfeit 15 scholarships over a three-year period.
An NCAA investigation found the program had committed nine major violations involving academic fraud, improper benefits and former assistant coach John Blake acting as an agent.
The NCAA news release announcing the decision said North Carolina "is responsible for multiple violations, including academic fraud, impermissible agent benefits, ineligible participation and a failure to monitor its football program."
The findings also highlighted the role of social networking sites in the case. The report said, "While we do not impose an absolute duty upon member institutions to regularly monitor such sites, the duty to do so may arise as part of an institution's heightened awareness when it has or should have a reasonable suspicion of rules violations."
Britton Banowsky, commissioner of Conference USA and chair of the committee on infractions, said, "To expect the university to monitor social networking sites is asking too much."
According to the NCAA, "The academic fraud violations stemmed from the former tutor constructing significant parts of writing assignments for three football student-athletes. . . . The tutor also provided more than $4,000 in impermissible benefits, including airfare and paying for outstanding parking tickets, to 11 football student-athletes after she graduated and was no longer a university employee."
The NCAA said, "The former assistant coach (Blake) also did not report $31,000 in athletically related outside income from a sports agency. . . . It was found that even after returning to college athletics, the former assistant coach continued recruiting clients for the sports agency, including student-athletes he was coaching."
The school previously imposed several penalties, including vacating all 16 wins for 2008 and 2009, reducing nine scholarships over the next three academic years, putting the program on two years of probation and a $50,000 fine.
Fourteen players missed at least one game during the 2010 season, and seven missed the entire season. Blake resigned one game into the 2010 season, and the school fired head coach Butch Davis before last season because of the investigation. School officials appeared before the committee in October. The NCAA said that since Blake did not cooperate and provided false and misleading information, there was a significant delay in the ruling.
After assistant coach Everett Withers led the Tar Heels to a 7-6 record last year, new athletics director Bubba Cunningham hired Larry Fedora from Southern Mississippi as the new coach.