Jimmie Johnson relishes moment, wows peers with title No. 6
HOMESTEAD, Fla. — Symbols of perhaps the greatest dynasty in NASCAR history were hard to miss amid the star-shaped confetti falling on the Sprint Cup championship stage Sunday night at Homestead-Miami Speedway.
But as his crewmembers wore hats shaped as mammoth title rings with sparkling fake diamonds and fans chanted "Six Time!" as he wandered around the championship stage accepting congratulations, Jimmie Johnson tried to downplay his latest step toward racing immortality.
He earned a Hall of Fame vote by virtue of winning his sixth title (NASCAR is adding the active champ to its panel), but the Hendrick Motorsports driver didn't want to weigh his place in the stock car pantheon.
"We'll see if I can get seven," Johnson said of the championship tally that would tie him with Richard Petty and Dale Earnhardt for the Cup record. "Time will tell. We need to save the argument until I hang up the helmet. Then it's worth the argument."
GLUCK: Johnson is the best NASCAR driver ever
For his peers, there wasn't any need for a debate about the career merits of a driver who has won six championships during his 12 seasons.
"Unfortunately, we're racing during the Jimmie Johnson era," Denny Hamlin said with a shrug after winning the Ford Ecoboost 400. "We're just unlucky in that sense. Racing with him, I think he's the best that there ever was. He's racing against competition that is tougher than this sport's ever seen."
Said Matt Kenseth, "Jimmie and that team are obviously unbelievable. Never seen anything like this in the sport and probably will never see anything like it again.It's amazing they can figure out how to do that year after year."
The Joe Gibbs Racing driver was kidding, but he might have hit on the only scenario in which the Johnson juggernaut can be slowed. His Homestead performance indicated why.
Kenseth was virtually perfect — leading the most laps and finishing second to teammate Hamlin — during a race in which Johnson faced adversity, but it wasn't nearly enough. Johnson won the title by 19 points with a ninth-place finish and never fell below 23rd, the finish needed to clinch the title regardless of Kenseth's result.
"The 10 races we put together would have won a championship in some years," said Kenseth, who notched a series-high seven victories in what he called the greatest season of his career. "They just seem to be able to raise the bar. If they don't have any kind of problem, they're capable of winning every week. If they don't win, they're going to run in the top five."
Johnson had an average finish of 5.1 in Chase races, his second-best performance, behind a 5.0 in 2007.
At 38, he is the youngest driver to reach six titles (83 days earlier than Petty) and seems at an unbeatable peak. In each of the final two races of the Chase, he averted disaster with impressive saves — at Homestead, on a restart with 74 laps remaining in which he made contact with Kenseth but didn't lose control.
"He can do things with a race car that most mortals can't," crew chief Chad Knaus said. "I'm blessed to be his crew chief, but the resources we have allow him to be as good as he is. He's very studious (and) very intuitive. He feeds us great information. He's pretty spectacular. That dude is pretty amazing."
The team also seems impervious, despite plenty of turnover. Only three members (Johnson, Knaus and car chief Ron Malec) remain from its 2002 formation, and this season brought the addition of two engineers. "I don't think we're close to the potential yet," Knaus said.
And though the fastidious Knaus admits to bickering with Johnson, there have been no cracks in their relationship since they nearly split eight years ago.
"They've learned how to not let things get to a boiling point," team owner Rick Hendrick said. "They have tremendous respect for each other, and the chemistry is the best it's ever been. They can see what they're capable of doing, and I don't think they'll let anything come between that."
Aside from planning to text basketball Hall of Famer Michael Jordan ("He's given me a hard time that I only won five. 'Hey buddy, I've caught up.'"), there were no hints Johnson would lose focus by getting caught up in accomplishments.
Said Johnson, "This team is capable of a lot of great things, but all of that is in the future. I just don't want to focus on that yet. I'm going to unplug and enjoy the sixth."
As Johnson emerged from his car, he tossed liquid from a six-pack of blue Gatorade, which he later held aloft.
Team owner Rick Hendrick, Knaus and the entire No. 48 crew — wearing huge title rings as hats with fake diamonds that sparkled in the lights — crowded into the winner's circle to congratulate the driver after he'd climbed from his car.
"I hear you up there! Thank you!," Johnson yelled to the crowd in the stands as he celebrated in victory lane with wife Chandra and Genevieve. "This sport's about people. And our people rose up and got the job done this year. I'm so honored and excited to have the six-pack.
"I know my grandma (who died last month), was guiding me around the track."
Johnson revealed during the post-race news conference that he had to skip her funeral to attend testing at this track.
Unlike last year's championship celebration — in which titlist Brad Keselowski swigged his sponsor's product from an oversized beer glass — this team drank adult beverages from blue Solo cups emblazoned with the No. 48 sponsor's logo — Lowe's. Johnson and Lowe's have been a team since his first season, in 2002.
Former NFL player Jason Sehorn and his wife, actress Angie Harmon, were among the crowd of fans near the stage. Harmon took pictures of the Sprint vision screen with her phone as Johnson was interviewed on TV.
Kenseth came to the championship stage, walked up on the podium, congratulated Hendrick and Knaus, then found Johnson. He smiled and held his hand up for a high-five from Johnson's daughter Genevieve, or "Evie".
Teammate Jeff Gordon made his way over and his children seemed fascinated by the star-shaped confetti that had fallen, along with the fireworks display, as Johnson was crowned. Gordon's daughter Ella picked up a few of the stars.
Johnson survived a scare on a Lap 194 restart after Gordon appeared to have trouble getting up to speed in second, stacking up several cars behind him. For the second consecutive race, Johnson swiftly was forced into evasive maneuvers in traffic, and he made contact with title contender Kenseth while jerking the wheel of his No. 48 Chevrolet back and forth.
Johnson got another scare seven laps later when Greg Biffle battled him hard for 15th. It seemed to be a leftover from a scrape between Biffle and Johnson at Martinsville Speedway a few weeks earlier in which Biffle was unhappy about being bumped.
Johnson caught a break with a caution five laps later that allowed his team to assess and fix the damage. He steadily solidered into the top 10 after restarting 17th with 56 laps remaining.
Leaders Summary (Driver, Times Led, Laps Led): M.Kenseth, 7 times for 144 laps; D.Hamlin, 5 times for 72 laps; D.Earnhardt Jr., 4 times for 28 laps; B.Keselowski, 1 time for 9 laps; K.Harvick, 3 times for 8 laps; Ku.Busch, 1 time for 4 laps; K.Larson, 1 time for 1 lap; D.Ragan, 1 time for 1 lap.