Iona out to impress President in hoop dream
DAYTON, Ohio — For many, the First Four portion of the NCAA Tournament is just a formality, the ultimate in undercards before the Big Dance starts. But for the Iona Gaels, Tuesday night not only represents a chance to start a Cinderella Final Four run, they may get a chance to impress the First Fan. As Iona left for Dayton Monday morning, the buzz was that President Obama would be in attendance to check out the start of the NCAA Tournament. “I hope he comes into the locker room and says ‘Hi’ to us,” said Iona’s Sean Armand, the Gaels premier 3-point threat. “I’m definitely going to give him a show, no doubt about that. That’s a great honor. I hope we get to meet him and show him how Iona basketball is.” The Gaels also hope to show the rest of the country they belong. Like VCU last season, Iona arrived in Dayton knowing it is taking some heat from critics for being selected to the tournament over some bigger-name schools from larger conferences. That talk died down when VCU went all the way to the Final Four, something Iona is dreaming of this year. “I think we can be that team this year,” said Iona point guard Scott Machado, who led the nation in assists this season with 9.9 per game. “Make some noise, get people’s attention. Right now is the perfect time for us to come together and make a run in this tournament.” They are hoping that run starts Tuesday night, when the Gaels take on BYU for the right to play Marquette Thursday in Louisville. Last season VCU was matched up against USC in the First Four and knocked the Trojans off by 13 points. What followed was a stunning succession of victories over Georgetown, Purdue, Florida State and finally Kansas as the Rams became just the second No. 11 seed to ever reach the Final Four. “I think it’s a motivation for all mid-majors and low majors that in a given tournament and a given couple of days anything can happen in basketball,” Iona coach Tim Cluess said. “That’s what’s so great about the sport.” Mike Glover knows all about the doubters out there and he thinks Iona has the pieces in place to make some major noise in the tournament. “You’ve seen what VCU has done, what Butler has done, teams like that just motivate us to go as far as we can go in the NCAA Tournament,” Glover said. “We don’t go on team names, we go on who has the biggest heart that day. That’s what Coach always preaches about, heart and effort.” As they hit Dayton Tuesday, Iona was greeted by a sign that said “Welcome to the First Four.” It was likely the same sign VCU saw last year. Oh, and then there’s this omen: Iona is staying in the same suburban Dayton hotel as VCU did last year. “Hopefully we’ll get the same lucky rooms they had,” Cluess deadpanned.