Ronda Rousey submits Miesha Tate by 3rd-round armbar
LAS VEGAS – For Ronda Rousey, one streak ended, but another remained intact.
Living up to her reputation as the world's nastiest arm collector, Ronda Rousey again stopped Miesha Tate with an armbar to retain her UFC women's bantamweight title – though Tate became the first woman to make it out of the first round against the champ.
The stoppage for Rousey came 58 seconds into the third round.
Rousey (8-0 MMA, 2-0 UFC) and Tate (13-5 MMA, 0-2 UFC) have displayed arguably as much disdain for each other as any pair in MMA history, let alone women's MMA history. On this past Season 18 of The Ultimate Fighter, they coached opposite each other – and there were run-ins aplenty.
But after all the bad blood, Rousey still did just what she said she would do, even if Tate gave her her biggest challenge yet. Before Saturday, all of Rousey's professional wins, as well as her amateur bouts, came by first-round armbar finish.
Referee Mario Yamasaki told the pair to touch gloves before the fight, but there was no chance of that – which would be a sign of things to come about 12 minutes later. The two came out swinging early, but just 10 seconds in, Rousey dragged Tate to the canvas looking for that signature finish. But Tate got back to her feet, where Rousey tied her up and landed knees to her thigh.
Throughout the first two rounds, it was largely back-and-forth as Rousey, an Olympic medal winner in judo, landed takedown after takedown. But each time Rousey went after an armbar, Tate managed to wriggle her way free in the first 10 minutes.
Surviving the first round was a moral victory of sorts, since no one had done it before. Surviving the second was another feather in Tate's cap, as the crowd chanted her name – fairly clearly wanting to see an upset from the heavy underdog.
But Rousey swarmed in the third, pushing Tate to the fence to work body shots in the clinch. After a ground scramble, Rousey had Tate right where she wanted her – again. And this time, it was too much. With Tate's right arm tied up, Rousey forced the challenger to tap to the armbar.
After the finish, Tate extended a hand in Rousey's direction – perhaps hoping to settle the long-standing feud. But Rousey turned and walked away – as the crowd booed emphatically.
"I want to congratulate Miesha," Rousey said afterward. "She's an amazing fighter. She really is. But for me, family comes before everything – even the boos and cheers of the crowd. I felt like it would disrespect my family if I shook her hand. I said she's an amazing fighter, but I can't shake the hand of someone who spits on my back."
Tate, who lost her Strikeforce title to Rousey in March 2012, said she believes Rousey has improved since their first fight.
"She worked on her right hand a little bit," Tate said. "That was surprising. But I have nothing bad to say. She showed up tonight, and I didn't. She was the better fighter tonight. The game plan was to stay away and punch her as much as I could."