Matildas lose 1-0 to Japan in final of AFC Women's Asian Cup
A strong second-half fightback was not enough for Australia, eventually going down 1-0 to world champions Japan in the Women's Asian Cup final in Vietnam.
The defending champion Matildas created most of the chances in the second 45 minutes, but could not find the touch that brought them nine goals in their four previous games.
Japan's victory in the decider was their first after losing each of their four previous Asian Cup finals.
Azusa Iwashimizu broke the drought by scoring the only goal in the 28th minute from a well-executed corner.
She headed in at the back post from close range, as Australia failed to deal with a teasing cross from Rumi Utsugi.
The Matildas failed to capitalise on three early chances before Japan had a meaningful attempt.
The recalled Sam Kerr blasted over the crossbar from seven metres after just 30 seconds and had a half chance a few minutes later following a misdirected back-pass.
Michelle Heyman also headed straight at the goalkeeper following a flowing multi-pass move.
Interim Matildas head coach Alen Stajcic said his team fought right to the end against one of the world's top teams.
"Unfortunately we couldn’t get the goal but I’m proud of how much the team has improved in the tournament," Stajcic said.
"Hopefully by the time we reach the World Cup next year we can improve that little bit more in our execution and beat those big countries."
Iwashimuzu's goal came during a spell of sustained pressure from Japan, in which the Matildas struggled to get the ball out of their own half.
Megumi Takasae had two attempts saved by Matildas goalkeeper Lydia Williams, as Japan dominated the middle of the half, with Australia guilty of turning over the ball too easily and conceding a number of free kicks.
The Matildas rallied in the last few minutes before half-time and Lisa de Vanna had a half chance in the first few moments of the second half.
Heyman fired in a strong 20-metre shot and twice just failed to make contact a few metres out.
Yuri Kawamura blazed over from a corner and Yuika Sugasawa crashed a shot against the underside of the bar, before Australia turned up the pressure in the final quarter.
In the final 20 minutes, Kerr had a goal rubbed out for offside and missed another chance, while de Vanna also just missed out.