 1985 births Chelsea F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football wingers Hibernian F.C. players Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. players Living people Millwall F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Portugal under-21 international footballers Portuguese expatriate footballers Portuguese footballers Scottish Football League players Scottish Premier League players St Johnstone F.C. players The Football League players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Scotland Oldham Athletic A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England Sport in Oldham Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Greater Manchester Rochdale A.F.C. 1907 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1907 Football clubs in Greater Manchester Lancashire Combination Sport in Rochdale The Football League clubs Oldham Oldham Borough 865 establishments Populated places established in the 9th century Towns in Greater Manchester 9th-century establishments in England Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Greater Manchester Metropolitan counties NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Counties of England established in 1974 North West England Organizations established in 1974 Police forces of England Organisations based in Greater Manchester 1974 establishments in England Greater Manchester Police 1972 births Living people People from Livingston, West Lothian Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland international footballers British people of Bulgarian descent Association football forwards Arsenal F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish football managers Oldham Athletic A.F.C. managers Doncaster Rovers F.C. managers The Football League managers Portugal Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Portuguese-speaking countries and territories Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe Western Europe Southwestern Europe Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 2014 films English-language films 2010s independent films 2014 drama films American drama films American films American independent films BAFTA winners (films) Blumhouse Productions films Bold Films films Films about educators Films about percussion and percussionists Films directed by Damien Chazelle Films featuring a Best Supporting Actor Academy Award winning performance Films featuring a Best Supporting Actor Golden Globe winning performance Films produced by Jason Blum Films set in 2014 Films set in New York City Films set in schools Films shot in Los Angeles, California Films that won the Best Sound Mixing Academy Award Films whose editor won the Best Film Editing Academy Award Jazz films Screenplays by Damien Chazelle Sony Pictures Classics films Sundance Film Festival award winners