 1963 births Association football defenders Bristol City F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Drumchapel Amateur F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Hamilton Academical F.C. players La Liga managers Labour Party (UK) people Living people Manchester United F.C. managers Premier League managers Real Sociedad managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Scottish Christians Scottish expatriate football managers Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players UEFA Pro Licence holders 1973 births Living people Association football wingers BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Welsh people of Sierra Leonean descent English Football Hall of Fame inductees Manchester United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Officers of the Order of the British Empire Footballers from Cardiff Premier League players The Football League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Wales international footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers People educated at Moorside High School Welsh football managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers Salford City F.C. Association football terminology Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Netherlands national football team 1905 establishments in the Netherlands European national association football teams UEFA European Championship-winning countries Football teams in the Netherlands Living people 1967 births 1. FSV Mainz 05 managers 1. FSV Mainz 05 players 2. Bundesliga managers 2. Bundesliga players Borussia Dortmund managers Bundesliga managers Eintracht Frankfurt II players Expatriate football managers in England German expatriate football managers German expatriates in England German football managers German footballers German Lutherans Liverpool F.C. managers Premier League managers Sportspeople from Stuttgart La Liga Football leagues in Spain Top level football leagues in Europe 1928 establishments in Spain Sports leagues established in 1928 Atlético de Kolkata owners FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain 1951 births Living people Footballers from Amsterdam Directors of football clubs in the Netherlands Dutch footballers Dutch football managers Dutch expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Germany Expatriate football managers in England Eredivisie players Belgian Pro League players AFC Ajax players Sparta Rotterdam players AZ Alkmaar players SC Telstar players Royal Antwerp F.C. players Eredivisie managers La Liga managers Bundesliga managers AFC Ajax non-playing staff AFC Ajax managers FC Barcelona managers AZ Alkmaar managers FC Bayern Munich managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Cup winning managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Netherlands national football team managers Officers of the Order of Orange-Nassau 2014 FIFA World Cup managers Dutch expatriates in Spain Dutch expatriates in Germany Dutch expatriates in England Premier League managers Borussia Dortmund 1909 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1909 Dortmund Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in North Rhine-Westphalia G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Germany Publicly traded sports companies Association football terminology Association football transfers FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners UEFA Champions League Finals 2009–10 UEFA Champions League 2009–10 in Spanish football International club association football competitions hosted by Spain FC Bayern Munich matches Inter Milan matches 2009–10 in German football 2009–10 in Italian football Top level football leagues in Europe Bundesliga Professional sports leagues 1963 establishments in West Germany Sports leagues established in 1963 Association football leagues in Germany AFC Ajax 1900 establishments in the Netherlands Association football clubs established in 1900 Football clubs in Amsterdam Football clubs in the Netherlands G-14 clubs FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events 1869 introductions American football Ball games Football codes Sports originating in the United States Gridiron football Dortmund Cities in North Rhine-Westphalia Imperial free cities Oil Campaign of World War II University towns in Germany Members of the Hanseatic League 882 establishments Bookmakers Gambling terminology Organized crime activity