 English football referees 1985 births People from Coventry Living people FIFA Women's World Cup referees Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Crewe Alexandra F.C. Crewe The Football League clubs Football clubs in Cheshire Association football clubs established in 1877 1877 establishments in England Bradford City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1903 Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners 1903 establishments in England Sport in Bradford Chauvinism Discrimination Hatred Prejudices Sexism Sexuality and gender-related prejudices Social problems Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP Sports venues in Cheshire Football venues in England Buildings and structures in Crewe Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1906 Crewe Alexandra F.C. 1977 births Living people People from Harrogate People educated at Ashville College English people of Scottish descent English footballers Scottish footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Bury F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Management occupations Hospitality occupations 1953 births Living people American football cornerbacks American football quarterbacks Alabama Crimson Tide football players Linfield Wildcats football coaches Northern Colorado Bears football coaches Oregon State Beavers football coaches Nebraska Cornhuskers football coaches San Diego Chargers head coaches USC Trojans football coaches Whitworth Pirates football coaches Winnipeg Blue Bombers coaches NFL Europe (WLAF) coaches Grey Cup champions Sportspeople from Corvallis, Oregon People from Wallace, Idaho Players of American football from Oregon Corvallis High School (Oregon) alumni 1869 introductions American football Ball games Football codes Sports originating in the United States Gridiron football Skills Learning Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions