 1964 births Living people People from Iesi Italian Roman Catholics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Bologna F.C. 1909 players U.C. Sampdoria players S.S. Lazio players Leicester City F.C. players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers S.S. Lazio managers ACF Fiorentina managers Inter Milan managers Serie A managers Premier League players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Manchester City F.C. managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology 1984 births Living people Footballers from Amsterdam Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Dutch footballers Dutch people of Surinamese descent Dutch people of Moluccan descent Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Indo people Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England AFC Ajax players Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players LA Galaxy players Eredivisie players Bundesliga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Expatriate footballers in Italy Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1971 births English football referees Living people People from Sheldon FA Cup Final referees 1986 births Living people People from Mogán, Las Palmas Spanish footballers Canarian footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Valencia CF Mestalla footballers Valencia CF players SD Eibar footballers Celta de Vigo players Premier League players Manchester City F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish people of Japanese descent Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Spanish expatriates in England 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División B players Atlético Madrid B players Atlético Madrid footballers Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England 1981 births Living people People from Bouaké Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Ivorian footballers Ivorian expatriate footballers Ivorian emigrants to the United Kingdom Ivory Coast international footballers Doping cases in association football Expatriate footballers in England ASEC Mimosas players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Ivorian sportspeople in doping cases FIFA Century Club Africa Cup of Nations-winning players Ivorian Muslims Derby County F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in England The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1884 Football clubs in Derbyshire FA Cup winners Football League Championship clubs Sport in Derby 1884 establishments in England Liverpool F.C. Manchester United F.C. England football derbies 1986 births Living people People from Uccle Belgian people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgian expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Association football central defenders Association football utility players R.S.C. Anderlecht players Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players Premier League players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Belgium Belgian expatriates in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football terminology 1990 births Living people People from Longsight Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players British people of Ghanaian descent Black British sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating 1968 births English football referees Living people Sportspeople from Chester The Football League referees Premier League referees Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London 1981 births Living people Association football midfielders Association football utility players South Korean footballers South Korean expatriate footballers South Korea international footballers Kyoto Sanga F.C. players PSV Eindhoven players Manchester United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players J1 League players J2 League players Eredivisie players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Japan Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in England 2000 AFC Asian Cup players 2001 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2002 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2004 AFC Asian Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 AFC Asian Cup players Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of South Korea South Korean expatriates in England People from South Jeolla Province People from Suwon South Korean expatriates in Japan South Korean expatriates in the Netherlands South Korean expatriates in the United Kingdom FIFA Century Club Myongji University alumni Running Man (TV series) contestants Asian Games medalists in football Footballers at the 2002 Asian Games 1983 births Living people People from Bouaké Ivorian footballers Ivorian expatriate footballers Ivory Coast international footballers Association football midfielders Association football central defenders ASEC Mimosas players AS Monaco FC players K.S.K. Beveren players FC Metalurh Donetsk players Olympiacos F.C. players FC Barcelona players Manchester City F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Belgian Pro League players Ligue 1 players La Liga players Ukrainian Premier League players Superleague Greece players Premier League players Ivorian emigrants to the United Kingdom Ivorian expatriates in Belgium Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Monaco Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Greece Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in Ukraine Ivorian expatriates in Spain Ivorian expatriates in Greece Ivorian expatriates in Ukraine Ivorian expatriates in France African Footballer of the Year winners Africa Cup of Nations-winning players Ivorian Muslims 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1979 Copa América players 1987 Copa América players 1989 Copa América players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Argentina youth international footballers Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina national football team managers Argentine football managers Argentine people of indigenous peoples descent Argentine people of Croatian descent Argentine people of Galician descent Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine sportspeople in doping cases Argentinos Juniors footballers Association football midfielders Boca Juniors footballers Deified people Doping cases in association football Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates FC Barcelona players FIFA 100 FIFA World Cup-winning captains 2010 FIFA World Cup managers Al Wasl FC managers Indigenous sportspeople of the Americas La Liga players Newell's Old Boys footballers People from Lanús People from Lomas de Zamora Partido Racing Club de Avellaneda managers S.S.C. Napoli players Serie A players Sevilla FC players Textil Mandiyú managers Television talk show hosts World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners Argentine Primera División players 1960 births Living people Argentine expatriate footballers South American Footballer of the Year winners Argentine Roman Catholics People convicted of drug offenses Argentine expatriates in the United Arab Emirates 1988 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers Club Atlético Independiente footballers People from Quilmes La Liga players Premier League players Atlético Madrid footballers Manchester City F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers Argentine expatriate footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Olympic medalists in football 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriates in England Argentina Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1816 Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1989 births Living people People from Greenwich Sportspeople from London English footballers England schools international footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Maidstone United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Isthmian League players Black British sportspeople 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1984 births Living people People from Buenos Aires Province Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers 2004 Copa América players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Olympic footballers of Argentina Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine Primera División players Boca Juniors footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Brazil Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Serie A players Sport Club Corinthians Paulista players Expatriate footballers in England Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Association football forwards Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Brazil Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom South American Footballer of the Year winners Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Expatriate footballers in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriates in England 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English footballers Black English sportspeople England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Footballers from Leeds Leeds United F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players Aston Villa F.C. players Premier League players England youth international footballers Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Italy British people of Barbadian descent 1985 births Living people People from Stevenage English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Association football utility players Watford F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 1986 births Living people People from Santiago, Cape Verde Sportspeople from Lisbon Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent Cape Verdean emigrants to Portugal Portuguese footballers Association football wingers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Primeira Liga players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Portuguese expatriates in England Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Turkey Portuguese expatriates in Turkey Fenerbahçe footballers Süper Lig players AS Cannes players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players Association football fullbacks French footballers French expatriate footballers France under-21 international footballers 1985 births Living people Manchester City F.C. players Sportspeople from Toulouse French people of Martiniquais descent Expatriate footballers in England France international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players France youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players French expatriates in England 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Marseille French Muslims French people of Algerian descent French footballers Association football midfielders Association football wingers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Olympique de Marseille players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players French expatriates in England