 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe Germany Central Europe Countries in Europe Federal republics G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1871 Western Europe Articles containing video clips Germany national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries National sports teams of Germany Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf Tórshavn Populated places in the Faroe Islands Populated places established in the 10th century Populated coastal places in the Faroe Islands Ports and harbours of the Faroe Islands Capitals in Europe Sweden Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe Scandinavia Year of establishment unknown Swedish-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Austria Countries in Europe Central Europe Federal constitutional republics German-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nuclear-free zones States and territories established in 1955 Erasmus Prize winners Germanic countries and territories Western Europe Buzzcocks 1976 establishments in England English boy bands English punk rock groups I.R.S. Records artists Music in Bolton Borough Musical groups established in 1976 Musical groups from Lancashire ROIR artists Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners Buildings and structures in Dublin (city) Association football venues in the Republic of Ireland Rugby union stadiums in Ireland Ballsbridge National stadiums Republic of Ireland national football team home stadiums Ireland national rugby union team Sports venues in Dublin (city) Aviva UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Association football venues in County Dublin Association football terminology Laws of association football European national association football teams Faroe Islands national football team National sports teams of the Faroe Islands Football Association of Ireland UEFA member associations Association football governing bodies in the Republic of Ireland 1921 establishments in Ireland Sports organisations established in 1921 Business terms Environmental issues with population Logistics Systems engineering Buzzwords PlayStation 3 2000s toys 2006 introductions 2010s toys Backward-compatible video game consoles Blu-ray Disc Cell BE architecture Home video game consoles PlayStation (brand) Regionless game consoles Seventh-generation video game consoles Sony consoles 1912 songs British patriotic songs Songs from musicals Songs of World War I County Tipperary Irish songs Billy Murray (singer) songs 1959 births Living people Sportspeople from Barnsley Footballers from South Yorkshire English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland football managers Republic of Ireland national football team managers Barnsley F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Olympique Lyonnais players Millwall F.C. players Millwall F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. managers Ipswich Town F.C. managers UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup managers Premier League managers The Football League managers The Football League players Expatriate footballers in France Ligue 1 players Association football defenders British association football commentators Scottish Football League players Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers People from Birkenhead 1983 births Living people Association football forwards Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Wrexham F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Stoke City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1863 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Football clubs in Staffordshire Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners The Football League founder members Sport in Stoke-on-Trent United Soccer Association imported teams Southern Football League clubs 1863 establishments in England Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology West Bromwich Albion F.C. Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1878 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs West Bromwich FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1878 establishments in England 2014 British television programme debuts 2010s British television series British crime television series Detective television series ITV television dramas Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 2010 films 2010s comedy films American films American comedy films English-language films Films directed by Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini Cross-dressing in film Films based on American novels Films set in New York City Films shot in New York City American independent films Film scores by Klaus Badelt French independent films French films 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players Human anatomy Tendons Lower limb anatomy 1950 films 1950s drama films American films American black-and-white films English-language films Film noir Films directed by Cy Endfield United Artists films