 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff 1986 births Living people People from Santiago, Cape Verde Sportspeople from Lisbon Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent Cape Verdean emigrants to Portugal Portuguese footballers Association football wingers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Primeira Liga players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Portuguese expatriates in England Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Turkey Portuguese expatriates in Turkey Fenerbahçe footballers Süper Lig players Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain Sports officiating 1976 births Living people Sportspeople from Istanbul Turkish football referees UEFA Champions League referees UEFA Europa League referees 2014 FIFA World Cup referees Insurance agents Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct 1955 establishments in the United Kingdom ITV Media companies of the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1970 births Living people Sportspeople from Watford English footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Crystal Palace F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English football managers Middlesbrough F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Alumni of Croydon College England national under-21 football team managers Social networking services Microblogging Chinese websites Swedish hard rock musical groups American hard rock musical groups Turkey Countries in Europe Western Asian countries Eastern Mediterranean Near Eastern countries Middle Eastern countries Modern Turkic states G20 nations Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1923 1923 establishments in Turkey Eurasia Southeastern Europe Western Asia Muslim-majority countries E7 nations 1983 births Living people People from Salamanca Spanish footballers Castilian-Leonese footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players Deportivo de La Coruña players Premier League players Liverpool F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Association football terminology Tournament systems Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Risk Actuarial science Economics of uncertainty Probability Environmental social science concepts Behavior Ethology Learning Play (activity) 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from County Waterford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Association football forwards Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Waterford United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players The Football League players 1982 births Living people People from Huyton Sportspeople from Liverpool English footballers English expatriate footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Olympique de Marseille players Burnley F.C. players Premier League players Ligue 1 players The Football League players English prisoners and detainees English people convicted of assault English columnists Expatriate footballers in France English expatriates in France English male writers