 1963 births Association football defenders Bristol City F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Drumchapel Amateur F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Hamilton Academical F.C. players La Liga managers Labour Party (UK) people Living people Manchester United F.C. managers Premier League managers Real Sociedad managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Scottish Christians Scottish expatriate football managers Scottish expatriates in Spain Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players UEFA Pro Licence holders Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Daylight saving time in the United Kingdom 1973 births Living people Association football wingers BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Welsh people of Sierra Leonean descent English Football Hall of Fame inductees Manchester United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Officers of the Order of the British Empire Footballers from Cardiff Premier League players The Football League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Wales international footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers People educated at Moorside High School Welsh football managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers Salford City F.C. Borussia Dortmund 1909 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1909 Dortmund Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in North Rhine-Westphalia G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Germany Publicly traded sports companies Living people 1967 births 1. FSV Mainz 05 managers 1. FSV Mainz 05 players 2. Bundesliga managers 2. Bundesliga players Borussia Dortmund managers Bundesliga managers Eintracht Frankfurt II players Expatriate football managers in England German expatriate football managers German expatriates in England German football managers German footballers German Lutherans Liverpool F.C. managers Premier League managers Sportspeople from Stuttgart Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Association football terminology Association football transfers 1909 births 1994 deaths Sportspeople from Bellshill A.F.C. Bournemouth wartime guest players Brentford F.C. wartime guest players Chelsea F.C. wartime guest players Commanders of the Order of the British Empire English Football Hall of Fame inductees Football players and officials awarded knighthoods Hibernian F.C. wartime guest players Knights Bachelor Liverpool F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Manchester United F.C. managers Middlesbrough F.C. wartime guest players Reading F.C. wartime guest players Scotland international footballers Scotland national football team managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland wartime international footballers Scottish people of Lithuanian descent Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Survivors of aviation accidents or incidents The Football League players Royal Army Physical Training Corps soldiers British Army personnel of World War II Denny Hibernian F.C. players Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Our Lady's High School, Motherwell Deaths in Greater Manchester Scottish Football League representative players Olympic managers of Great Britain Scottish Roman Catholics Knights Commander of the Order of St Gregory the Great 1971 births Living people People from Chelmsford British accountants British bankers Alumni of the University of Bristol Manchester United F.C. directors and chairmen Player-coaches Sports coaches Basketball personnel 2010 racehorse births Racehorses bred in Kentucky Racehorses trained in the United States Thoroughbred family 22-c Eclipse Award winners Articles with hAudio microformats Norwich City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1902 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Norwich Premier League clubs 1902 establishments in England Football clubs in Norfolk BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom 1970 births Living people People from Burton upon Trent English footballers Association football fullbacks Derby County F.C. players Derby County F.C. non-playing staff Middlesbrough F.C. non-playing staff Newcastle United F.C. non-playing staff The Football League players UEFA Pro Licence holders Everton F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff 1947 births Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish footballers Living people Leeds United F.C. players Southend United F.C. players Greenock Morton F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players Clydebank F.C. players Scottish Football League players The Football League players Association football midfielders Scottish football managers Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Leeds United F.C. non-playing staff Bristol City F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. non-playing staff Everton F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Cork Hibernians F.C. players League of Ireland players English footballers England international footballers England B international footballers England under-21 international footballers Burnley F.C. players Colorado Rapids players Major League Soccer players Norwich City F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players People from Boston (district) 1959 births Living people Association football goalkeepers Everton F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. non-playing staff Expatriate soccer players in the United States The Football League players 1977 births Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Living people England B international footballers English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. players People from Bury Premier League players Twin sportspeople from England UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players Salford City F.C. British association football commentators English expatriates in Spain English football managers New York Stock Exchange National Historic Landmarks in New York City Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Manhattan Financial services companies established in 1817 1817 establishments in New York Stock exchanges in the United States Netherlands national football team 1905 establishments in the Netherlands European national association football teams UEFA European Championship-winning countries Football teams in the Netherlands 1951 births Living people Footballers from Amsterdam Directors of football clubs in the Netherlands Dutch footballers Dutch football managers Dutch expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Germany Expatriate football managers in England Eredivisie players Belgian Pro League players AFC Ajax players Sparta Rotterdam players AZ Alkmaar players SC Telstar players Royal Antwerp F.C. players Eredivisie managers La Liga managers Bundesliga managers AFC Ajax non-playing staff AFC Ajax managers FC Barcelona managers AZ Alkmaar managers FC Bayern Munich managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Cup winning managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Netherlands national football team managers Officers of the Order of Orange-Nassau 2014 FIFA World Cup managers Dutch expatriates in Spain Dutch expatriates in Germany Dutch expatriates in England Premier League managers Atlético Madrid La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners Multi-sport clubs in Spain Association football clubs established in 1903 1903 establishments in Spain Dalian Wanda Group Atlético de Kolkata owners Argentine footballers Argentine people of Italian descent Argentina youth international footballers Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina international footballers FIFA Century Club Association football midfielders Atlético Madrid footballers Inter Milan players A.C. Pisa 1909 players Racing Club de Avellaneda footballers S.S. Lazio players Sevilla FC players Club Atlético Vélez Sarsfield footballers La Liga players Serie A players Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic silver medalists for Argentina Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics 1991 Copa América players 1992 King Fahd Cup players 1993 Copa América players 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1995 Copa América players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 1999 Copa América players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Copa América-winning players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Argentine football managers Racing Club de Avellaneda managers River Plate managers Estudiantes de La Plata managers Calcio Catania managers Serie A managers Atlético Madrid managers La Liga managers People from Buenos Aires 1970 births Living people Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Expatriate football managers in Italy Olympic medalists in football Primeira Liga managers UEFA Cup winning managers Paris Saint-Germain F.C. Association football clubs established in 1970 Football clubs in France G-14 clubs 16th arrondissement of Paris Ligue 1 clubs Football clubs in Paris 1970 establishments in France Unrelegated association football clubs 1965 births Living people People from Alès French footballers France international footballers Association football central defenders Montpellier HSC players S.S.C. Napoli players Nîmes Olympique players AS Saint-Étienne players AJ Auxerre players FC Barcelona players Olympique de Marseille players Inter Milan players Manchester United F.C. players La Liga players Premier League players FIFA World Cup-winning players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA European Championship-winning players Serie A players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England French football managers FC Girondins de Bordeaux managers France national football team managers Ligue 1 managers Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur UEFA Euro 2012 managers Paris Saint-Germain F.C. managers French expatriates in Spain French expatriates in Italy French expatriates in England 1821 establishments in England History of Manchester Investigative news sources Liberalism in the United Kingdom National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London Newspapers published in Manchester Publications established in 1821 The Guardian Pulitzer Prize-winning newspapers 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England English footballers English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain England international footballers England B international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Liverpool F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers FIFA 100 European Footballer of the Year winners World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners La Liga players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners English Football Hall of Fame inductees People from Flintshire Sportspeople from Chester 1979 births Living people England youth international footballers English expatriates in Spain Yahoo! Music websites Publications established in 1855 National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Telegraph Media Group 1855 establishments in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London 1971 births Living people People from Bages Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players Serie A players Brescia Calcio players A.S. Roma players Qatar Stars League players Al Ahli SC (Doha) players Liga MX players Dorados de Sinaloa footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers Footballers at the 1992 Summer Olympics 1994 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players Olympic footballers of Spain Olympic gold medalists for Spain Olympic medalists in football Doping cases in association football Spanish sportspeople in doping cases Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Qatar Expatriate footballers in Mexico Spanish football managers Spanish expatriate football managers La Liga managers FC Barcelona B managers FC Barcelona managers Bundesliga managers FC Bayern Munich managers Expatriate football managers in Germany UEFA Champions League winning managers Catalonia international footballers Spanish expatriates in Qatar BBC Sport Sports radio in the United Kingdom Sports television in the United Kingdom 1957 births Bradford City A.F.C. managers People with cancer England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English footballers English football managers Premier League managers 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Living people Manchester United F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. managers Middlesbrough F.C. players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People from Chester-le-Street Premier League players Sheffield United F.C. managers Thailand national football team managers The Football League players UEFA Euro 1988 players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. players English Football Hall of Fame inductees Friends of the Earth 2007 in the environment 2007 in the United Kingdom Climate change in the United Kingdom Association football terminology 1907–08 in English football FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams  FA Cup Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Belgium national football team 1904 establishments in Belgium Articles containing video clips European national association football teams Football in Belgium National sports teams of Belgium Belgium at the Olympics UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe 1946 births 2005 deaths Sportspeople from Belfast Ulster Scots people Presbyterians from Northern Ireland People educated at Grosvenor Grammar School Association football midfielders Association football wingers Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland international footballers Manchester United F.C. players Expatriate association footballers from Northern Ireland British expatriates in South Africa Expatriate soccer players in South Africa Jewish Guild players Dunstable Town F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Cork Celtic F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Expatriates from Northern Ireland in the United States Los Angeles Aztecs players Fulham F.C. players Fort Lauderdale Strikers (1977–83) players Hibernian F.C. players San Jose Earthquakes (1974–88) players Expatriates from Northern Ireland in Hong Kong Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong Sea Bee players Hong Kong Rangers FC players A.F.C. Bournemouth players British expatriates in Australia Expatriate soccer players in Australia Queensland Lions players Nuneaton Town F.C. players Tobermore United F.C. players The Football League players League of Ireland players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Scottish Football League players North American Soccer League (1968–84) indoor players National Soccer League (Australia) players First Division/Premier League top scorers European Footballer of the Year winners English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 UEFA Golden Players British association football commentators British people convicted of assault Organ transplant recipients Alcohol-related deaths in England Deaths from renal failure Infectious disease deaths in England FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1988 births People from Porto Alegre Living people Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Italy Association football midfielders Grêmio Foot-Ball Porto Alegrense players FC Porto players Manchester United F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players Sport Club Internacional players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Campeonato Brasileiro Série B players Primeira Liga players Premier League players Serie A players 2007 Copa América players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic medalists in football Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil Olympic footballers of Brazil Brazil youth international footballers Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Copa América-winning players Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy ACF Fiorentina Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Tuscany Association football clubs established in 1926 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners 1926 establishments in Italy Association football terminology 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Guadalajara, Jalisco Footballers from Jalisco Mexican Roman Catholics Mexican footballers Mexico international footballers Liga MX players C.D. Guadalajara footballers Premier League players La Liga players Bundesliga players Manchester United F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Bayer 04 Leverkusen players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Germany Mexican expatriate footballers Mexican expatriates in the United Kingdom Mexican expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Mexican expatriates in Spain Mexican expatriates in Germany Mexico youth international footballers Articles containing video clips 1992 births Living people People from Abidjan British people of Ivorian descent Ivorian footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Crystal Palace F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester 1st-century establishments in Roman Britain 79 establishments Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North West England Local government districts of North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 1st century 1990 births Living people People from Longsight Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players British people of Ghanaian descent Black British sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain 1991 births Living people People from the Province of Brindisi Naturalised citizens of Spain Brazilian emigrants to Spain Spanish footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Bundesliga players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players FC Bayern Munich footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Spanish expatriates in Germany 1987 births Living people People from Maresme Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football midfielders Premier League players La Liga players Arsenal F.C. players FC Barcelona players Chelsea F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Catalonia international footballers FIFA Century Club Association football terminology Association football records and statistics 1987 births Living people People from Etterbeek Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium under-21 international footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian Muslims Standard Liège players Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Belgian people of Moroccan descent Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Belgium Belgian Pro League players Premier League players Belgian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England R.A.E.C. Mons players Belgian expatriates in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1984 births Living people People from Kirkby English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Wigan Athletic F.C. players Everton F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Halifax Town A.F.C. F.C. Halifax Town National League (English football) Defunct Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1911 Association football clubs disestablished in 2008 Football clubs in West Yorkshire Defunct football clubs in England 1911 establishments in England 2008 disestablishments in England Sport in Halifax, West Yorkshire IK Start Football clubs in Norway Association football clubs established in 1905 1905 establishments in Norway Sport in Kristiansand Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs FA Community Shield National association football supercups Football competitions in England Recurring sporting events established in 1908 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match Liverpool F.C. Sports venues in Liverpool Football venues in England Premier League venues Football League venues UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Visitor attractions in Liverpool Everton F.C. Sports venues completed in 1884 Etihad Airways Premier League venues Football venues in England Manchester City F.C. Sports venues in Manchester 2002 Commonwealth Games venues Music venues in Greater Manchester Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Rugby union stadiums in England Sports venues completed in 2002 2002 establishments in England Football clubs in England Sheffield United F.C. Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Sheffield Association football clubs established in 1889 Football clubs in South Yorkshire FA Cup winners Sports clubs established in 1889 Football League Championship clubs 1889 establishments in England Government of Michigan United States bankruptcy law Local government in Michigan 1937 births Living people Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers England youth international footballers England international footballers Manchester United F.C. players The Football League players English football managers Manchester United F.C. managers Aris Thessaloniki F.C. managers Panachaiki G.C. managers York City F.C. managers The Football League managers Bury F.C. non-playing staff Association football wing halves England under-23 international footballers The Football League representative players 1910 births 1989 deaths Welsh people of Irish descent Welsh footballers Wales international footballers Welsh football managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Manchester United F.C. managers Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Wales national football team managers 1958 FIFA World Cup managers The Football League players People from Rhondda Airliner accidents and incidents caused by weather Aviation accidents and incidents in Germany Aviation accidents and incidents in 1958 Aviation accidents and incidents involving professional sports teams 1958 meteorology History of Munich 1957–58 in English football 1958 in Germany 1958 in the United Kingdom Manchester United F.C. Articles containing video clips British European Airways accidents and incidents 20th century in Munich Football League Third Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe 1958 deaths English football managers Manchester United F.C. managers 1900 births 1894 births 1977 deaths People from Hartford, Cheshire English footballers Association football forwards Association football midfielders England wartime international footballers Altrincham F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players English football managers Manchester United F.C. managers Sportspeople from Cheshire