 Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers 1983 births Living people Footballers from Rotterdam Dutch footballers Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Association football forwards SBV Excelsior players Feyenoord players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Fenerbahçe footballers Eredivisie players Premier League players Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Dutch expatriates in England Dutch expatriates in Turkey Expatriate footballers in Turkey FIFA Century Club Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Wolverhampton English footballers Welsh footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Hednesford Town F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Welsh descent Scotland national football team matches Wales national football team matches 1985–86 in Scottish football 1986 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) FIFA World Cup qualification matches 1985–86 in Welsh football 20th century in Cardiff Football venues in Wales Rugby union stadiums in Wales Swansea City A.F.C. Ospreys (rugby team) Sports venues in Swansea Stadiums in Swansea Buildings and structures in Swansea Sports venues completed in 2005 Premier League venues Football League venues English football referees 1985 births Living people People from Ashington Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Christmas Quarter days December observances Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1981 births Sportspeople from Dakar Living people French people of Cape Verdean descent French people of Guinean descent French footballers French expatriate footballers France international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Association football fullbacks A.C. Monza Brianza 1912 players OGC Nice players AS Monaco FC players Manchester United F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Naturalized citizens of France Running Man (TV series) contestants French expatriates in England French expatriates in Italy Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991