 1975 births Living people People from Consett English football referees English people of Canadian descent National League (English football) referees The Football League referees Premier League referees UEFA Champions League referees Olympic football referees Football referees at the 2012 Summer Olympics 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1988 births Living people People from the Province of Burgos Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Castilian-Leonese footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Real Madrid C.F. players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Valencia CF players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions 1984 births Living people People from Sremska Mitrovica Association football defenders Association football utility players Serbian footballers Serbia and Montenegro international footballers Serbia international footballers Serbian expatriate footballers Serbian expatriates in Russia Serbian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in England FK Srem players OFK Beograd players FC Lokomotiv Moscow players Chelsea F.C. players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Serbia under-21 international footballers Laws of association football Association football terminology Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1985 births Living people People from Stevenage English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Association football utility players Watford F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players Laws of association football Association football terminology Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology A-League Football Federation Australia Top level football leagues in Asia Summer association football leagues Fox Sports (Australia) Soccer leagues in Australia Professional sports leagues in Australia 2004 establishments in Australia Sports leagues established in 2004  1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Belfast Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland youth international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Manchester United F.C. players Royal Antwerp F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Belgian Second Division players Expatriate footballers in Belgium People educated at Belfast High School Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers 1990 births England international rugby union players English rugby union players Gloucester Rugby players Living people Moseley Rugby Football Club players People from Swindon Rugby union centres Sportspeople from Gloucestershire Mexico Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories States and territories established in 1813 G20 nations E7 nations 1989 births Living people People from Basingstoke English footballers Association football midfielders Bradford City A.F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Watford F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Everton F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics England international footballers 1975 births Living people People from Bury English footballers English football managers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football fullbacks Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Salford City F.C. Daily Telegraph journalists British association football commentators English Football Hall of Fame inductees English expatriates in Spain La Liga managers Valencia CF managers Expatriate football managers in Spain 1986 births Living people Seattle Mariners players 2009 World Baseball Classic players All-Star Futures Game players American League All-Stars American League wins champions Major League Baseball pitchers Major League Baseball players from Venezuela People from Valencia, Carabobo Wisconsin Timber Rattlers players Everett AquaSox players Inland Empire 66ers of San Bernardino players San Antonio Missions players Tacoma Rainiers players Major League Baseball pitchers who have pitched a perfect game Luis Aparicio Award winners Cy Young Award winners Ffestiniog Railway Narrow gauge locomotives of the United Kingdom George England and Company locomotives 0-4-4-0T locomotives Railway locomotives introduced in 1869 Scrapped locomotives 1970 births Living people People from Schaffhausen Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers S.S. Lazio players Chelsea F.C. players Premier League players Italian football managers Milton Keynes Dons F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate footballers in England FC Schalke 04 managers Bundesliga managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FC Schaffhausen players FC Zürich players FC Aarau players Serie A players Swiss Super League players Swiss people of Italian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League winning managers Italian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Italian expatriates in Germany 1987 births Living people People from Salto, Uruguay Uruguayan footballers Association football forwards 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2011 controversies Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 controversies 2014 FIFA World Cup players Copa América-winning players Club Nacional de Football players FC Groningen players AFC Ajax players Liverpool F.C. players FC Barcelona players Uruguayan Primera División players Eredivisie players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain First Division/Premier League top scorers Olympic footballers of Uruguay Uruguay youth international footballers Uruguay international footballers Uruguayan expatriate footballers Uruguayan expatriates in the Netherlands Uruguayan expatriates in England Uruguayan expatriates in Spain Uruguay under-20 international footballers Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Violence in sports Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology England football derbies Everton F.C. Liverpool F.C. Sport in Liverpool David Bowie songs 1997 singles Music videos directed by Floria Sigismondi Songs written by David Bowie Songs written by Reeves Gabrels Song recordings produced by David Bowie Middle Ages History of Europe by period Wikipedia good articles Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Featured articles 5th century in Europe 6th century in Europe 7th century in Europe 8th century in Europe 9th century in Europe 10th century in Europe 11th century in Europe 12th century in Europe 13th century in Europe 14th century in Europe 15th century in Europe Christianization Dinosaurs Fossil taxa described in 1842 Carnian first appearances Extant Late Triassic first appearances