 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe Germany national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries National sports teams of Germany Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf Dublin (city) 841 establishments Capitals in Europe Cities in the Republic of Ireland County towns in the Republic of Ireland Leinster Local administrative units of the Republic of Ireland Populated coastal places in the Republic of Ireland Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Staple ports University towns in Ireland Viking Age populated places Populated places established in the 9th century Faroe Islands Extinct volcanoes Germanic countries and territories Island countries Northern Europe Paleogene volcanism States and territories established in 1948 Volcanoes of Denmark Regions of Europe with multiple official languages Former Norwegian colonies Norwegian Empire 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team 1981 births Living people People from Waterford (city) Sportspeople from County Waterford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Royal Antwerp F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Belgian Pro League players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Belgium Irish expatriates in England Irish expatriates in Belgium UEFA Euro 2012 players 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology UEFA Euro 2012 Republic of Ireland at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Croatian football 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) 2008–09 in European football Buildings and structures in Dublin (city) Association football venues in the Republic of Ireland Rugby union stadiums in Ireland Ballsbridge National stadiums Republic of Ireland national football team home stadiums Ireland national rugby union team Sports venues in Dublin (city) Aviva UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Association football venues in County Dublin Germany Central Europe Countries in Europe Federal republics G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1871 Western Europe Articles containing video clips LA Galaxy Soccer clubs in the Greater Los Angeles Area Soccer clubs in California Association football clubs established in 1995 1995 establishments in California Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1961 births Living people 1990 FIFA World Cup players 1994 FIFA World Cup players Apollon Limassol managers Association football midfielders Expatriate football managers in Cyprus Expatriate football managers in Greece Home Farm F.C. players Irish association football commentators League of Ireland players Liverpool F.C. players Olympiakos Nicosia managers Panionios G.S.S. managers Premier League players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland football managers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Association football players from County Dublin Southend United F.C. managers Southend United F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1988 players League of Ireland XI players Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Irish expatriates in the United Kingdom Publicly funded broadcasters Raidió Teilifís Éireann State-sponsored bodies of the Republic of Ireland Entities with Irish names Irish television networks European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters Castlebar Song Contest Department of Communications, Energy and Natural Resources Companies established in 1960 Television channels and stations established in 1960 Radio stations established in 1926 Peabody Award winners 1960 establishments in Ireland Political pundits Political occupations 1945 births Living people Charlton Athletic F.C. players Irish columnists Irish Examiner people Irish sports broadcasters Irish television talk show hosts League of Ireland players Manchester United F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Newstalk presenters Reading F.C. players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Irish expatriates in the United Kingdom RTÉ Radio 1 presenters Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Association football players from Dublin (city) Sunday Independent (Ireland) people Sunday Tribune people The Football League players The Irish Press people Today FM presenters U2 York City F.C. players Millwall F.C. Hall of Fame inductees Stella Maris F.C. players 1959 births Living people Sportspeople from Barnsley Footballers from South Yorkshire English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland football managers Republic of Ireland national football team managers Barnsley F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Olympique Lyonnais players Millwall F.C. players Millwall F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. managers Ipswich Town F.C. managers UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup managers Premier League managers The Football League managers The Football League players Expatriate footballers in France Ligue 1 players Association football defenders British association football commentators Scottish Football League players Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers 1979 births Living people People from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Home Farm F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1984 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Bury F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Cherry Orchard F.C. players 1984 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Peterborough United F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Orlando City SC players Colorado Rapids players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Cooking techniques Barbecue Culinary terms Ireland Celtic nations Divided regions International islands Northern Europe Western Europe Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners 1957 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland international footballers Association football midfielders Dundee F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Scottish Football League players The Football League players Premier League players 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players Scottish football managers Coventry City F.C. managers Southampton F.C. managers Celtic F.C. managers Middlesbrough F.C. managers Premier League managers Scottish Premier League managers The Football League managers Officers of the Order of the British Empire Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scotland national football team managers Articles with hAudio microformats Norwich City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1902 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Norwich Premier League clubs 1902 establishments in England Football clubs in Norfolk 1958 births Living people People from Stratford, London English people of Irish descent English people of Ghanaian descent Black British sportspeople Irish people of Ghanaian descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Brentford F.C. players UEFA Pro Licence holders UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Premier League managers The Football League players English football managers The Football League managers Republic of Ireland football managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from London Birmingham City F.C. managers Norwich City F.C. managers People educated at St Bonaventure's Catholic Comprehensive School Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. managers Association football defenders