 A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy UEFA member associations Football governing bodies in Italy Sports governing bodies in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy Sports organisations established in 1898 Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football friendly trophies Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Busto Arsizio Association football clubs established in 1919 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs 1919 establishments in Italy Pro Patria Calcio 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Berlin German people of Ghanaian descent German footballers Ghanaian footballers Association football midfielders Association football forwards Serie A players Premier League players Bundesliga players FC Schalke 04 players A.C. Milan players Genoa C.F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Borussia Dortmund players Hertha BSC players Hertha BSC II players Füchse Berlin Reinickendorf players Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Ghana international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Ghanaian football personalities Association football culture Anti-racist organizations in Europe Organizations established in 1999 Association football supporters Ghana Commonwealth republics Countries in Africa Economic Community of West African States English-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of the African Union Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1957 West African countries Articles containing video clips Portsmouth F.C. Association football clubs established in 1898 Football clubs in England Sport in Portsmouth Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Southern Football League clubs Football clubs in Hampshire 1898 establishments in England Fan-owned English League football clubs Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Football in Italy Former capitals of Italy Milan Populated places established in the 1st millennium BC 1994 births People from Meulan-en-Yvelines French footballers French people of Senegalese descent SM Caen players A.C. Milan players Montpellier HSC players Genoa C.F.C. players Ligue 1 players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy French expatriate footballers Living people France under-21 international footballers France youth international footballers Association football forwards Association football wingers 1986 births Living people Footballers from Amsterdam Dutch people of Surinamese descent Dutch footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Association football fullbacks Association football wingers Association football midfielders Association football utility players AFC Ajax players Eredivisie players Expatriate footballers in Italy A.C. Milan players A.S. Roma players Atalanta B.C. players Hellas Verona F.C. players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in England Fulham F.C. players Premier League players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of the Netherlands 1984 births Living people Association football midfielders Liberty Professionals F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Udinese Calcio players Inter Milan players Sunderland A.F.C. players A.C. Milan players Ittihad FC players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Serie A players Premier League players Saudi Professional League players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Saudi Arabia Ghanaian footballers Ghana international footballers Ghanaian expatriate footballers Ghanaian expatriates in Italy Ghanaian expatriates in the United Kingdom Ghanaian Muslims Ghana under-20 international footballers Living people 1967 births People from Livorno Association football midfielders Italian footballers Italian football managers A.S. Livorno Calcio players A.C. Pisa 1909 players Delfino Pescara 1936 players Cagliari Calcio players A.C. Perugia Calcio players Calcio Padova players S.S.C. Napoli players A.C. Pistoiese players Serie A players Serie B players Juventus F.C. managers A.C. Milan managers Cagliari Calcio managers U.S. Grosseto F.C. managers U.S. Sassuolo Calcio managers Serie A managers A.C. Pavia players UEFA Pro Licence holders Anthropological categories of peoples Civilizations Cultural anthropology Cultural geography Cultural history Culture Society Sociocultural evolution Theories of history 2000 singles U2 songs Island Records singles Billboard Dance Club Songs number-one singles Canadian Singles Chart number-one singles Dutch Top 40 number-one singles European Hot 100 Singles number-one singles Grammy Award for Record of the Year Grammy Award for Song of the Year Irish Singles Chart number-one singles Number-one singles in Australia Number-one singles in Italy UK Singles Chart number-one singles Music videos directed by Jonas Åkerlund Song recordings produced by Brian Eno Song recordings produced by Daniel Lanois Songs written by Bono Songs written by the Edge Songs written by Adam Clayton Songs written by Larry Mullen, Jr. Lee DeWyze songs Compositions in A major 2000 songs BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1986 births Living people People from Uccle Belgian people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgian expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Association football central defenders Association football utility players R.S.C. Anderlecht players Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players Premier League players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Belgium Belgian expatriates in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1976 births Living people People from Paramaribo Surinamese emigrants to the Netherlands Dutch expatriate footballers Dutch footballers Netherlands international footballers AFC Ajax players U.C. Sampdoria players Real Madrid C.F. players Inter Milan players A.C. Milan players Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players La Liga players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players Association football midfielders FIFA 100 Eredivisie players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Spain Dutch expatriates in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy Dutch expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Brazil Dutch expatriates in Brazil Knights of the Order of Orange-Nassau Honorary Order of the Yellow Star Dutch expatriate football managers Dutch football managers Serie A managers Expatriate football managers in Italy A.C. Milan managers BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom Association football executives Association football terminology Europe Continents Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe 1955 births 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players AS Nancy players AS Saint-Étienne players Association football midfielders Dual internationalists (football) English Football Hall of Fame inductees European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Italy FIFA 100 Footballers at the 1976 Summer Olympics France international footballers France national football team managers France under-21 international footballers French expatriate footballers French footballers French football managers French people of Italian descent French sports executives and administrators Juventus F.C. players Kuwait international footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Living people Officiers of the Légion d'honneur Officiers of the Ordre national du Mérite Olympic footballers of France Olympic cauldron lighters People from Meurthe-et-Moselle People of Piedmontese descent Presidents of UEFA Recipients of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin Serie A players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA Euro 1984 players UEFA Euro 1992 managers World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations