 Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles 1983 births Living people Footballers from Rotterdam Dutch footballers Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Association football forwards SBV Excelsior players Feyenoord players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Fenerbahçe footballers Eredivisie players Premier League players Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Dutch expatriates in England Dutch expatriates in Turkey Expatriate footballers in Turkey FIFA Century Club 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Wolverhampton English footballers Welsh footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Hednesford Town F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Welsh descent Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Scotland national football team matches Wales national football team matches 1985–86 in Scottish football 1986 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) FIFA World Cup qualification matches 1985–86 in Welsh football 20th century in Cardiff Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology English football referees 1985 births Living people People from Ashington Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 Peabody Award winning radio programs American classical music radio programs American Public Media programs 1987 radio programme debuts Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Laws of association football Sports rules and regulations Sports venues by type 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Oviedo Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Association football midfielders Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Real Oviedo players Celta de Vigo B players Celta de Vigo players Rayo Vallecano footballers UP Langreo footballers Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players Serie A players S.S.C. Napoli players Spain international footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Wales Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in Wales Spanish expatriates in Italy 1981 births Sportspeople from Dakar Living people French people of Cape Verdean descent French people of Guinean descent French footballers French expatriate footballers France international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Association football fullbacks A.C. Monza Brianza 1912 players OGC Nice players AS Monaco FC players Manchester United F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Naturalized citizens of France Running Man (TV series) contestants French expatriates in England French expatriates in Italy Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Football venues in Wales Rugby union stadiums in Wales Swansea City A.F.C. Ospreys (rugby team) Sports venues in Swansea Stadiums in Swansea Buildings and structures in Swansea Sports venues completed in 2005 Premier League venues Football League venues 1973 births Living people Association football wingers BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Welsh people of Sierra Leonean descent English Football Hall of Fame inductees Manchester United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Officers of the Order of the British Empire Footballers from Cardiff Premier League players The Football League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Wales international footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers People educated at Moorside High School Welsh football managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers Salford City F.C. 1985 births Living people People from Stevenage English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Association football utility players Watford F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players