 Publications established in 1855 National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Telegraph Media Group 1855 establishments in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London Southampton F.C. Football clubs in Hampshire Association football clubs established in 1885 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs 1885 establishments in England Football clubs in England 1963 births Living people Sportspeople from Bellshill People from Ross and Cromarty Scottish footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers Aberdeen F.C. players FC Metz players Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Ligue 1 players Scottish Football League players Motherwell F.C. managers Coventry City F.C. managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Scottish football managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Scottish Premier League managers Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from Highland (council area) Scotland under-21 international footballers Wigan Athletic F.C. non-playing staff Rotherham United F.C. non-playing staff Rotherham United F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Concepts in metaphysics Information Information, knowledge, and uncertainty Information science Laws of association football Association football terminology 1863 introductions Aberdeen F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1903 Sport in Aberdeen United Soccer Association imported teams Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish Premier League teams Former Highland Football League teams 1903 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Bribery Association football clubs established in 1886 Football clubs in Scotland Motherwell F.C. Sport in North Lanarkshire Scottish Premier League teams 1886 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Coventry Populated places established in the 11th century Local government in the West Midlands (county) Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Metropolitan boroughs Cities in the West Midlands (region) Local government districts of the West Midlands (region) 1043 establishments Association football terminology Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Birmingham, West Midlands Cities in the West Midlands (region) Local government districts of the West Midlands (region) Metropolitan boroughs NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Populated places established in the 6th century Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Towns in Lancashire West Pennine Moors Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom Blackburn Rotherham Towns in South Yorkshire Folly castles in England Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Aberdeen Council areas of Scotland Fishing communities in Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Royal burghs Grampian France Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Western Europe FC Metz Football clubs in France Sport in Metz Football clubs from former German territories Association football clubs established in 1932 1932 establishments in France Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Association football clubs established in 1887 Barnsley F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in South Yorkshire Sport in Barnsley FA Cup winners 1887 establishments in England Midland Football League (1889) 1984 births Sportspeople from Leicester Living people English footballers Association football forwards Leicester City F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Darlington F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Grimsby Town F.C. players Kidderminster Harriers F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Forest Green Rovers F.C. players Tamworth F.C. players Harrogate Town F.C. players Corby Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players National League (English football) players Southern Football League players English football managers Corby Town F.C. managers 1954 births Living people Alumni of the University of Bolton Blackpool F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players British association football commentators British expatriate sportspeople in the United States Coventry City F.C. players English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Ireland English expatriates in the United States English football managers English footballers Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football central defenders League of Ireland managers League of Ireland players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Limerick F.C. managers Limerick F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Notts County F.C. managers People from Dudley Premier League managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League managers The Football League players Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93) players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Local government in London Honourable Artillery Company Police forces of London 1839 establishments in England Organizations established in 1839