 Association football clubs established in 1885 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Millwall F.C. Southern Football League clubs 1885 establishments in England Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands 1980 births Sportspeople from Lagos State Living people Yoruba sportspeople Association football defenders Nigerian footballers Nigeria international footballers 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players Nigerian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Charlton Athletic F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Watford F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Nigerian expatriates in England 1992 births Living people Footballers from Lewisham (London borough) English footballers Association football forwards Millwall F.C. players Staines Town F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Gillingham F.C. players Leyton Orient F.C. players The Football League players FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1987 births Living people Footballers from Hammersmith and Fulham (London borough) English footballers Association football midfielders Hayes F.C. players Salisbury City F.C. players Southend United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Millwall F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players 1979 births Living people People from Galway (city) Association football players from County Galway Association football goalkeepers Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Galway United F.C. (1937–2011) players Barry Town F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Derry City F.C. players Barnet F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Millwall F.C. players League of Ireland players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Belvedere F.C. players FA Cup seasons 2012–13 domestic association football cups 2012–13 FA Cup 2012–13 in English football   Bradford City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1903 Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners 1903 establishments in England Sport in Bradford 1969 births Living people Sportspeople from Renfrewshire Expatriate footballers in Germany Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers St Mirren F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Borussia Dortmund players Celtic F.C. players Livingston F.C. players 1998 FIFA World Cup players Scottish Football League players Bundesliga players Scottish Premier League players Scottish expatriate footballers Scottish football managers Livingston F.C. managers Wycombe Wanderers F.C. managers Colchester United F.C. managers Norwich City F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Premier League managers People educated at Linwood High School Scottish Football League representative players Scotland under-21 international footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow 1984 births Living people People from Tooting Footballers from Greater London English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Jamaican descent English Christians Association football forwards Godmanchester Rovers F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black English sportspeople Articles with hAudio microformats Norwich City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1902 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Norwich Premier League clubs 1902 establishments in England Football clubs in Norfolk 1962 births Living people Sportspeople from Watford Welsh footballers Wales international footballers Watford F.C. players The Football League players Watford F.C. non-playing staff Welsh football managers Watford F.C. managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Millwall F.C. managers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. managers The Football League managers English people of Welsh descent Manchester City F.C. non-playing staff 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Bradford English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Bradford City A.F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players English people of Guyanese descent Black English sportspeople 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Vienna Austrian footballers Austria youth international footballers Austria under-21 international footballers Austria international footballers Austrian expatriate footballers Association football forwards SK Rapid Wien players Aston Villa F.C. players Watford F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Austrian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Sports terminology Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports 1976 births Living people People from Lifford Sportspeople from County Donegal Association football goalkeepers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland FIFA Century Club Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Celtic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff  Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating 1957 births Living people Australian cricketers Tasmania cricketers Sportspeople from Melbourne Cricketers from Victoria (Australia) Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Low-cost airlines Airline types Business models Association football terminology 1989 births Aston Villa F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Association football midfielders Living people People from Airdrie, North Lanarkshire Scotland B international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish footballers The Football League players Premier League players Scotland international footballers Sports terminology Aston Villa F.C. Sports venues in Birmingham, West Midlands 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums Football venues in England UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Defunct velodromes in the United Kingdom Darts venues Sports venues completed in 1897 Football League venues Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1991 births Living people English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Footballers from Waltham Forest (London borough) Defunct cricket grounds in England Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1932 Sports venues in York York City F.C.