 Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Copyright law Data management Intellectual property law Metadata Monopoly (economics) Public records Football media in the United Kingdom Media companies of the United Kingdom Legal terms English phrases Copyright law Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Football clubs in Scotland Kilmarnock F.C. Association football clubs established in 1869 Defunct Scottish rugby union clubs Scottish Premier League teams Kilmarnock 1869 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners South of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Football Association founder members Scottish League Cup winners Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Aberdeen F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1903 Sport in Aberdeen United Soccer Association imported teams Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish Premier League teams Former Highland Football League teams 1903 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Scottish Football League First Division Scottish Football League Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1975 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Dunfermline Athletic F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1885 Scottish Premier League teams 1885 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Computers Articles containing video clips Articles with example code American inventions 1949 introductions Office equipment Computer peripherals Photocopiers Articles containing video clips Printing processes Forgery Audio engineering Sound recording Media technology Sound production technology Electronics Writing Nonverbal communication Human communication Gloucester Populated places on the River Severn Towns of the Welsh Marches Towns in Gloucestershire Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) County towns in England Non-metropolitan districts of Gloucestershire London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports