 European women's national association football teams England national football teams Women's football in England Women's national sports teams of England 1972 establishments in England England women's national football team Terminology used in multiple sports English women's footballers Sunderland W.F.C. players Leeds United L.F.C. players Arsenal L.F.C. players England women's international footballers FA Women's Premier League players 1988 births Living people People from Durham, County Durham FA WSL players 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Great Britain Manchester City W.F.C. players England women's under-23 international footballers Association football forwards Association football midfielders Association football defenders Association football utility players Members of the Order of the British Empire Germany national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries National sports teams of Germany Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf Germany Central Europe Countries in Europe Federal republics G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1871 Western Europe Articles containing video clips FIFA Women's World Cup FIFA competitions for women's national teams Recurring sporting events established in 1991 World championships 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1991 births Living people 1. FFC Turbine Potsdam players German women's footballers Germany women's international footballers 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players People from Stade Association football fullbacks Association football wingers England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 1984 births Living people English women's footballers Everton L.F.C. players Arsenal L.F.C. players Liverpool L.F.C. players Chelsea L.F.C. players Charlton Athletic L.F.C. players England women's international footballers FA Women's Premier League players FA WSL players 2007 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players FIFA Century Club Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Great Britain Homeless people Sportspeople from London Association football midfielders Members of the Order of the British Empire AFC Asian Cup-winning countries Australia national soccer team Oceanian national association football teams Asian national association football teams Men's national sports teams of Australia Football Federation Australia Association football clubs established in 1922 Soccer in Australia La Liga seasons 2011–12 in Spanish football leagues 2011–12 in European association football leagues Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Turkish Cup seasons 2014–15 European domestic association football cups Association football terminology 1988 births 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players Apollon Limassol FC Ladies players Arsenal L.F.C. players Association football forwards Boston Breakers (NWSL) players Chelsea L.F.C. players D.C. United Women players England women's international footballers English expatriates in Spain English expatriates in the United States FA Women's Premier League players LGBT association football players LGBT sportspeople from England Living people National Women's Soccer League players Philadelphia Independence players Primera División (women) players RCD Espanyol Femenino players Sportspeople from Watford Expatriate women's footballers in Spain Expatriate women's footballers in Cyprus Expatriate women's soccer players in the United States Lesbian sportswomen Portland Thorns FC players Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1978 births Living people 1. FFC Frankfurt players 1. FFC Turbine Potsdam players Portland Thorns FC players 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2003 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2007 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players FIFA Women's World Cup-winning players Bisexual sportspeople Expatriate women's footballers in Sweden Expatriate women's soccer players in Australia Expatriate women's soccer players in the United States Brisbane Roar FC players FC Bayern Munich (women) players FIFA Century Club Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics German women's footballers Germany women's international footballers LGBT sportspeople from Germany Olympic women's footballers of Germany Olympic bronze medalists for Germany Olympic medalists in football LGBT association football players Bisexual women Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics FIFA World Player of the Year winners Djurgårdens IF Fotboll (women) players Physiotherapists 1990 births Living people People from Gera German women's footballers 1. FFC Turbine Potsdam players 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players Sportspeople from Thuringia Association football wing halves 1982 births Living people People from Cardiff Alumni of Cardiff Metropolitan University Swansea City A.F.C. non-playing staff Cardiff City F.C. non-playing staff Welsh football managers FA WSL managers England women's national football team managers 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup managers Wales Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union United Kingdom Great Britain 1983 births Living people English women's footballers Arsenal L.F.C. players Chelsea L.F.C. players Birmingham City L.F.C. players Leeds United L.F.C. players Notts County L.F.C. players England women's international footballers FA Women's Premier League players FA WSL players 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players Coventry City L.F.C. players United Soccer Leagues W-League players Expatriate women's soccer players in the United States British expatriate sportspeople in the United States England women's under-23 international footballers People from Nuneaton Association football defenders English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports Japan national football team AFC Asian Cup-winning countries Asian national association football teams National sports teams of Japan 1977 films 1977 horror films American films American horror films English-language films Films based on American horror novels Films directed by Richard Loncraine Films set in London Films shot in London Ghost films Conservatism Political ideologies Social theories 1984 births Living people English women's footballers Everton L.F.C. players Arsenal L.F.C. players Charlton Athletic L.F.C. players Birmingham City L.F.C. players England women's international footballers FA Women's Premier League players FA WSL players British association football commentators England women's under-23 international footballers 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players People from Mansfield Association football midfielders 1944 births Living people English footballers Harrow Borough F.C. players Walton & Hersham F.C. players Wimbledon F.C. players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players English football managers Premier League managers Wimbledon F.C. managers Watford F.C. managers Sheffield United F.C. managers Crystal Palace F.C. managers Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Barnsley F.C. managers Leicester City F.C. managers Southampton F.C. managers People from Stanmore Alcohol abuse Drinking culture Headaches UEFA European Championship Recurring sporting events established in 1960 UEFA competitions Quadrennial sporting events 1988 births Living people 1. FFC Frankfurt players 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players Association football forwards Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics German people of Cameroonian descent German people of French descent German women's footballers Germany women's international footballers Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic bronze medalists for Germany Olympic women's footballers of Germany Olympic medalists in football SC 07 Bad Neuenahr players Sportspeople from Bonn 2010 FIFA World Cup 2010 in association football 2009–10 in South African soccer FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by South Africa 1964 births Living people German women's footballers German football managers Germany women's international footballers Germany women's national football team managers Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Germany Recipients of the Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany FIFA Century Club 1991 FIFA Women's World Cup players 1995 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2007 FIFA Women's World Cup managers 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup managers 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup managers FIFA Women's World Cup-winning managers Female association football managers 1994 births Living people German women's footballers Germany women's international footballers FC Bayern Munich (women) players SC Freiburg (women) players 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players People from Wangen im Allgäu Association football midfielders Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people American women's soccer players English women's footballers England women's international footballers Cal State Fullerton Titans women's soccer players Sky Blue FC (WPS) players Pali Blues players 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players Expatriate women's footballers in Sweden United Soccer Leagues W-League players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Great Britain Notts County L.F.C. players Linköpings FC players Damallsvenskan players Manchester City W.F.C. players FA WSL players American emigrants to England American people of English descent England women's under-23 international footballers Soccer players from California Association football goalkeepers People from Santa Monica, California Women's association football goalkeepers 1994 births Living people People from Cuxhaven German women's footballers Association football forwards Hamburger SV (women) players Germany women's international footballers 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players SC Freiburg (women) players UCF Knights women's soccer players English women's footballers Nigerian emigrants to the United Kingdom Birmingham City L.F.C. players Charlton Athletic L.F.C. players Chelsea L.F.C. players Saint Louis Athletica players Atlanta Beat (WPS) players Sky Blue FC (WPS) players Black English sportspeople England women's international footballers FA Women's Premier League players FA WSL players Alumni of Brunel University 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Lagos Expatriate soccer players in the United States 2007 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup players 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Great Britain Mexico Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories States and territories established in 1813 G20 nations E7 nations 1987 births Living people English women's footballers Sunderland W.F.C. players Everton L.F.C. players England women's international footballers FA Women's Premier League players Alumni of Loughborough University FA WSL players Sportspeople from Sunderland, Tyne and Wear Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Great Britain Manchester City W.F.C. players 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup players Association football midfielders Superpowers Military terminology International relations Hegemony International relations theory States by power status Political science terms Words coined in the 1940s Women's association football Association football