 Genoa Italian Riviera Mediterranean port cities and towns in Italy Roman towns and cities in Italy Capitals of former nations World Heritage Sites in Italy 1964 births Living people People from Ravenna Italian football managers S.S. Sambenedettese Calcio managers Delfino Pescara 1936 managers Cagliari Calcio managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers Genoa C.F.C. managers Serie A managers A.C. Cesena players Italian footballers S.S. Lazio managers Bologna F.C. 1909 managers Cagliari Populated places established in the 7th century BC Capitals of former nations Cities and towns in Sardinia Populated coastal places in Italy Mediterranean port cities and towns in Italy Phoenician colonies Roman towns and cities in Italy Wine regions of Italy Italian football chairmen and investors Italian businesspeople Living people 1948 births 2015–16 Premier League Premier League seasons 2015–16 in European association football leagues 2015–16 in English football leagues UEFA Cup winning managers 1954 births Living people Udinese Calcio managers Parma F.C. managers ACF Fiorentina managers Modena F.C. managers Panathinaikos F.C. managers A.C. Chievo Verona managers Empoli F.C. managers A.C. Siena managers Bologna F.C. 1909 managers Genoa C.F.C. managers Italian football managers Vicenza Calcio players Superleague Greece managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers U.S. Sassuolo Calcio managers Serie A managers Expatriate football managers in Greece Sportspeople from Verona 1939 births Living people People from Crevalcore UEFA Cup winning managers Italian footballers Italian football managers S.S.C. Napoli players Torino F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Brescia Calcio players Genoa C.F.C. players Serie A players Genoa C.F.C. managers A.C. Pisa 1909 managers Brescia Calcio managers U.S. Cremonese managers S.S.C. Napoli managers Inter Milan managers A.C. Ancona managers A.C. Siena managers A.S. Lucchese-Libertas managers Serie A managers PFC CSKA Sofia managers Expatriate football managers in Bulgaria 1958 births A.C. Pistoiese players A.C. Reggiana 1919 players F.C. Crotone managers Association football midfielders Genoa C.F.C. managers Italian football managers Italian footballers Living people People from the Province of Turin Delfino Pescara 1936 players U.S. Salernitana 1919 players Serie A players Serie B players U.S. Città di Palermo players U.S.D. Cavese 1919 players Serie A managers Inter Milan managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin S.S. Lazio Football clubs in Italy Sports clubs established in 1900 Association football clubs established in 1900 Publicly traded sports companies Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Sport in Rome Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners Multi-sport clubs in Italy 1900 establishments in Italy