 Stoke City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1863 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Football clubs in Staffordshire Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners The Football League founder members Sport in Stoke-on-Trent United Soccer Association imported teams Southern Football League clubs 1863 establishments in England Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1976 births Living people Danish footballers Danish expatriate footballers Denmark youth international footballers Denmark under-21 international footballers Denmark international footballers Association football goalkeepers Odense Boldklub players Vejle Boldklub players Sunderland A.F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Danish Superliga players Premier League players The Football League players A-League players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate soccer players in Australia Danish expatriates in England Danish expatriates in Australia UEFA Euro 2000 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club FC Svendborg players 1984 births Living people People from Buenos Aires Province Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers 2004 Copa América players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Olympic footballers of Argentina Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine Primera División players Boca Juniors footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Brazil Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Serie A players Sport Club Corinthians Paulista players Expatriate footballers in England Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Association football forwards Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Brazil Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom South American Footballer of the Year winners Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Expatriate footballers in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriates in England 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1986 births Living people People from Mogán, Las Palmas Spanish footballers Canarian footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Valencia CF Mestalla footballers Valencia CF players SD Eibar footballers Celta de Vigo players Premier League players Manchester City F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish people of Japanese descent Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Spanish expatriates in England FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England 1981 births Living people People from Bouaké Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Ivorian footballers Ivorian expatriate footballers Ivorian emigrants to the United Kingdom Ivory Coast international footballers Doping cases in association football Expatriate footballers in England ASEC Mimosas players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Ivorian sportspeople in doping cases FIFA Century Club Africa Cup of Nations-winning players Ivorian Muslims 1964 births Living people People from Iesi Italian Roman Catholics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Bologna F.C. 1909 players U.C. Sampdoria players S.S. Lazio players Leicester City F.C. players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers S.S. Lazio managers ACF Fiorentina managers Inter Milan managers Serie A managers Premier League players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Manchester City F.C. managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 2007 establishments in England 2012 Summer Olympic venues American football venues in the United Kingdom Buildings and structures in Brent England national football team FA Cup Final venues Football venues in London Music venues completed in 2007 Music venues in London National stadiums National Football League venues Olympic football venues European retractable-roof stadiums Rugby league stadiums in London Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues completed in 2007 Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Retractable-roof stadiums UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Neo-futurism architecture Hip extensors Knee flexors Muscles of the lower limb Posterior compartment of thigh 1981 births Living people People from Truro Association football wingers Footballers from Cornwall English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Peterborough United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Berlin Association football defenders German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany international footballers German expatriate footballers German expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England 1. FC Union Berlin players Chelsea F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Danish footballers Danish expatriate footballers Serie A players Lyngby Boldklub players 1. FC Köln players Juventus F.C. players Bologna F.C. 1909 players Hellas Verona F.C. players Denmark under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Expatriate footballers in Italy Danish expatriates in Italy 1992 births Living people Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Bradford Sportspeople from Leeds English football referees UEFA Champions League referees FA Cup Final referees National League (English football) referees The Football League referees Premier League referees 1983 births Living people People from Bouaké Ivorian footballers Ivorian expatriate footballers Ivory Coast international footballers Association football midfielders Association football central defenders ASEC Mimosas players AS Monaco FC players K.S.K. Beveren players FC Metalurh Donetsk players Olympiacos F.C. players FC Barcelona players Manchester City F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Belgian Pro League players Ligue 1 players La Liga players Ukrainian Premier League players Superleague Greece players Premier League players Ivorian emigrants to the United Kingdom Ivorian expatriates in Belgium Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Monaco Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Greece Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in Ukraine Ivorian expatriates in Spain Ivorian expatriates in Greece Ivorian expatriates in Ukraine Ivorian expatriates in France African Footballer of the Year winners Africa Cup of Nations-winning players Ivorian Muslims FA Cup Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Ivory Coast Blood diamonds Countries in Africa Economic Community of West African States Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative French-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the African Union Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1960 West African countries World Digital Library related Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Manchester City F.C. matches Newcastle United F.C. matches Football League Cup Finals 1975–76 Football League Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League Bolton Wanderers F.C. 1877 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1877 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bolton Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Football League Trophy winners Premier League clubs Denmark Countries in Europe Danish-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union Scandinavia States and territories established in 1814 Musical groups established in 1992 Musical groups disestablished in 2009 English rock music groups English Christian rock groups People from Littlehampton 1992 establishments in England 2009 disestablishments in England Musical quintets Manchester 1st-century establishments in Roman Britain 79 establishments Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North West England Local government districts of North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 1st century Association football clubs established in 1875 Football clubs in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. Sport in Blackburn The Football League founder members Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1875 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire Association football terminology FA Community Shield National association football supercups Football competitions in England Recurring sporting events established in 1908 Etihad Airways Premier League venues Football venues in England Manchester City F.C. Sports venues in Manchester 2002 Commonwealth Games venues Music venues in Greater Manchester Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Rugby union stadiums in England Sports venues completed in 2002 2002 establishments in England 2015–16 UEFA Europa League 2015–16 in UEFA football UEFA Europa League seasons Current association football seasons 2010–11 UEFA Europa League 2010–11 in European football UEFA Europa League seasons 1984 births Living people Expatriate footballers in England Trinidad and Tobago footballers Trinidad and Tobago international footballers Trinidad and Tobago expatriate footballers Premier League players The Football League players Joe Public F.C. players W Connection F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Al Jazira Club players 2005 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2014 Caribbean Cup players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players TT Pro League players Recipients of the Chaconia Medal 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Shrewsbury English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Abu Dhabi Capitals in Asia Metropolitan areas of the United Arab Emirates Populated coastal places in the United Arab Emirates Populated places in Abu Dhabi (emirate) Port cities in the Arabian Peninsula Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 2001–02 in English football Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English footballers Black English sportspeople England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Footballers from Leeds Leeds United F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players Aston Villa F.C. players Premier League players England youth international footballers Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Italy British people of Barbadian descent Unincorporated communities in Alabama Unincorporated communities in Marengo County, Alabama 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Black English sportspeople English people of Barbadian descent 1982 births Living people People from Abingdon-on-Thames English footballers Association football midfielders Oxford United F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players