 Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Hibernian F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1875 Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Edinburgh United Soccer Association imported teams Leith Scottish Premier League teams 1875 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange 1983 establishments in the United States AT&T Bell System Companies based in Dallas, Texas Companies established in 1983 Internet service providers of the United States Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Tier 1 networks Telecommunications companies of the United States American brands Scotland national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Scotland 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football terminology Association football transfers St Johnstone F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Perth, Scotland Association football clubs established in 1884 Sport in Perth and Kinross Scottish Premier League teams 1884 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. Sport in Inverness Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1994 Scottish Premier League teams 1994 establishments in Scotland Inverness Thistle F.C. Caledonian F.C. Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Heart of Midlothian F.C. Football clubs in Edinburgh Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1874 Scottish Premier League teams 1874 establishments in Scotland Gorgie Scottish Football League teams Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Dundee United F.C. Sport in Dundee Irish diaspora in Scotland Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1909 Diaspora sports clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Scottish Premier League teams 1909 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Dallas Tornado Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Rangers F.C. Aberdeen F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1903 Sport in Aberdeen United Soccer Association imported teams Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish Premier League teams Former Highland Football League teams 1903 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Bankruptcy Corporate law Insolvency Aberdeen Council areas of Scotland Fishing communities in Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Royal burghs Grampian 1950 births Living people Scottish businesspeople Scottish football chairmen and investors Aberdeen F.C. directors and chairmen Commanders of the Order of the British Empire People from Marr Scottish Football Association Football governing bodies in Scotland UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1873 1873 establishments in Scotland Organisations based in Glasgow 1943 births Association football forwards Dundee F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Kilmarnock F.C. players Living people Montrose F.C. managers Montrose F.C. players Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Sportspeople from Dundee Dundee United F.C. non-playing staff Scottish league football top scorers Inverness Clan Fraser Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Shinty Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions 1956 births Living people Scottish football chairmen and investors Scottish chief executives Scottish accountants Hibernian F.C. directors and chairmen Edinburgh British capitals Capitals in Europe Council areas of Scotland Districts of Scotland Feudalism in Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Scottish society Basic financial concepts Personal finance 1978 births Living people Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Dundee United F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Burnley F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Premier League players Sportspeople from Paisley Scottish Professional Football League players Association football terminology Sports terminology Dunfermline Athletic F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1885 Scottish Premier League teams 1885 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Dundee F.C. Sport in Dundee Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1893 1893 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Business law Insolvency Corporate finance Court orders Insolvency law of the United Kingdom Insolvency law of the United Kingdom Business law United Kingdom company law Insolvency law of the United Kingdom Business law United Kingdom company law Contract law Legal documents