 Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands 1979 births Living people People from Montana, Bulgaria Association football midfielders Bulgarian footballers Bulgaria international footballers Bulgarian expatriate footballers Bulgarian expatriates in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England PFC Montana players PFC CSKA Sofia players Celtic F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Bulgarian A Football Group players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players FIFA Century Club People with cancer Leukemia Lymphatic vessel diseases RTT Articles containing video clips Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports 1959 births 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Aberdeen F.C. players Association football central defenders Aston Villa F.C. managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Belgium Expatriate football managers in Egypt Hibernian F.C. managers K.R.C. Genk managers Lewis United F.C. players Living people Motherwell F.C. managers Motherwell F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. managers People from Barrhead Premier League managers Rangers F.C. managers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland national football team managers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish expatriate football managers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers The Football League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders Zamalek SC managers BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology West Midlands (county) Metropolitan counties West Midlands (region) NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Bulgaria national football team European national association football teams Football in Bulgaria National sports teams of Bulgaria Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports Arsenal F.C. Football venues in London Sport in Islington Buildings and structures in Islington Premier League venues The Emirates Group Visitor attractions in Islington Sports venues completed in 2006 Virology Viruses The Clash 1976 establishments in England 1986 disestablishments in England English anti-fascists Political music English buskers English punk rock groups Grammy Award winners Musical groups disestablished in 1986 Musical groups established in 1976 Musical groups from London Musical quartets Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees Chelsea, London Districts of Kensington and Chelsea Districts of London on the River Thames 1962 births Living people American bankers American billionaires American chairmen of corporations American investors American Jews American people of Russian-Jewish descent Aston Villa F.C. directors and chairmen Cleveland Browns owners MBNA people National Football League team presidents Columbia University alumni Columbia Law School alumni People from Brooklyn People from Cleveland, Ohio People from Amagansett, New York Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions 1913 births 1997 deaths People from Montville, Connecticut People from North Platte, Nebraska People from Milwaukee, Wisconsin University of Nebraska alumni School of the Art Institute of Chicago alumni Painters from Connecticut Artists from Nebraska Painters from Nebraska Painters from Wisconsin Fresco painters 20th-century American painters American muralists Smithsonian Institution people People of the New Deal arts projects Fear Emotions Love Emotions Ethical principles Personal life 1952 books French plays Works by Jean-Paul Sartre 1971 births Armagh Gaelic footballers Association football midfielders Association footballers from Northern Ireland Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Celtic F.C. players Clan na Gael CLG Gaelic footballers Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Football managers from Northern Ireland Gaelic footballers who switched code Glenavon F.C. players NIFL Premiership players Leicester City F.C. players Living people Manchester City F.C. players Northern Ireland B international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Nottingham Forest F.C. players People educated at St Michael's Grammar School, Lurgan People from Lurgan Premier League players Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League managers The Football League players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers The Football League managers 2013 films 2010s drama films Films about racism Finnish films Finnish drama films Finnish-language films Films directed by Dome Karukoski Skinhead films Celtic L.F.C. Women's football clubs in Scotland 2007 establishments in Scotland Football clubs in Glasgow Sport in South Lanarkshire 1959 births Living people People from Glasgow Celtic F.C. non-playing staff British businesspeople People from Thorntonhall 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1964 births Living people Cancer survivors English footballers England international footballers England B international footballers Rochdale A.F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Sportspeople from Manchester Hematologic malignant neoplasms 1907 establishments in the United Kingdom Association football trade unions English football organisations Trade unions established in 1907 Trade unions in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Manchester 1944 births Living people People from Ashton-under-Lyne English footballers Leaders of British trade unions Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Vancouver Whitecaps (1974–84) players Bury F.C. players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at Ashton-under-Lyne Grammar School Alumni of Manchester Metropolitan University 1976 births Living people People from Lifford Sportspeople from County Donegal Association football goalkeepers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland FIFA Century Club Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Celtic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people People from Tooting Footballers from Greater London English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Jamaican descent English Christians Association football forwards Godmanchester Rovers F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black English sportspeople Members of the Conexus Mobile Alliance KT Group 1992 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players OGC Nice Football clubs in France Association football clubs established in 1904 Sport in Nice 1904 establishments in France 1904 1984 births Living people People from Evergreen Park, Illinois Association football goalkeepers American soccer players United States men's under-23 international soccer players American Christians American people of Polish descent American expatriate soccer players Olympic soccer players of the United States United States men's international soccer players Expatriate footballers in England American expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom South Carolina Gamecocks men's soccer players Chicago Fire U-23 players Chivas USA players Aston Villa F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning players 2007 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2007 Copa América players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Soccer players from Illinois Chivas USA draft picks Premier Development League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Premier League players The Football League players Major League Soccer first round draft picks Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras Association football clubs established in 1914 Diaspora sports clubs Sports clubs 1981 births Living people Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players CD Numancia players CA Osasuna players UD Almería players Scottish Premier League players Rangers F.C. players Premier League players Aston Villa F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Scotland Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group 1983 births Living people English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers Nottingham Forest F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Sportspeople from Nottingham Black English sportspeople England youth international footballers British association football commentators 1964 British television programme debuts BBC Sport BBC Television programmes British sports television series The Football League on television Premier League on television Football media in the United Kingdom 1960s British television series 1970s British television series 1980s British television series 1990s British television series 2000s British television series 2010s British television series 1960 births Living people Association football forwards BBC sports presenters and reporters British association football commentators England B international footballers England international footballers English footballers Everton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Leicester City F.C. players Nagoya Grampus players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in Spain English expatriate footballers FIFA 100 Golf writers and broadcasters 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players The Football League players First Division/Premier League top scorers English Football Hall of Fame inductees Expatriate footballers in Japan J.League players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at City of Leicester Boys' Grammar School Sportspeople from Leicester 1968 births Living people Black English sportspeople English footballers English people of Barbadian descent Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Moor Green F.C. players Port Vale F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Religious education Bolton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester West Pennine Moors 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Kinshasa Democratic Republic of the Congo footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Democratic Republic of the Congo emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People associated with the University of Bolton Black British sportspeople Alumni of Staffordshire University German musical groups