 Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners Bradford City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1903 Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners 1903 establishments in England Sport in Bradford FA Cup Finals FA Cup 1964 births Living people People from Frederiksberg Danish footballers Association football midfielders Danish Superliga players Kjøbenhavns Boldklub players Brøndby IF players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players S.S. Lazio players La Liga players FC Barcelona players Real Madrid C.F. players J.League players Vissel Kobe players Eredivisie players AFC Ajax players Danish football managers Danish Superliga managers Brøndby IF managers La Liga managers Getafe CF managers RCD Mallorca managers Russian Football Premier League managers FC Spartak Moscow managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Lekhwiya SC managers Denmark under-21 international footballers Denmark international footballers UEFA Euro 1984 players 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1995 King Fahd Cup players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club UEFA Golden Players Danish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Japan Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate football managers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Russia Expatriate football managers in Wales Expatriate football managers in Qatar Danish knights Danish expatriate football managers 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Oviedo Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Association football midfielders Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Real Oviedo players Celta de Vigo B players Celta de Vigo players Rayo Vallecano footballers UP Langreo footballers Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players Serie A players S.S.C. Napoli players Spain international footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Wales Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in Wales Spanish expatriates in Italy 1987 births Living people Canadian soccer players Canadian people of Filipino descent Canadian people of Jamaican descent Dutch people of Filipino descent Dutch people of Jamaican descent Dutch footballers Association football midfielders Eredivisie players Feyenoord players La Liga players RCD Mallorca players Villarreal CF players Swansea City A.F.C. players S.S.C. Napoli players Carpi FC 1909 players Premier League players Serie A players Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of the Netherlands Canadian expatriate soccer players Dutch expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Wales Expatriate footballers in Italy Canadian emigrants to the Netherlands People from Scarborough, Toronto Black Canadian sportspeople Soccer people from Ontario Canadian sportspeople of Asian descent Naturalised citizens of the Netherlands Canadian expatriates in Spain Dutch expatriates in Spain Canadian expatriates in Wales Dutch expatriates in Wales Canadian expatriates in Italy Dutch expatriates in Italy 2014 FIFA World Cup players Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands British people of Montserratian descent 1987 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent Association football wingers Southampton F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black English sportspeople People from Trowbridge Living people Ball games Terminology used in multiple sports Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Living people 1967 births English football managers Charlton Athletic F.C. managers English footballers Reading F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Bury F.C. players Colchester United F.C. managers Hull City A.F.C. managers The Football League managers Bradford City A.F.C. managers Association football terminology Laws of association football   Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Football in England Football leagues in England Football league systems in Europe 1977 births Living people Sportspeople from Sheffield Footballers from Sheffield English footballers Association football goalkeepers Alfreton Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Bury F.C. players Burton Albion F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players 2007 establishments in England 2012 Summer Olympic venues American football venues in the United Kingdom Buildings and structures in Brent England national football team FA Cup Final venues Football venues in London Music venues completed in 2007 Music venues in London National stadiums National Football League venues Olympic football venues European retractable-roof stadiums Rugby league stadiums in London Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues completed in 2007 Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Retractable-roof stadiums UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Neo-futurism architecture Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Bradford District Cities in Yorkshire and the Humber Leeds City Region Metropolitan boroughs Local government districts of Yorkshire and the Humber Wales Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union United Kingdom Great Britain 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from County Antrim Association footballers from Northern Ireland Ballymena United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Reading F.C. non-playing staff Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff Expatriate football managers from Northern Ireland The Football League managers Watford F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers Denmark Countries in Europe Danish-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union Scandinavia States and territories established in 1814 1963 births Swansea City A.F.C. People from Neath Port Talbot English football chairmen and investors Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire 2015–16 UEFA Europa League 2015–16 in UEFA football UEFA Europa League seasons Current association football seasons 2010–11 UEFA Europa League 2010–11 in European football UEFA Europa League seasons 2010–11 Football League Two Football League Two seasons 2010–11 Football League 2010–11 in English football leagues 2010–11 in European fourth tier association football leagues Bradford Cities in Yorkshire and the Humber History of the textile industry Market towns in West Yorkshire Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns in West Yorkshire West Yorkshire Metropolitan counties Counties of England established in 1974 Iron Maiden songs 2003 singles Songs written by Adrian Smith Songs written by Steve Harris (musician) 2003 songs EMI Records singles Swansea Cities in Wales Counties of Wales Glamorgan Populated coastal places in Wales Populated places established in the 12th century Port cities and towns in Wales Principal areas of Wales Seaside resorts in Wales Swansea Bay Angle 1977 births Living people Sportspeople from Birkenhead English footballers Association football midfielders Swansea City A.F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Notts County F.C. players The Football League players 1978 births Living people Sportspeople from Munich German footballers German expatriate footballers Association football goalkeepers SpVgg Unterhaching players Hannover 96 players Hertha BSC players German expatriates in Austria Hertha BSC II players FC Energie Cottbus players FC Red Bull Salzburg players Swansea City A.F.C. players SV Werder Bremen players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Austria Expatriate footballers in Wales German expatriates in Wales Footballers from Bavaria Tournament systems 1985 births Living people People from Castellón de la Plana Spanish footballers Valencian footballers Association football wingers La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Valencia CF Mestalla footballers Valencia CF players Cádiz CF players Getafe CF footballers Rayo Vallecano footballers Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players Qatar Stars League players Al-Arabi SC (Qatar) players UAE Arabian Gulf League players Al-Nasr SC (Dubai) players Spain international footballers 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Wales Expatriate footballers in Qatar Expatriate footballers in the United Arab Emirates Spanish expatriates in Wales Spanish expatriates in the United Arab Emirates 1993 births Living people People from Kilcar Sportspeople from County Donegal Gaelic footballers who switched code Donegal Gaelic footballers The Football League players League of Ireland players Reading F.C. players Swindon Supermarine F.C. players Dundalk F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Plymouth Argyle F.C. players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1985 births Living people People from Sidcup Sportspeople from London English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football wingers Crystal Palace F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black English sportspeople Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating English football referees Living people 1971 births Sportspeople from Bristol People from Leicester The Football League referees Premier League referees Netherlands Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Kingdom of the Netherlands Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Western Europe Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology  Association football terminology 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Scottish footballers Association football goalkeepers Harrogate Railway Athletic F.C. players Harrogate Town F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Burton Albion F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Alumni of Leeds Beckett University Top Gear 2000s British television series 2010s British television series 2002 British television programme debuts BBC World News programmes English-language television programming Driving in the United Kingdom International Emmy Award for Best Non-Scripted Entertainment winners 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Wolverhampton English footballers Welsh footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Hednesford Town F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Welsh descent 1979 births Living people People from Bedford English footballers Association football defenders Torquay United F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English football managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Premier League managers