 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club 1986 births Living people People from Mogán, Las Palmas Spanish footballers Canarian footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Valencia CF Mestalla footballers Valencia CF players SD Eibar footballers Celta de Vigo players Premier League players Manchester City F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish people of Japanese descent Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Spanish expatriates in England 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Spain national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Spain UEFA European Championship-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries 1987 births Living people People from Maresme Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football midfielders Premier League players La Liga players Arsenal F.C. players FC Barcelona players Chelsea F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Catalonia international footballers FIFA Century Club Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people People from the Province of Albacete Spanish footballers Castilian-Manchegan footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División B players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players Spanish Roman Catholics Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Catalan XI guest footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA European Championship-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA World Cup-winning players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team Association football terminology Croatia Balkans Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Croatian-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Member states of NATO Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Southeastern Europe Central Europe 1979 births Living people Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Irish expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in Australia Irish expatriates in Australia Melbourne City FC players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players A-League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club Leicester Celtic A.F.C. players 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 1979 births Living people People from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Home Farm F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1987 births Living people Footballers from Barcelona Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football defenders Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players La Liga players Real Zaragoza players FC Barcelona players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Spanish expatriates in England Catalonia international footballers Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations European national association football teams Croatia national football team National sports teams of Croatia Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners Germany national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries National sports teams of Germany Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf Netherlands Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Kingdom of the Netherlands Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Western Europe 1950 births Living people People from Salamanca Spanish footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players CD Castellón footballers Córdoba CF footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain amateur international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 1980 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers Spanish football managers La Liga managers Real Madrid Castilla managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Expatriate football managers in Turkey Spanish expatriates in Turkey Süper Lig managers Beşiktaş J.K. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Spain national football team managers FIFA World Cup-winning managers Marquesses of Spain 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup managers UEFA European Championship-winning managers Rhetoric Applied linguistics Narratology Critical thinking Communication studies Contract law Legal documents 1939 births Living people 1962 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.C. Milan players ACF Fiorentina managers A.S. Varese 1910 players Association football defenders Cagliari Calcio managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Inter Milan managers FC Bayern Munich managers Expatriate football managers in Austria FC Red Bull Salzburg managers Footballers at the 1960 Summer Olympics Bundesliga managers Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers Italy national football team managers Juventus F.C. managers Olympic footballers of Italy People from the Province of Milan Expatriate football managers in Portugal S.L. Benfica managers Primeira Liga managers Expatriate football managers in the Republic of Ireland Republic of Ireland national football team managers Serie A players Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 2004 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers VfB Stuttgart managers Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in Ireland UEFA Cup winning managers Italian Roman Catholics 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Reading, Berkshire English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football forwards Reading F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from County Wexford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Gaelic footballers who switched code St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Cork City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Colorado Rapids players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Designated Players (MLS) Wexford Youths F.C. players People from Birkenhead 1983 births Living people Association football forwards Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Wrexham F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1981 births Living people People from Móstoles Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Primeira Liga players Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players FC Porto players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2000 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning captains FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning captains FIFA Century Club 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1998 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by France 1985 births Living people People from Fingal Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Association football utility players Bohemian F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Burnley F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Home Farm F.C. players 1976 births Living people People from Lifford Sportspeople from County Donegal Association football goalkeepers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland FIFA Century Club Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Celtic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1986 births Living people People from Thorntonhall Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish footballers Scottish people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in Russia Irish expatriates in Russia Queen's Park F.C. players Celtic F.C. players FC Spartak Moscow players Everton F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Russian Football Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players 1960 births Living people People from Lörrach (district) Sportspeople from Baden-Württemberg Fenerbahçe football managers German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers German football managers Expatriate football managers in Austria Germany national football team managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers UEFA Euro 2008 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers SC Freiburg players VfB Stuttgart players Eintracht Frankfurt players Karlsruher SC players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Süper Lig managers VfB Stuttgart managers Karlsruher SC managers FK Austria Wien managers Bundesliga managers 2. Bundesliga managers Recipients of the Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Expatriate football managers in Turkey German expatriates in Turkey FC Tirol Innsbruck managers FIFA World Cup-winning managers FC Frauenfeld players Germany's Sports Hall of Fame inductees 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Watford F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Irish expatriates in England Stella Maris F.C. players Labour law Court of Justice of the European Union case law Association football terminology Sports law 1995 in case law Association football transfers 1993–94 in Belgian football 1994–95 in Belgian football 1993–94 in European football 1994–95 in European football Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Ball games Terminology used in multiple sports Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1976 films Italian films Poliziotteschi films 1970s crime films