 Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1975 births Living people People from Consett English football referees English people of Canadian descent National League (English football) referees The Football League referees Premier League referees UEFA Champions League referees Olympic football referees Football referees at the 2012 Summer Olympics Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1970 births Living people People from Schaffhausen Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers S.S. Lazio players Chelsea F.C. players Premier League players Italian football managers Milton Keynes Dons F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate footballers in England FC Schalke 04 managers Bundesliga managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FC Schaffhausen players FC Zürich players FC Aarau players Serie A players Swiss Super League players Swiss people of Italian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League winning managers Italian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Italian expatriates in Germany Laws of association football Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Laws of association football Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers 1944 births Living people 1970 FIFA World Cup players Brazil international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian expatriates in the United States Brazilian football managers Brazilian footballers FIFA 100 FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning captains Association football defenders Association football wingers National Soccer Hall of Fame members North American Soccer League (1968–84) players North American Soccer League (1968–84) indoor players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A managers Fluminense Football Club players Santos Futebol Clube players Clube de Regatas do Flamengo footballers New York Cosmos players California Surf players Clube de Regatas do Flamengo managers Sport Club Corinthians Paulista managers Once Caldas managers C.F. Monterrey managers Club Tijuana managers Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas managers Fluminense Football Club managers Clube Atlético Mineiro managers Querétaro F.C. managers Unión Magdalena managers Oman national football team managers Paysandu Sport Club managers Azerbaijan national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Azerbaijan Football refereeing in England English football organisations Premier League 1987 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Norway Igbo sportspeople Lyn Fotball players Manchester United F.C. players Nigeria international footballers Nigerian expatriate footballers Nigerian expatriate sportspeople in Norway Nigerian expatriates in the United Kingdom Nigerian footballers Tippeligaen players People from Jos Pepsi Football Academy players Plateau United footballers Premier League players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Africa Cup of Nations-winning players Articles with inconsistent citation formats Freedom of expression Censorship Human rights by issue Freedom of speech Controversies 1959 births Living people American record producers American humanitarians African-American Muslims American multi-instrumentalists American rhythm and blues singer-songwriters Post-disco musicians Songwriters from New York Arista Records artists Football in England 1980 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football central defenders Chelsea F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Living people Nottingham Forest F.C. players People acquitted of crimes People from Barking Premier League players Senrab F.C. players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1987 births Living people People from Salto, Uruguay Uruguayan footballers Association football forwards 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2011 controversies Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 controversies 2014 FIFA World Cup players Copa América-winning players Club Nacional de Football players FC Groningen players AFC Ajax players Liverpool F.C. players FC Barcelona players Uruguayan Primera División players Eredivisie players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain First Division/Premier League top scorers Olympic footballers of Uruguay Uruguay youth international footballers Uruguay international footballers Uruguayan expatriate footballers Uruguayan expatriates in the Netherlands Uruguayan expatriates in England Uruguayan expatriates in Spain Uruguay under-20 international footballers Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Violence in sports 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Belfast Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland youth international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Manchester United F.C. players Royal Antwerp F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Belgian Second Division players Expatriate footballers in Belgium People educated at Belfast High School Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1869 introductions American football Ball games Football codes Sports originating in the United States Gridiron football 1970 births Living people Sportspeople from Derby English footballers Derby County F.C. players Bury F.C. players Northwich Victoria F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Stoke City F.C. non-playing staff Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff UEFA Pro Licence holders 1990 births England international rugby union players English rugby union players Gloucester Rugby players Living people Moseley Rugby Football Club players People from Swindon Rugby union centres Sportspeople from Gloucestershire 1985 births Living people People from Nueva Loja Ecuadorian footballers Ecuador international footballers Ecuadorian expatriate footballers Ecuadorian people of African descent Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England Association football wingers El Nacional footballers Villarreal CF players Recreativo de Huelva players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players La Liga players Premier League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Ecuadorian expatriates in England Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Football clubs in England Sheffield United F.C. Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Sheffield Association football clubs established in 1889 Football clubs in South Yorkshire FA Cup winners Sports clubs established in 1889 Football League Championship clubs 1889 establishments in England 1953 births 1996 deaths People educated at Abingdon School Chelsea F.C. chairmen and investors English football chairmen and investors English businesspeople Victims of helicopter accidents or incidents People from Haywards Heath Victims of aviation accidents or incidents in the United Kingdom Accidental deaths in England 20th-century English businesspeople 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Guadalajara, Jalisco Footballers from Jalisco Mexican Roman Catholics Mexican footballers Mexico international footballers Liga MX players C.D. Guadalajara footballers Premier League players La Liga players Bundesliga players Manchester United F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Bayer 04 Leverkusen players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Germany Mexican expatriate footballers Mexican expatriates in the United Kingdom Mexican expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Mexican expatriates in Spain Mexican expatriates in Germany Mexico youth international footballers Articles containing video clips Chelsea, London Districts of Kensington and Chelsea Districts of London on the River Thames Time Concepts in metaphysics Concepts in physics Physical quantities SI base quantities Spacetime 1981 births Sportspeople from Dakar Living people French people of Cape Verdean descent French people of Guinean descent French footballers French expatriate footballers France international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Association football fullbacks A.C. Monza Brianza 1912 players OGC Nice players AS Monaco FC players Manchester United F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Naturalized citizens of France Running Man (TV series) contestants French expatriates in England French expatriates in Italy Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Mexico Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories States and territories established in 1813 G20 nations E7 nations