  Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Birmingham, West Midlands Cities in the West Midlands (region) Local government districts of the West Midlands (region) Metropolitan boroughs NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Populated places established in the 6th century Birmingham City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1875 Football clubs in England Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market 1875 establishments in England Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) 1959 births 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Aberdeen F.C. players Association football central defenders Aston Villa F.C. managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Belgium Expatriate football managers in Egypt Hibernian F.C. managers K.R.C. Genk managers Lewis United F.C. players Living people Motherwell F.C. managers Motherwell F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. managers People from Barrhead Premier League managers Rangers F.C. managers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland national football team managers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish expatriate football managers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers The Football League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders Zamalek SC managers Behavior Education terminology Human behavior Life skills FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Blues Blues styles African-American music Radio formats Jazz terminology 2018 FIFA World Cup bids England at the FIFA World Cup Middle Ages Historiography Philosophy of history Historical eras Urban decay Early Middle Ages Post-medieval constructs about the Middle Ages Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England West Ham United F.C. Football venues in London Premier League venues Boxing venues in the United Kingdom Buildings and structures in Newham Sports venues completed in 1904 Football League venues 2010–11 Football League Cup Football League Cup seasons 2010–11 domestic association football cups 2010–11 Football League Association football clubs established in 1885 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Millwall F.C. Southern Football League clubs 1885 establishments in England 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons Middle Ages History of Europe by period Wikipedia good articles Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Featured articles 5th century in Europe 6th century in Europe 7th century in Europe 8th century in Europe 9th century in Europe 10th century in Europe 11th century in Europe 12th century in Europe 13th century in Europe 14th century in Europe 15th century in Europe Christianization England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Early Middle Ages Articles which contain graphical timelines St Andrews Royal burghs Towns in Fife University towns in the United Kingdom 1922 births 2010 deaths People from Sparkhill England international footballers English footballers Association football goalkeepers Birmingham City F.C. players 1954 FIFA World Cup players English football managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Atherstone Town F.C. managers The Football League players The Football League representative players Internal fipple flutes Whistles Blown percussion instruments English musical instruments 1979 births Living people Aston Villa F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Association football defenders Middlesbrough F.C. players People from Harlow Premier League players The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Crowd control and riot control techniques Law enforcement units Sports venues Stadiums Sports venues by type Living people 1964 births 1990 FIFA World Cup players Association football midfielders Aston Villa F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Coventry City F.C. managers Coventry City F.C. players Leeds United F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. non-playing staff Liverpool F.C. players Members of the Order of the British Empire Motherwell F.C. players People educated at Braidhurst High School People from Motherwell Premier League managers Premier League players Scotland international footballers Scottish footballers Scottish football managers The Football League managers The Football League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland B international footballers Publications established in 1855 National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Telegraph Media Group 1855 establishments in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London Organisations based in the West Midlands (county) Police forces of England 1974 establishments in England Organizations established in 1974 West Midlands Police 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Home Office (United Kingdom) Ministerial departments of the United Kingdom Government English law Public safety ministries Law enforcement in England and Wales Internal affairs ministries Ministries established in 1782 1782 establishments in Great Britain High school football High school football in the United States High school football in Canada