 Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1986 births Living people People from Santiago, Cape Verde Sportspeople from Lisbon Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent Cape Verdean emigrants to Portugal Portuguese footballers Association football wingers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Primeira Liga players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Portuguese expatriates in England Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Turkey Portuguese expatriates in Turkey Fenerbahçe footballers Süper Lig players Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain 1976 births Living people Sportspeople from Istanbul Turkish football referees UEFA Champions League referees UEFA Europa League referees 2014 FIFA World Cup referees Insurance agents UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct Turkey Countries in Europe Western Asian countries Eastern Mediterranean Near Eastern countries Middle Eastern countries Modern Turkic states G20 nations Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1923 1923 establishments in Turkey Eurasia Southeastern Europe Western Asia Muslim-majority countries E7 nations European national association football teams National sports teams of Portugal Portugal national football team 1983 births Living people People from Salamanca Spanish footballers Castilian-Leonese footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players Deportivo de La Coruña players Premier League players Liverpool F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues 1975 births Living people People from Bury English footballers English football managers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football fullbacks Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Salford City F.C. Daily Telegraph journalists British association football commentators English Football Hall of Fame inductees English expatriates in Spain La Liga managers Valencia CF managers Expatriate football managers in Spain 1955 establishments in the United Kingdom ITV Media companies of the United Kingdom 1957 births Bradford City A.F.C. managers People with cancer England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English footballers English football managers Premier League managers 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Living people Manchester United F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. managers Middlesbrough F.C. players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People from Chester-le-Street Premier League players Sheffield United F.C. managers Thailand national football team managers The Football League players UEFA Euro 1988 players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. players English Football Hall of Fame inductees Publications established in 1791 Guardian Media Group National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Weekly newspapers published in the United Kingdom 1791 establishments in England Sunday newspapers published in the United Kingdom 1791 establishments in Great Britain The Observer Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers 1962 births Living people English footballers England international footballers Burnley F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Association football midfielders Blackpool F.C. non-playing staff Stockport County F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff People from Nelson, Lancashire Norwich City F.C. captains Norwich City F.C. non-playing staff 2010 software Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Facebook acquisitions Internet properties established in 2010 IOS software Photo software Photo sharing Social networking services Facebook applications Windows Phone software Video software BlackBerry software Mobile software Symbian software WatchOS software