 A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy Former capitals of Italy Milan Populated places established in the 1st millennium BC Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports A.C. Milan Inter Milan Sports venues in Milan Italian fascist architecture 1934 FIFA World Cup stadiums 1990 FIFA World Cup stadiums Football venues in Italy Rugby union stadiums in Italy UEFA Euro 1980 stadiums Museums in Milan PlayStation 3 2000s toys 2006 introductions 2010s toys Backward-compatible video game consoles Blu-ray Disc Cell BE architecture Home video game consoles PlayStation (brand) Regionless game consoles Seventh-generation video game consoles Sony consoles Living people 1967 births People from Livorno Association football midfielders Italian footballers Italian football managers A.S. Livorno Calcio players A.C. Pisa 1909 players Delfino Pescara 1936 players Cagliari Calcio players A.C. Perugia Calcio players Calcio Padova players S.S.C. Napoli players A.C. Pistoiese players Serie A players Serie B players Juventus F.C. managers A.C. Milan managers Cagliari Calcio managers U.S. Grosseto F.C. managers U.S. Sassuolo Calcio managers Serie A managers A.C. Pavia players UEFA Pro Licence holders Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London Sports venues in London Football venues in London Defunct rugby union venues in England Sports venues completed in 1904 Shepherd's Bush Football League venues Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Busto Arsizio Cities and towns in Lombardy 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1964 births Living people People from Iesi Italian Roman Catholics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Bologna F.C. 1909 players U.C. Sampdoria players S.S. Lazio players Leicester City F.C. players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers S.S. Lazio managers ACF Fiorentina managers Inter Milan managers Serie A managers Premier League players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Manchester City F.C. managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands 1944 births Living people People from Monza Sports executives and administrators A.C. Milan People involved in the 2006 Italian football scandal People from Brianza 20th-century Italian businesspeople 21st-century Italian businesspeople Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata Inter Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1908 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1908 establishments in Italy Unrelegated association football clubs