 1947 births Living people A.F.C. Bournemouth managers A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football midfielders Brentford F.C. players English autobiographers English footballers English football managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players People from Poplar, London Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Seattle Sounders (1974–83) players Southampton F.C. managers Sportspeople from London The Football League managers The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. players Tax evasion Portsmouth F.C. Association football clubs established in 1898 Football clubs in England Sport in Portsmouth Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Southern Football League clubs Football clubs in Hampshire 1898 establishments in England Fan-owned English League football clubs 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Living people English chief executives West Ham United F.C. directors and chairmen Portsmouth F.C. directors and chairmen 1952 births Notts County F.C. non-playing staff English expatriates in Australia 1180 establishments Cities in South East England Local government districts of South East England Local government in Hampshire Populated coastal places in Hampshire Port cities and towns in England Ports and harbours of Hampshire Ports and harbours of the English Channel Portsmouth Towns in Hampshire Unitary authority districts of England Money Economic anthropology Monetary economics News Corporation subsidiaries Publications established in 1843 Publications disestablished in 2011 News of the World 1843 establishments in the United Kingdom Sunday newspapers published in the United Kingdom Defunct newspapers of the United Kingdom 2011 disestablishments in the United Kingdom Crimes English criminal law Common law offences in England and Wales 1983 establishments in England Buildings and structures in Southwark Courts in London Crown Courts Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs 1948 births 20th-century Swedish people 21st-century Swedish people Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup managers 2006 FIFA World Cup managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers ACF Fiorentina managers A.S. Roma managers Degerfors IF managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in China Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Mexico Expatriate football managers in Portugal Guangzhou R&F F.C. managers IFK Göteborg managers Ivory Coast national football team managers Manchester City F.C. managers Mexico national football team managers Notts County F.C. non-playing staff Örebro University alumni People from Sunne Municipality Premier League managers Serie A managers S.S. Lazio managers Swedish autobiographers Swedish expatriate football managers Swedish expatriates in England Swedish expatriates in Portugal Swedish football managers Swedish people of Finnish descent U.C. Sampdoria managers UEFA Cup winning managers UEFA Euro 2004 managers UEFA Pro Licence holders Västra Frölunda IF players Leicester City F.C. managers 1946 births Living people Italian footballers Italy international footballers SPAL 1907 players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players A.S. Roma players A.C. Milan players 1974 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.S. Roma managers Juventus F.C. managers La Liga managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers England national football team managers Russia national football team managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Spain People from San Canzian d'Isonzo People from the Province of Gorizia Italian Roman Catholics Italian expatriate football managers Bookmakers Gambling terminology Organized crime activity Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England 1947 births Living people English aviators English autobiographers English businesspeople English football chairmen and investors English people of Jewish descent English billionaires English writers English television personalities English atheists Jewish atheists British real estate businesspeople British billionaires Knights Bachelor People from Hackney The Apprentice (UK TV series) BBC people Labour Party (UK) life peers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. directors and chairmen Labour Party (UK) people 20th-century British businesspeople 21st-century British businesspeople BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom  2009 films Best British Film Empire Award winners British crime thriller films British films 2000s crime thriller films Elstree Studios films English-language films Films set in London Films shot in London Gang films Lions Gate Entertainment films Neo-noir Vigilante films Films directed by Daniel Barber Films about revenge Films set in the 21st century Films about old age Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Media in Sarajevo Media in Bosnia and Herzegovina Television stations in Bosnia and Herzegovina Television channels and stations established in 2012 Living people 1942 births English television presenters British reporters and correspondents ITV regional newsreaders and journalists Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Birmingham, West Midlands People educated at Portsmouth Grammar School Mergers and acquisitions Mobile telecommunication services Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1977 births Living people Sportspeople from Dakar Association football midfielders Senegalese footballers Senegal international footballers Senegalese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Étoile Fréjus Saint-Raphaël players AS Monaco FC players AJ Auxerre players Portsmouth F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Senegalese expatriates in England Scottish Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players Football clubs in France Yonne AJ Auxerre Association football clubs established in 1905 1905 establishments in France Sport in Burgundy 1922 establishments in the United Kingdom BBC News BBC television news programmes BBC World News programmes Multilingual news services Television news in the United Kingdom Operational Divisions BBC Peabody Award winners International Emmy Awards Current Affairs & News winners Monaco Capitals in Europe City-states Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Massalian colonies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Port cities of the Mediterranean Sea Principalities Romance countries and territories States and territories established in 1297 Western Europe Southern Europe Military Military terminology Defense Government occupations Local government Legal professions Prosecution Criminal law Prosecutors Law enforcement Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology PlayStation 3 2000s toys 2006 introductions 2010s toys Backward-compatible video game consoles Blu-ray Disc Cell BE architecture Home video game consoles PlayStation (brand) Regionless game consoles Seventh-generation video game consoles Sony consoles Association football executives Association football terminology Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Barristers and advocates Common law Law in the United Kingdom Legal professions English prosecutors Members of the Inner Temple British barristers Alumni of St Edmund Hall, Oxford 1953 births British Queen's Counsel Members of Matrix Chambers People educated at Bishop Wordsworth's School People from Salisbury People from Windsor, Berkshire Place of birth missing (living people) Liberal Democrat life peers Living people People educated at Prior Park College Wardens of Wadham College, Oxford 1988 births Living people People from Beccles English footballers England youth international footballers English people of Scottish descent Association football forwards Norwich City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scotland international footballers HM Revenue and Customs Customs services Government agencies established in 2005 National law enforcement agencies of the United Kingdom Non-ministerial departments of the United Kingdom Government Revenue services Taxation in the United Kingdom 2005 establishments in the United Kingdom Branches of sociology (interdisciplinary) Social psychology Criminology Victimology Sociology of law Crime Criminal law Criminology Morality Sin Vices 1998 singles Robbie Williams songs Pop ballads 1990s ballads Songs written by Guy Chambers 1998 songs Songs written by Robbie Williams Song recordings produced by Steve Power Song recordings produced by Guy Chambers Chrysalis Records singles Evidence law Philosophy of law