 Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1975 births Living people People from Bury English footballers English football managers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football fullbacks Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Salford City F.C. Daily Telegraph journalists British association football commentators English Football Hall of Fame inductees English expatriates in Spain La Liga managers Valencia CF managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports Award items Awards Victory FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom UEFA European Championship Recurring sporting events established in 1960 UEFA competitions Quadrennial sporting events Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues Nicknamed groups of sportspeople Nicknamed groups of Olympic competitors Nicknamed groups of association football players Cultural generations 1973 births Living people Association football wingers BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Welsh people of Sierra Leonean descent English Football Hall of Fame inductees Manchester United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Officers of the Order of the British Empire Footballers from Cardiff Premier League players The Football League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Wales international footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers People educated at Moorside High School Welsh football managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers Salford City F.C. David Beckham 1975 births 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.C. Milan players Association football midfielders BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners Brimsdown Rovers F.C. players British expatriate sportspeople in the United States British people of Jewish descent Designated Players (MLS) England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English bloggers English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Italy English expatriates in Spain English expatriates in the United States English Football Hall of Fame inductees English footballers English male models English people of Jewish descent Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club LA Galaxy players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Living people Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players Manchester United F.C. players Officers of the Order of the British Empire Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players People from Leytonstone Premier League players Preston North End F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Serie A players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players Victoria Beckham 1975 births Living people People from Gorton English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong British expatriates in Hong Kong Association football midfielders Manchester United F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players South China AA footballers Premier League players The Football League players Hong Kong First Division League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players Salford City F.C. 1974 births Living people People from Middleton, Greater Manchester Sportspeople from Salford, Greater Manchester Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers Association football midfielders Manchester United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Premier League players England youth international footballers England international footballers English Football Hall of Fame inductees 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players Footballers from Greater Manchester Salford City F.C. English people of Irish descent Association football terminology Australian rules football terminology American football terminology Association football academies UEFA Champions League European Champion Clubs' Cup Association football trophies and awards European football trophies and awards UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe  Intercontinental Cup (football) Defunct CONMEBOL club competitions Defunct UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1960 Recurring events disestablished in 2004 FIFA Club World Cup FIFA club competitions World championships Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Finland national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Finland 1948 establishments in Portugal Media in Lisbon Newspapers published in Portugal Publications established in 1948 Portuguese-language newspapers Sports media in Portugal Sports newspapers 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events 1869 introductions American football Ball games Football codes Sports originating in the United States Gridiron football 1978 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football central defenders Black English sportspeople Doping cases in association football English autobiographers English film producers English footballers England international footballers English people of Irish descent English people of Saint Lucian descent English sportspeople in doping cases English television personalities England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players People from Peckham Premier League players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Sportspeople from London The Football League players West Ham United F.C. players Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software