 FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Luton Town F.C. Football clubs in England Association football clubs established in 1885 Football clubs in Bedfordshire Football clubs in Luton The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Southern Football League clubs 1885 establishments in England National League (English football) Non-League football Milton Keynes Dons F.C. The Football League clubs Sport in Milton Keynes Wimbledon F.C. Football League Trophy winners Football clubs in Buckinghamshire 2004 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 2004 Football clubs in England Queens Park Rangers F.C. Premier League clubs Football clubs in London Sports venues in London Football venues in London Defunct rugby union venues in England Sports venues completed in 1904 Shepherd's Bush Football League venues Competition Sports terminology 1889 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1889 Brentford F.C. Brentford, London Football clubs in England Football clubs in London The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Sport in Hounslow FA Cup Finals 1994–95 FA Cup Manchester United F.C. matches Everton F.C. matches Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1948 Summer Olympic venues Brentford F.C. Brentford, London Buildings and structures in Hounslow Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London Olympic football venues Sports venues completed in 1904 Defunct rugby league venues in England London Broncos Visitor attractions in Hounslow Football League venues Association football clubs established in 1885 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Millwall F.C. Southern Football League clubs 1885 establishments in England Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands