 Leicester City F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Leicester Association football clubs established in 1884 Football League Cup winners Midland Football League (1889) Football League Championship clubs 1884 establishments in England Football clubs in Leicestershire Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 1951 births A.S. Roma players Atlético Madrid managers Cagliari Calcio managers Chelsea F.C. managers ACF Fiorentina managers Parma F.C. managers Juventus F.C. managers S.S.C. Napoli managers Valencia CF managers A.S. Roma managers Inter Milan managers AS Monaco FC managers Greece national football team managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England La Liga managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Serie A managers Expatriate football managers in France Ligue 1 managers Expatriate football managers in Greece Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in England Italian expatriates in Spain Italian expatriates in Monaco Italian expatriates in Greece Italian footballers Italian football managers Living people Calcio Catania players U.S. Città di Palermo players Serie B players Leicester City F.C. managers Sportspeople from Rome U.S. Catanzaro 1929 players 2015–16 Premier League Premier League seasons 2015–16 in European association football leagues 2015–16 in English football leagues Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Monday Night Football 1970 American television series debuts 1970s American television series 1980s American television series 1990s American television series 2000s American television series 2010s American television series American Broadcasting Company network shows ABC Sports English-language television programming ESPN network shows 1987 births Living people English footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Stocksbridge Park Steels F.C. players F.C. Halifax Town players Fleetwood Town F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Northern Premier League players Footballers from Sheffield England international footballers English people convicted of assault FA Cup Finals FA Cup 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 Companies listed on the Euronext exchanges Association football clubs established in 1906 Multi-sport clubs in Portugal Football clubs in Portugal Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Lisbon Sporting Clube de Portugal Sports clubs established in 1906 1906 establishments in Portugal Unrelegated association football clubs Taça de Portugal winners Primeira Liga clubs Team sports Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe  Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues Perth Glory FC A-League teams Association football clubs established in 1995 National Soccer League (Australia) teams Soccer clubs in Perth, Western Australia 1995 establishments in Australia IK Start Football clubs in Norway Association football clubs established in 1905 1905 establishments in Norway Sport in Kristiansand Association football terminology Sports terminology  1907 establishments in the United Kingdom Association football trade unions English football organisations Trade unions established in 1907 Trade unions in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Manchester Journalism-related professional associations Football media in the United Kingdom British sportswriters English sportswriters English football organisations European journalism organizations Sports organisations established in 1947 1947 establishments in England Association football terminology Australian rules football terminology Military traditions Military parades 1996–97 in English football Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Nottingham English footballers English people of Jamaican descent Jamaican footballers Jamaica international footballers Association football defenders Nottingham Forest F.C. players Kidderminster Harriers F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Black British sportspeople 2015 Copa América players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 1978 births Living people People from Bootle Sportspeople from Liverpool English people of Irish descent English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players