 Scottish Football Association Football governing bodies in Scotland UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1873 1873 establishments in Scotland Organisations based in Glasgow Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland 1979 films 1970s comedy films Alien visitations in fiction British comedy films British films British satirical films Christianity-related controversies English-language films Films about religion Films critical of religion Films directed by Terry Jones Films set in Palestine Films set in the Roman Empire Films set in the 1st century BC Films set in the 1st century Films shot in Tunisia Films with live action and animation George Harrison HandMade Films Israel in fiction Monty Python films Orion Pictures films Parody films Portrayals of Jesus in film Religious comedy films Roman Empire in art and culture Screenplays by Eric Idle Screenplays by Graham Chapman Screenplays by John Cleese Screenplays by Michael Palin Screenplays by Terry Gilliam Screenplays by Terry Jones Warner Bros. films Association football terminology Sports terminology Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips 1903 establishments in Scotland 2012 Summer Olympic venues 2014 Commonwealth Games venues American football venues in Scotland Athletics (track and field) venues in Scotland Sports venues completed in 1903 Buildings and structures in Glasgow Defunct speedway venues in Scotland Football venues in Scotland Music venues in Glasgow National stadiums Olympic football venues Queen's Park F.C. Rugby World Cup stadiums Rugby union in Glasgow Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Scotland national football team venues Scottish Football League venues Sports venues in Glasgow Scottish Professional Football League venues UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Elections in North Korea Uncontested elections Scottish Football League First Division Scottish Football League Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1975 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland 1950s births Living people Scottish football chairmen and investors Heart of Midlothian F.C. non-playing staff Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Scottish Football Association Scottish Football League 1964 births Living people People from County Durham Chief executives of the Scottish Football Association English cricket administrators Logical fallacies Bullying Workplace bullying Psychological abuse Psychological manipulation Goal Anti-social behaviour Cognitive inertia Misuse of statistics Informal fallacies Misconduct Cheating 2012 in mixed martial arts 2012 in Indian sport Mixed martial arts events Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Primeira Liga Football leagues in Portugal Top level football leagues in Europe 1934 establishments in Portugal Football leagues in England Football league systems in Europe 1964 births 1990 FIFA World Cup players Cowdenbeath F.C. managers Cowdenbeath F.C. players Dundee United F.C. managers Association football defenders Heart of Midlothian F.C. managers Heart of Midlothian F.C. players Leicester City F.C. managers Livingston F.C. non-playing staff Living people Sportspeople from Dunfermline Raith Rovers F.C. managers Scotland international footballers Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish footballers People educated at Inverkeithing High School Scotland national football team managers Scotland under-21 international footballers Lochore Welfare F.C. players Heart of Midlothian F.C. non-playing staff