 Sexual abuse Crewe Alexandra F.C. Crewe The Football League clubs Football clubs in Cheshire Association football clubs established in 1877 1877 establishments in England 1907 establishments in the United Kingdom Association football trade unions English football organisations Trade unions established in 1907 Trade unions in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Manchester Child sexual abuse Child abuse Human sexuality Sexual abuse Sex crimes Child sexual abuse in religious groups Rape BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom 1884 establishments in England Charities based in London Children's charities based in England Organisations based in London with royal patronage Organizations established in 1884 Cruelty Concepts in metaphysics Information Information, knowledge, and uncertainty Information science Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions  Blackpool F.C. Football clubs in England Sport in Blackpool Association football clubs established in 1887 The Football League clubs Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners 1887 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire British sports radio programmes BBC Radio 5 Live programmes Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Articles with inconsistent citation formats Criminal law Lawyers by type Queen's Counsel Bar of England and Wales British legal professionals Common law Law in the United Kingdom 1967 births English footballers England international footballers England B international footballers England under-21 international footballers Manchester City F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Living people People from Urmston Premier League players English footballers Northwich Victoria F.C. players Halifax Town A.F.C. players Scunthorpe United F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Bury F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players The Football League players 1966 births Living people 1972 births Living people Sportspeople from Plymouth English footballers Association football midfielders Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Northwich Victoria F.C. players Morecambe F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Kidsgrove Athletic F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players 1964 births Living people English footballers Blackpool F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players England under-21 international footballers England international footballers England B international footballers Crystal Palace F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Workington A.F.C. players Sportspeople from Manchester People from Poulton-le-Fylde Premier League players The Football League players 1986 births Living people Kenyan swimmers Swimmers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Swimmers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic swimmers of Kenya Kenyan people of British descent Sportspeople from Nairobi Swimmers at the 2010 Commonwealth Games Commonwealth Games gold medallists for Kenya Commonwealth Games competitors for Kenya BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom 2015 British television programme debuts 2010s British television series BBC television news programmes British television news programmes BBC television talk shows Current affairs shows 1944 births Living people People from Ashton-under-Lyne English footballers Leaders of British trade unions Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Vancouver Whitecaps (1974–84) players Bury F.C. players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at Ashton-under-Lyne Grammar School Alumni of Manchester Metropolitan University Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Leeds Leeds City Region University towns in the United Kingdom Market towns in West Yorkshire Towns in West Yorkshire Stoke City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1863 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Football clubs in Staffordshire Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners The Football League founder members Sport in Stoke-on-Trent United Soccer Association imported teams Southern Football League clubs 1863 establishments in England Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League Abstraction Concepts in metaphysics Mathematical terminology Mereology Ontology Philosophical concepts Quality Football clubs in England Leeds United F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1919 Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Championship clubs 1919 establishments in England Sport in Leeds Phoenix clubs (association football) NUTS 1 statistical regions of England North West England NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Youth Fear Emotions Power (social and political) Bullying Majority–minority relations Michel Foucault Philosophical concepts Political concepts Social concepts Social psychology Paraphilias Pedophilia Family Divorce Human development Marriage Motherhood Fatherhood Infancy Parenting Evidence law 1869 introductions American football Ball games Football codes Sports originating in the United States Gridiron football 2015 television episodes 2020 in fiction Glee (TV series) episodes Television series finales Alter egos Self Literary concepts Latin words and phrases Fictional concepts in superhero fiction Ego psychology 1970 births Living people Conservative Party (UK) MPs Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for English constituencies Female members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for English constituencies UK MPs 2010–15 UK MPs 2015–20 Arts in England English art English culture Media in the United Kingdom Performing arts in England Sports organisations of the United Kingdom Sport in England Sports ministries Department for Culture, Media and Sport Ministries established in 1992 Media in England 1992 establishments in the United Kingdom Culture ministries 1956 births Living people People educated at Ravens Wood School BBC newsreaders and journalists Alumni of the University of Bradford British political pundits BBC Radio 5 Live presenters English people of Dutch descent