 Paris Saint-Germain F.C. Association football clubs established in 1970 Football clubs in France G-14 clubs 16th arrondissement of Paris Ligue 1 clubs Football clubs in Paris 1970 establishments in France Unrelegated association football clubs Sports terminology Tournament systems Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin Tournament systems Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Valencia CF La Liga clubs Football clubs in Valencia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Association football clubs established in 1919 1919 establishments in Spain Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain Borussia Dortmund 1909 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1909 Dortmund Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in North Rhine-Westphalia G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Germany Publicly traded sports companies Association football terminology Tournament systems London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports Reuters Companies established in 1851 Media companies based in London Multilingual news services News agencies based in the United Kingdom Financial news agencies 1851 establishments in the United Kingdom Webby Award winners UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 2014–15 UEFA Champions League 2014–15 in UEFA football UEFA Champions League seasons 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from County Tipperary Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football forwards Cork City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Southampton F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Tipperary hurlers Gortnahoe-Glengoole hurlers UEFA Euro 2012 players Brazil Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Portuguese colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Portuguese-speaking countries and territories Romance countries and territories States and territories established in 1822 BRICS nations E7 nations 1984 births Living people People from São Paulo (state) Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Association football forwards Guarani Futebol Clube players Santos Futebol Clube players Grêmio Foot-Ball Porto Alegrense players Associação Portuguesa de Desportos players Valencia CF players S.L. Benfica footballers Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players La Liga players Primeira Liga players Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in Spain Expatriate footballers in Spain Argentina Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1816 1985 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Association football forwards Estudiantes de Buenos Aires footballers Genoa C.F.C. players San Lorenzo footballers S.S.C. Napoli players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Hebei China Fortune F.C. players People from Rosario Department Argentina international footballers Serie A players Ligue 1 players Chinese Super League players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in China 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate footballers Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in France Argentine Roman Catholics Argentine people of Italian descent Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1987 births Living people People from Torrent, Valencia Spanish footballers Valencian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Valencia CF Mestalla footballers Valencia CF players Recreativo de Huelva players Getafe CF footballers 1987 births Living people French footballers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers French people of Portuguese descent RC Strasbourg players FC Lorient players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Sevilla FC players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in Spain Association football forwards People from Senlis French expatriates in Spain 1938 FIFA World Cup stadiums 1998 FIFA World Cup stadiums Football venues in France Paris Saint-Germain F.C. 16th arrondissement of Paris Rugby union stadiums in France Rugby World Cup stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Paris Multi-purpose stadiums in France 1960 European Nations' Cup stadiums Velodromes in France UEFA Euro 2016 stadiums UEFA Euro 1984 stadiums 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England David Beckham 1975 births 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.C. Milan players Association football midfielders BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners Brimsdown Rovers F.C. players British expatriate sportspeople in the United States British people of Jewish descent Designated Players (MLS) England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English bloggers English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Italy English expatriates in Spain English expatriates in the United States English Football Hall of Fame inductees English footballers English male models English people of Jewish descent Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club LA Galaxy players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Living people Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players Manchester United F.C. players Officers of the Order of the British Empire Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players People from Leytonstone Premier League players Preston North End F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Serie A players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players Victoria Beckham Association football terminology Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles 1959 births 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players A.S. Roma players A.C. Milan players A.C. Milan managers A.C. Reggiana 1919 managers Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in France Expatriate football managers in Spain Juventus F.C. managers Living people Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in England Italian expatriates in France Italian expatriates in Spain Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers La Liga managers Ligue 1 managers People from the Province of Reggio Emilia Paris Saint-Germain F.C. managers Parma F.C. managers Parma F.C. players Premier League managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Recipients of the Order of the Star of Italian Solidarity Serie A managers Serie A players UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 1988 players Glasgow Council areas of Scotland Districts of Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Populated places established in the 6th century Port cities and towns in Scotland Turin Roman colonies Roman towns and cities in Italy Cities and towns in Piedmont Province of Turin Former national capitals Capitals of former nations Former capitals of Italy 1984 births Living people Italian footballers Italy international footballers A.C. Milan players A.C. Prato players A.C. Lumezzane players A.C. Rimini 1912 players Cagliari Calcio players Juventus F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players Genoa C.F.C. players S.S. Lazio players Serie A players Serie B players Association football forwards People from the Province of Lodi 1983 births Living people People from Castellammare di Stabia Sportspeople from Campania Italian footballers Italy international footballers Torino F.C. players ACF Fiorentina players Udinese Calcio players Ascoli Calcio 1898 players U.C. Sampdoria players S.S.C. Napoli players A.S.D. Chieti players Association football forwards Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Serie A players Serie B players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Juventus F.C. players Juventus F.C. Sport in Turin Buildings and structures in Turin Visitor attractions in Turin Football venues in Italy Sports venues completed in 2011 Sports venues in Piedmont Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Copa del Rey seasons 2003–04 in Spanish football cups Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FC Shakhtar Donetsk Football clubs in Donetsk Association football clubs established in 1936 1936 establishments in Ukraine Soviet Top League clubs Ukrainian Premier League clubs SCM Holdings Football clubs in the Ukrainian SSR FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in North Rhine-Westphalia FC Schalke 04 1904 establishments in Germany Multi-sport clubs in Germany 1905 establishments in the Ottoman Empire Association football clubs established in 1905 Galatasaray S.K. (football) Unrelegated association football clubs Málaga CF La Liga clubs Football clubs in Andalusia Football clubs in Spain Association football clubs established in 1904 1904 establishments in Spain FC Porto Football clubs in Porto Football clubs in Portugal Companies listed on the Euronext exchanges Publicly traded sports companies Association football clubs established in 1893 Sports clubs established in 1893 Multi-sport clubs in Portugal G-14 clubs 1893 establishments in Portugal Unrelegated association football clubs Taça de Portugal winners Primeira Liga clubs FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England