 Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League 1989 births Living people People from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Cork City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Blackrock hurlers St. Michael's Gaelic footballers College Corinthians A.F.C. players Strikes (martial arts) Articles containing video clips Christian hamartiology Christian philosophy Crimes in religion Religious belief and doctrine Sin Religious terminology Vices Crime Motivation Social psychology Self Autonomy Virtue Self-control 1869 introductions American football Ball games Football codes Sports originating in the United States Gridiron football Hull City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in England Sport in Kingston upon Hull Football clubs in the East Riding of Yorkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1904 establishments in England Belief Epistemology Truth Psychological attitude Propositional attitudes Religious belief and doctrine  1960 births Living people Association football forwards BBC sports presenters and reporters British association football commentators England B international footballers England international footballers English footballers Everton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Leicester City F.C. players Nagoya Grampus players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in Spain English expatriate footballers FIFA 100 Golf writers and broadcasters 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players The Football League players First Division/Premier League top scorers English Football Hall of Fame inductees Expatriate footballers in Japan J.League players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at City of Leicester Boys' Grammar School Sportspeople from Leicester Living people 1974 births People from Wrexham Welsh footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football midfielders Manchester United F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players British association football commentators Strictly Come Dancing participants Welsh autobiographers Welsh sportswriters 1982 births Living people People from Huyton Sportspeople from Liverpool English footballers English expatriate footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Olympique de Marseille players Burnley F.C. players Premier League players Ligue 1 players The Football League players English prisoners and detainees English people convicted of assault English columnists Expatriate footballers in France English expatriates in France English male writers Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Government occupations Management occupations Titles Local government in the United States Heads of local government 1953 births Living people Association football defenders Chilean people of Italian descent Chilean Roman Catholics Chile international footballers Chilean football managers Universidad de Chile managers O'Higgins F.C. managers Club Deportivo Universidad Católica managers Expatriate football managers in Argentina Expatriate football managers in Ecuador Expatriate football managers in Spain La Liga managers LDU Quito managers Málaga CF managers Manchester City F.C. managers Pontifical Catholic University of Chile alumni Premier League managers Real Madrid C.F. managers River Plate managers San Lorenzo managers Sportspeople from Santiago Universidad de Chile footballers Villarreal CF managers Club Deportivo Palestino managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England 1949 births Living people Sportspeople from Strasbourg FC Mulhouse players Association football sweepers RC Strasbourg players ASPV Strasbourg players Ligue 1 players French footballers French football managers French Roman Catholics AS Nancy managers AS Monaco FC managers Ligue 1 managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Arsenal F.C. managers Honorary Officers of the Order of the British Empire Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Nagoya Grampus managers Expatriate football managers in Japan English Football Hall of Fame inductees University of Strasbourg alumni UEFA Pro Licence holders French expatriate football managers French expatriates in Japan French expatriates in England Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England 1965 births Living people Sportspeople from Newcastle upon Tyne English footballers Association football defenders Newcastle United F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Gateshead F.C. players The Football League players English football managers Newcastle United F.C. managers Leeds United F.C. managers Toronto FC coaches Sheffield United F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Newcastle United F.C. non-playing staff Leeds United F.C. non-playing staff Luton Town F.C. non-playing staff Plymouth Argyle F.C. non-playing staff Sheffield United F.C. non-playing staff DC Comics superheroes Fictional characters who can change size Fictional lesbians Fictional bisexual females LGBT superheroes DC Comics aliens Extraterrestrial superheroes Characters created by Jerry Siegel Characters created by Jim Mooney Comics characters introduced in 1961 Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Newcastle United F.C. 2012 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Football venues in England Football League venues Premier League venues Sports venues in Newcastle upon Tyne Sports venues completed in 1892