 Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Association football terminology Sports terminology Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1962 births Living people English football managers Brentford F.C. managers Watford F.C. non-playing staff Enfield F.C. players Boreham Wood F.C. players Isthmian League players National League (English football) players English expatriates in the United States The Football League managers Association football defenders Association football fullbacks Leicester City F.C. players Rangers F.C. managers Scottish Professional Football League managers Hibernian F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1875 Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Edinburgh United Soccer Association imported teams Leith Scottish Premier League teams 1875 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Dumbarton Dumbarton F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Sport in West Dunbartonshire Association football clubs established in 1872 Scottish Football League teams Scottish Football League founder members 1872 establishments in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Football League Third Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe Scottish Professional Football League Scottish Premiership Top level football leagues in Europe Football leagues in Scotland 2013 establishments in Scotland Sports leagues established in 2013 Football leagues in England Football league systems in Europe 1962 births 1990 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Kilmarnock F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Rangers F.C. dispute articles Rangers F.C. managers Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish association football commentators Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Professional Football League managers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Bellshill St Johnstone F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players Scottish league football top scorers Heart of Midlothian F.C. Football clubs in Edinburgh Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1874 Scottish Premier League teams 1874 establishments in Scotland Gorgie Scottish Football League teams Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League Second level football leagues in Europe Football leagues in Scotland 2013 establishments in Scotland Sports leagues established in 2013 Scottish Championship 2008–09 in English football 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Bradford English footballers Association football defenders Farsley Celtic A.F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Gateshead F.C. players Carlisle United F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Scottish Professional Football League players Sports venues completed in 1899 Category B listed buildings in Glasgow Football venues in Scotland Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Govan Listed sports venues in Scotland Rangers F.C. Sports venues in Glasgow 1899 establishments in Scotland 2014 Commonwealth Games venues Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Scottish Professional Football League venues Scotland national football team venues Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Sports museums in Scotland Credit Debt Personal financial problems Social problems Economic problems 1971 births Scottish businesspeople People from Motherwell Living people British venture capitalists Scottish football chairmen and investors Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Rangers F.C. chairmen People educated at Kelvinside Academy Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff   2005–06 in English football Dunfermline Athletic F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1885 Scottish Premier League teams 1885 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scotland football derbies Heart of Midlothian F.C. Hibernian F.C. Sport in Edinburgh 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons 1964 births Living people Footballers from Leeds English people of Scottish descent Scottish footballers Scottish football managers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Bradford City A.F.C. players Everton F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Farsley Celtic A.F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. non-playing staff Bradford City A.F.C. managers Motherwell F.C. managers The Football League players Premier League players Scottish Football League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Professional Football League managers 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players Football managers from Leeds Rangers F.C. managers Football League Championship play-off Finals 2012 Football League play-offs 2011–12 Football League Championship West Ham United F.C. matches Blackpool F.C. matches 2012 in London Events at Wembley Stadium Association football clubs established in 1886 Football clubs in Scotland Motherwell F.C. Sport in North Lanarkshire Scottish Premier League teams 1886 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners South Africa national soccer team 1955 births Scottish businesspeople Living people People from Glasgow Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Rangers F.C. chairmen Scottish football chairmen and investors British emigrants to South Africa 1889 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1889 Brentford F.C. Brentford, London Football clubs in England Football clubs in London The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Sport in Hounslow Falkirk F.C. Sport in Falkirk Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1876 1876 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams