 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Kinshasa Democratic Republic of the Congo footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Democratic Republic of the Congo emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People associated with the University of Bolton Black British sportspeople Alumni of Staffordshire University Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Bolton Wanderers F.C. 1877 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1877 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bolton Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Football League Trophy winners Premier League clubs Bolton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester West Pennine Moors Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Cardiac dysrhythmia Medical emergencies Causes of death Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Music in Sheffield British indie rock groups V2 Records artists Belgium 1831 establishments in Belgium Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Federal monarchies French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1830 Western Europe Aging-associated diseases Causes of death Ischemic heart diseases Medical emergencies Articles containing video clips RTT Acute pain Belgium national football team 1904 establishments in Belgium Articles containing video clips European national association football teams Football in Belgium National sports teams of Belgium Belgium at the Olympics Cardiology Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Cardiac electrophysiology Implants (medicine) Neuroprosthetics Hospital buildings completed in 1855 NHS hospitals in London Bethnal Green Sports venues completed in 1997 Bolton Wanderers F.C. Buildings and structures in Bolton Borough Football venues in England Premier League venues Sport in Bolton Borough Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester Darts venues Music venues in Greater Manchester Reebok brands Football League venues Bradshaw, Gass & Hope buildings Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Birmingham City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1875 Football clubs in England Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market 1875 establishments in England Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) 1966 births Living people Sportspeople from Glasgow Dundee United F.C. non-playing staff Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Dumbarton F.C. players Clydebank F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. (1878) players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Ross County F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Falkirk F.C. managers St Johnstone F.C. managers Burnley F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Houston Dynamo coaches Premier League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Republic of Ireland football managers Scottish Roman Catholics Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish people of Irish descent 2009 singles Dane Rumble songs Pop rock songs Synthpop songs Universal Music Group singles 2009 songs 1952 births 2016 deaths People from Leigh, Greater Manchester English football chairmen and investors Cancer deaths in England FIFA Association football governing bodies International sports federations IOC-recognised international federations International sports bodies based in Switzerland Organisations based in Zürich Sports organisations established in 1904 1936 births Living people Presidents of FIFA Commanders Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany English Football Hall of Fame inductees International Olympic Committee members People from Visp (district) Recipients of the Olympic Order Recipients of the Order of Francisco de Miranda Recipients of the Order of the Companions of O. R. Tambo Recipients of the Order of the Rising Sun, 1st class Swiss public relations people University of Lausanne alumni Swiss sportspeople Swiss Roman Catholics Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software 1943 births Living people People from St Helens, Merseyside Commanders of the Order of the British Empire English businesspeople English Jews Manchester City F.C. directors and chairmen Chairmen of the Football Association English accountants