 Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League 1960 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid UEFA Cup winning managers Spanish football managers Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla managers Liverpool F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Valencia CF managers CA Osasuna managers CF Extremadura managers CD Tenerife managers Real Valladolid managers La Liga managers Segunda División managers Premier League managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy UEFA Pro Licence holders Polytechnic University of Madrid alumni Linares CF players S.S.C. Napoli managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Spanish expatriate football managers Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Urban areas of England Geography of Tyne and Wear NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom River Tyne 2001–02 in English football 1207 establishments Liverpool Cities in North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated coastal places in Merseyside Populated places established in the 13th century Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Port cities and towns in England Towns in Merseyside Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Local government districts of North West England NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom 1935 births 2009 deaths People from Lancaster, Lancashire English footballers England international footballers Preston North End F.C. players Morecambe F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Wrexham F.C. players Bradford Park Avenue A.F.C. players The Football League players A.F.C. Bournemouth Association football clubs established in 1899 Sport in Bournemouth Football League Trophy winners 1899 establishments in England Football clubs in Dorset Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Publications established in 1855 National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Telegraph Media Group 1855 establishments in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London 1964 births Living people English businesspeople in retailing English billionaires Newcastle United F.C. directors and chairmen People from Burnham, Buckinghamshire People educated at Burnham Grammar School Leicester City F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Leicester Association football clubs established in 1884 Football League Cup winners Midland Football League (1889) Football League Championship clubs 1884 establishments in England Football clubs in Leicestershire Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams 1954 births Living people Alumni of the University of Bolton Blackpool F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players British association football commentators British expatriate sportspeople in the United States Coventry City F.C. players English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Ireland English expatriates in the United States English football managers English footballers Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football central defenders League of Ireland managers League of Ireland players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Limerick F.C. managers Limerick F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Notts County F.C. managers People from Dudley Premier League managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League managers The Football League players Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93) players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain Football clubs in England Sport in Rotherham Rotherham United F.C. Association football clubs established in 1925 Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1925 establishments in England Preston North End F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Sport in Preston 1880 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire 1985 births Living people People from Funchal Portuguese footballers Madeiran footballers Association football forwards Association football wingers Primeira Liga players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Portugal youth international footballers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers Portuguese Roman Catholics UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Portugal Golden Globes (Portugal) winners Grand Officers of the Order of Prince Henry First Division/Premier League top scorers Pichichi Trophy winners European Footballer of the Year winners FIFA World Player of the Year winners World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners FIFA Century Club Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Portuguese male models Portuguese people of Cape Verdean descent Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Spain 1989 births Living people Footballers from Cardiff Welsh expatriate footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Association football utility players Southampton F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Premier League players The Football League players La Liga players BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year People educated at Whitchurch High School 1986 births Living people People from Seville (comarca) Spanish footballers Andalusian footballers Association football defenders La Liga players Segunda División B players Sevilla Atlético players Sevilla FC players Real Madrid C.F. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA Century Club Real Madrid C.F. Football venues in Spain 1982 FIFA World Cup stadiums 1964 European Nations' Cup stadiums Sports venues in Madrid Sports venues completed in 1947 National stadiums 1947 establishments in Spain Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match 1991 births Living people Sportspeople from Newcastle upon Tyne English footballers Welsh footballers Association football defenders Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Newcastle United F.C. players Gateshead F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players National League (English football) players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players 1986 births Living people People from Villeneuve-Saint-Georges SM Caen players Association football forwards French footballers France under-21 international footballers FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Newcastle United F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England French people of Guadeloupean descent France youth international footballers 1986 births Living people People from Greenwich English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers Association football defenders Newcastle United F.C. players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Wallsend Boys Club players England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Collaborative projects Social media Mass media Revolutionary tactics 1948 births Living people British fantasy writers British science fiction writers Edgar Award winners British non-fiction writers 20th-century British writers 21st-century British writers 20th-century British novelists 21st-century British novelists British male writers British male novelists Association football terminology Association football transfers 1966 births Living people People from Carlisle, Cumbria English footballers England under-21 international footballers Manchester City F.C. players Finn Harps F.C. players League of Ireland players Oxford United F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players Carlisle United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English football managers Rochdale A.F.C. managers Carlisle United F.C. managers Northwich Victoria F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. managers Shrewsbury Town F.C. managers Stockport County F.C. managers The Football League managers Derby County F.C. non-playing staff UEFA Pro Licence holders 1982 births Living people Mayors of Timmins People from Oshawa Timmins city councillors Queen's University alumni 1973 births Living people People from the Province of Latina Italian footballers Italian football managers S.S.C. Napoli players Juventus F.C. players U.C. Sampdoria players Torino F.C. players Bologna F.C. 1909 players Calcio Como players A.C. Siena players Serie A players Serie B players Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Italy Association football midfielders Frosinone Calcio players Foggia Calcio players A.S. Avellino 1912 players Ascoli Calcio 1898 players Italy under-21 international footballers 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Tercera División players Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players Sevilla FC players Albacete Balompié players Hércules CF players CD Toledo footballers Spanish football managers Segunda División managers Real Valladolid managers Albacete Balompié managers Liverpool F.C. non-playing staff 1960 births Living people Association football forwards BBC sports presenters and reporters British association football commentators England B international footballers England international footballers English footballers Everton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Leicester City F.C. players Nagoya Grampus players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players La Liga players Expatriate footballers in Spain English expatriate footballers FIFA 100 Golf writers and broadcasters 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players The Football League players First Division/Premier League top scorers English Football Hall of Fame inductees Expatriate footballers in Japan J.League players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at City of Leicester Boys' Grammar School Sportspeople from Leicester Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software English football organisations Association football trade unions