 S.S.C. Napoli Association football clubs established in 1926 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Campania Football clubs in Italy Italian football First Division clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Naples 1926 establishments in Italy A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Marseille French footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers Association football midfielders Olympique de Marseille players Arsenal F.C. players A.C. Milan players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in Italy French expatriates in England French people of Corsican descent French people of Italian descent Italian footballers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Delfino Pescara 1936 players Juventus F.C. players Udinese Calcio players Sevilla FC players Galatasaray S.K. footballers S.S.C. Napoli players A.S. Roma players Serie A players Serie B players La Liga players Süper Lig players Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Turkey Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Association football goalkeepers People from the Province of Chieti 1977 births Living people Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe A.C. Milan Inter Milan Sports venues in Milan Italian fascist architecture 1934 FIFA World Cup stadiums 1990 FIFA World Cup stadiums Football venues in Italy Rugby union stadiums in Italy UEFA Euro 1980 stadiums Museums in Milan 1961 births Living people People from the Province of Livorno Association football midfielders Italian footballers Serie A players A.C. Reggiana 1919 players Modena F.C. players Delfino Pescara 1936 players Cagliari Calcio players ACF Fiorentina players Empoli F.C. players Italian football managers Serie A managers A.C. Pistoiese managers Reggina Calcio managers A.S. Livorno Calcio managers U.C. Sampdoria managers S.S.C. Napoli managers Inter Milan managers Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1986 births Living people People from Cauca Department Colombian people of African descent Colombian footballers Association football central defenders Deportivo Cali footballers Serie A players Udinese Calcio players La Liga players Villarreal CF players A.C. Milan players Colombia under-20 international footballers Colombia international footballers 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Colombian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Colombian expatriates in Italy Colombian expatriates in Spain 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from Florence Italian football referees Olympic football referees Football referees at the 2012 Summer Olympics Documents Technical communication 2000 British television programme debuts 2000 British television programme endings BBC children's television programmes Fictional association football television series Arsenal F.C. Tottenham Hotspur F.C. London derbies England football derbies Articles containing video clips Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Serie A seasons 1996–97 in European association football leagues 1996–97 in Italian football leagues  Europe Continents ACF Fiorentina Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Tuscany Association football clubs established in 1926 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners 1926 establishments in Italy 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Campania People from the Province of Benevento Italian footballers Association football midfielders A.C. Milan players S.S.C. Napoli players U.C. Sampdoria players Piacenza Calcio 1919 players Modena F.C. players Empoli F.C. players Torino F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Italy under-21 international footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Italy Italy international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Berlin German people of Ghanaian descent German footballers Ghanaian footballers Association football midfielders Association football forwards Serie A players Premier League players Bundesliga players FC Schalke 04 players A.C. Milan players Genoa C.F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Borussia Dortmund players Hertha BSC players Hertha BSC II players Füchse Berlin Reinickendorf players Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Ghana international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Ghanaian football personalities Ghana Commonwealth republics Countries in Africa Economic Community of West African States English-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of the African Union Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1957 West African countries Articles containing video clips 1981 births Living people Sportspeople from Naples Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Serie A players Serie B players S.S.C. Napoli players Parma F.C. players Hellas Verona F.C. players U.S. Sassuolo Calcio players Association football central defenders 1985 births Living people People from Caravaggio, Lombardy Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Atalanta B.C. players ACF Fiorentina players A.C. Milan players Serie A players Serie B players Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Association football midfielders Italian people of German descent Italian atheists 1987 births Living people People from Fréjus Naturalized citizens of Guinea Guinean footballers French people of Guinean descent French footballers Guinea international footballers Guinean expatriate footballers Guinean expatriates in France Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Turkey Ligue 1 players Toulouse FC players Ligue 2 players LB Châteauroux players Serie A players A.C. Chievo Verona players Genoa C.F.C. players A.C. Milan players Süper Lig players Trabzonspor footballers France youth international footballers 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Near-Earth object tracking Discoveries by institution Jet Propulsion Laboratory Palomar Observatory 1984 births Living people People from São Vicente, São Paulo Brazilian people of African descent Brazilian footballers Brazilian futsal players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in China Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian expatriates in China Association football forwards Brazil international footballers Santos Futebol Clube players Real Madrid C.F. players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Guangzhou Evergrande Taobao F.C. players Clube Atlético Mineiro players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players Chinese Super League players 2003 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Copa América-winning players 1987 births Living people Expatriate footballers in Italy Association football forwards People from Salto, Uruguay Danubio F.C. players Serie A players U.S. Città di Palermo players S.S.C. Napoli players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Uruguayan expatriate footballers Uruguayan expatriates in Italy Uruguayan footballers Uruguay international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Uruguayan people of Italian descent Naturalised citizens of Italy Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Uruguay 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Ligue 1 players Uruguayan evangelicals Uruguay youth international footballers Uruguay under-20 international footballers Uruguayan Primera División players Uruguayan expatriates in France 2014 FIFA World Cup players Copa América-winning players 1977 births Living people People from the Province of Milan 2002 FIFA World Cup players A.C. Milan players A.C. Monza Brianza 1912 players Atlético Madrid footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Association football goalkeepers Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Italian expatriate footballers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Italian footballers Italian Roman Catholics Italian neo-fascists Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Juventus F.C. players Olympic footballers of Italy Serie A players Serie B players La Liga players Torino F.C. players UEFA Euro 2000 players Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1994 births People from Meulan-en-Yvelines French footballers French people of Senegalese descent SM Caen players A.C. Milan players Montpellier HSC players Genoa C.F.C. players Ligue 1 players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy French expatriate footballers Living people France under-21 international footballers France youth international footballers Association football forwards Association football wingers Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Living people 1967 births People from Livorno Association football midfielders Italian footballers Italian football managers A.S. Livorno Calcio players A.C. Pisa 1909 players Delfino Pescara 1936 players Cagliari Calcio players A.C. Perugia Calcio players Calcio Padova players S.S.C. Napoli players A.C. Pistoiese players Serie A players Serie B players Juventus F.C. managers A.C. Milan managers Cagliari Calcio managers U.S. Grosseto F.C. managers U.S. Sassuolo Calcio managers Serie A managers A.C. Pavia players UEFA Pro Licence holders Italian footballers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Association football forwards Serie A players Serie B players People from Savona Genoa C.F.C. players Calcio Padova players A.C. Milan players AS Monaco FC players A.S. Roma players Italian people of Egyptian descent 1992 births Living people 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Italian Muslims Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Monaco Italian expatriates in Monaco Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy Serie A seasons 1958–59 in European association football leagues 1958–59 in Italian football leagues S.S. Lazio Football clubs in Italy Sports clubs established in 1900 Association football clubs established in 1900 Publicly traded sports companies Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Sport in Rome Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners Multi-sport clubs in Italy 1900 establishments in Italy