 Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Dundee United F.C. Sport in Dundee Irish diaspora in Scotland Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1909 Diaspora sports clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Scottish Premier League teams 1909 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Dallas Tornado 1975 births Living people Norwegian footballers Odds BK players Viking FK players Strømsgodset IF players Norwegian football managers Strømsgodset IF managers Norwegian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Scotland Norwegian expatriates in Scotland Celtic F.C. managers Scottish Professional Football League managers Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Aberdeen F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1903 Sport in Aberdeen United Soccer Association imported teams Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish Premier League teams Former Highland Football League teams 1903 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. Sport in Inverness Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1994 Scottish Premier League teams 1994 establishments in Scotland Inverness Thistle F.C. Caledonian F.C. Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Aberdeen Council areas of Scotland Fishing communities in Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Royal burghs Grampian Aberdeen F.C. Football venues in Scotland Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. Sports venues in Aberdeen Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Scottish Professional Football League venues Scotland national football team venues Sports venues completed in 1899 1899 establishments in Scotland 1996 births Living people Scottish footballers Association football forwards Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players Kilmarnock F.C. players Scotland youth international footballers Sportspeople from Irvine, North Ayrshire Dundee United F.C. players Partick Thistle F.C. players Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe   1971 births Armagh Gaelic footballers Association football midfielders Association footballers from Northern Ireland Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Celtic F.C. players Clan na Gael CLG Gaelic footballers Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Football managers from Northern Ireland Gaelic footballers who switched code Glenavon F.C. players NIFL Premiership players Leicester City F.C. players Living people Manchester City F.C. players Northern Ireland B international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Nottingham Forest F.C. players People educated at St Michael's Grammar School, Lurgan People from Lurgan Premier League players Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League managers The Football League players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers The Football League managers Norway Countries in Europe Nordic countries Scandinavia Northern Europe Liberal democracies States and territories established in 872 States and territories established in 1905 Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Germanic countries and territories Celtic F.C. Visitor attractions in Glasgow Sports venues in Glasgow Football venues in Scotland 2014 Commonwealth Games venues Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Defunct speedway venues in Scotland Scottish Professional Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1892 1892 establishments in Scotland Scotland national football team venues UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 2006–07 in European football UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying UEFA European Championship qualifying Hamilton Academical F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1874 Sport in South Lanarkshire Hamilton, South Lanarkshire 1874 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams St Johnstone F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Perth, Scotland Association football clubs established in 1884 Sport in Perth and Kinross Scottish Premier League teams 1884 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League Scottish Premiership Top level football leagues in Europe Football leagues in Scotland 2013 establishments in Scotland Sports leagues established in 2013 Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Scottish Cup Football cup competitions in Scotland National association football cups 1873 establishments in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1873 European national association football teams Football teams in Norway Norway national football team National sports teams of Norway 1908 establishments in Norway Association football clubs established in 1908 Dundee Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Council areas of Scotland Dundee F.C. Sport in Dundee Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1893 1893 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners