 Stoke City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1863 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Football clubs in Staffordshire Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners The Football League founder members Sport in Stoke-on-Trent United Soccer Association imported teams Southern Football League clubs 1863 establishments in England 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Berlin Association football defenders German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany international footballers German expatriate footballers German expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England 1. FC Union Berlin players Chelsea F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Disorders causing seizures Medical emergencies Meningitis Acute pain Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Virology Viruses Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Meningitis Viral infections of the central nervous system Enterovirus-associated diseases 1958 births Living people Sportspeople from Newport, Wales Welsh Roman Catholics British expatriates in Hong Kong British people of Maltese descent Welsh footballers Welsh football managers The Football League players Bristol Rovers F.C. players Happy Valley AA footballers Newport County A.F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Gillingham F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth managers Gillingham F.C. managers Welsh expatriates in Hong Kong Bristol City F.C. managers Portsmouth F.C. managers Stoke City F.C. managers Plymouth Argyle F.C. managers Hong Kong First Division League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Crystal Palace F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Association football defenders Germany national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries National sports teams of Germany Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf Football clubs in Devon The Football League clubs Torquay United F.C. Association football clubs established in 1899 Southern Football League clubs Torquay 1899 establishments in England