 1989 births Living people People from Stanmore English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Southampton F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players English children's writers Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology 1949 births Living people Sportspeople from Strasbourg FC Mulhouse players Association football sweepers RC Strasbourg players ASPV Strasbourg players Ligue 1 players French footballers French football managers French Roman Catholics AS Nancy managers AS Monaco FC managers Ligue 1 managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Arsenal F.C. managers Honorary Officers of the Order of the British Empire Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Nagoya Grampus managers Expatriate football managers in Japan English Football Hall of Fame inductees University of Strasbourg alumni UEFA Pro Licence holders French expatriate football managers French expatriates in Japan French expatriates in England 1961 births Living people People from Wimbledon, London English footballers Association football midfielders The Football League players Whyteleafe F.C. players Corinthian-Casuals F.C. players Dulwich Hamlet F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Barnet F.C. players English football managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Reading F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. managers Charlton Athletic F.C. managers Southampton F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers UEFA Pro Licence holders British association football commentators Epsom & Ewell F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. managers Christmas traditions Christmas-linked holidays Public holidays in Australia Public holidays in Canada Public holidays in New Zealand Public holidays in the United Kingdom December observances 1986 births Living people People from Chambéry French footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers French Roman Catholics Association football forwards Grenoble Foot 38 players FC Istres players Tours FC players Montpellier HSC players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Arsenal F.C. Football venues in London Sport in Islington Buildings and structures in Islington Premier League venues The Emirates Group Visitor attractions in Islington Sports venues completed in 2006 Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England 2007–08 La Liga La Liga seasons 2007–08 in Spanish football leagues Defunct cricket grounds in England Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1932 Sports venues in York York City F.C.  1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Association football terminology Association football transfers BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom ESPN Bristol, Connecticut ESPN media outlets Sports television networks in the United States Television channels and stations established in 1979 Webby Award winners Peabody Award winners 1979 establishments in Connecticut 1993 births Living people Arsenal F.C. players Association football wingers Black English sportspeople England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers English people of Jamaican descent People educated at St John's College (Portsmouth) Sportspeople from Portsmouth Premier League players Southampton F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1985 births Living people People from Gliwice German people from the Polish part of Silesia German people of Silesian descent German people of Polish descent Naturalized citizens of Germany German footballers German expatriate footballers German Roman Catholics Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Premier League players Serie A players 1. FC Köln II players 1. FC Köln players FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players Arsenal F.C. players Inter Milan players Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers FIFA Century Club UEFA Euro 2004 players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy German expatriates in England German expatriates in Italy Galatasaray S.K. footballers Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in Turkey German expatriates in Turkey 1985 births Living people Sportspeople from Paris French people of Senegalese descent French footballers French Muslims Senegalese footballers Senegal international footballers Senegalese Muslims Association football forwards FC Rouen players R.E. Mouscron players TSG 1899 Hoffenheim players West Ham United F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Shanghai Shenhua F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Premier League players Süper Lig players Chinese Super League players Senegalese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate footballers in China Senegalese expatriates in Germany Senegalese expatriates in France Senegalese expatriates in Belgium Senegalese expatriates in Turkey 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players Senegalese expatriates in England People from Vannes French footballers French people of Martiniquais descent Martiniquais footballers Association football midfielders French expatriate footballers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers 1986 births Living people Ligue 1 players Premier League players Stade Rennais F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players EA Guingamp players Expatriate footballers in England London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports 1977 births Living people People from Les Ulis 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Arsenal F.C. players AS Monaco FC players Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur ES Viry-Châtillon players FC Barcelona players FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Association football forwards France international footballers France under-21 international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy INF Clairefontaine players Expatriate footballers in Spain French expatriates in Italy French expatriates in Spain French expatriates in England French footballers Juventus F.C. players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers English Football Hall of Fame inductees Serie A players UEFA Euro 2000 players New York Red Bulls players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA European Championship-winning players UNICEF people French people of Guadeloupean descent Expatriate soccer players in the United States French expatriates in the United States French people of Martiniquais descent Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars France youth international footballers Designated Players (MLS) Anti-racism activists Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1992 births Living people People from Stevenage Footballers from Hitchin English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Association football wingers Luton Town F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1943 works American art American propaganda during World War II Feminism and the arts Propaganda posters Westinghouse Electric Company Political concepts Social concepts Ethical principles War Justice Normative ethics Newcastle, New South Wales Populated places established in 1797 Port cities in Australia Suburbs of Newcastle, New South Wales 1804 establishments in Australia FA Cup Finals FA Cup London sub regions Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe The Clash 1976 establishments in England 1986 disestablishments in England English anti-fascists Political music English buskers English punk rock groups Grammy Award winners Musical groups disestablished in 1986 Musical groups established in 1976 Musical groups from London Musical quartets Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees