 Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. The Football League clubs Football League Championship clubs Sport in Brighton and Hove Association football clubs established in 1901 Southern Football League clubs 1901 establishments in England Football clubs in East Sussex 1989 births Living people People from Stanmore English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Southampton F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players English children's writers 1979 births Living people People from Køge Municipality Danish footballers Denmark youth international footballers Denmark under-21 international footballers Danish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Association football goalkeepers Køge BK players Brøndby IF players Leeds United F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Danish Superliga players The Football League players 1986 births Living people People from Chambéry French footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers French Roman Catholics Association football forwards Grenoble Foot 38 players FC Istres players Tours FC players Montpellier HSC players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate footballers in England French expatriates in England 1949 births Living people Sportspeople from Strasbourg FC Mulhouse players Association football sweepers RC Strasbourg players ASPV Strasbourg players Ligue 1 players French footballers French football managers French Roman Catholics AS Nancy managers AS Monaco FC managers Ligue 1 managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Arsenal F.C. managers Honorary Officers of the Order of the British Empire Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Nagoya Grampus managers Expatriate football managers in Japan English Football Hall of Fame inductees University of Strasbourg alumni UEFA Pro Licence holders French expatriate football managers French expatriates in Japan French expatriates in England 1992 births Living people People from Stevenage Footballers from Hitchin English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Association football wingers Luton Town F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Warsaw Polish footballers Poland youth international footballers Poland under-21 international footballers Poland international footballers Association football goalkeepers Arsenal F.C. players Brentford F.C. players A.S. Roma players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2012 players Polish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Polish expatriates in England Polish expatriates in Italy FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Association football terminology Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1986 births Living people People from Río Negro Province Argentine people of Chilean descent Argentine footballers Association football forwards Argentine Primera División players C.A.I. footballers San Lorenzo footballers Arsenal de Sarandí footballers Olimpo footballers La Liga players Segunda División players CD Castellón footballers UD Almería players Premier League players The Football League players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England Argentine expatriates in Spain Argentine expatriates in England Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1988 births Living people English footballers English people of Jamaican descent Jamaican footballers Association football midfielders Derby County F.C. players Fulham F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Houston Dynamo players The Football League players Premier League players Major League Soccer players English expatriate footballers England youth international footballers Jamaican expatriate footballers Jamaica international footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Black English sportspeople People from Barking Sportspeople from London 2015 Copa América players 2015 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 1988 births Living people Footballers from Oldham English footballers Association football forwards Rochdale A.F.C. players Watford F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players FA Cup seasons 2012–13 domestic association football cups 2012–13 FA Cup 2012–13 in English football 1967 births 1995 Copa América players AEK Athens F.C. managers Association football midfielders Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. players Copa América-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Greece Superleague Greece managers Grenoble Foot 38 players La Liga players Leeds United F.C. non-playing staff Living people Premier League players Real Zaragoza players River Plate Montevideo players Sportspeople from Montevideo Swindon Town F.C. players The Football League managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. non-playing staff Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Uruguay international footballers Uruguayan expatriate footballers Uruguayan expatriate football managers Uruguayan expatriates in England Uruguayan expatriates in Greece Uruguayan expatriates in Spain Uruguayan footballers Uruguayan people of Spanish descent Uruguayan people of French descent Premier League managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers   1989 births Living people People from Bath, Somerset English people of Austrian descent English footballers Austrian footballers Austria youth international footballers Association football forwards Paulton Rovers F.C. players Plymouth Argyle F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Salisbury City F.C. players Eastbourne Borough F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Argentina Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1816 Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. Sports venues in Brighton and Hove Football venues in England Football League venues Sports venues completed in 2011 Rugby union stadiums in England Rugby World Cup stadiums 1984 births Living people People from Llanera, Asturias Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Association football midfielders Association football wingers La Liga players Tercera División players Villarreal CF B players Villarreal CF players Recreativo de Huelva players Málaga CF players Premier League players Arsenal F.C. players Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1980 births Sportspeople from Glasgow Living people Association football defenders Scottish footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Clyde F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Kilmarnock F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Scottish Football League players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players 1986 births Association football players from County Dublin Living people Association football midfielders Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers University College Dublin A.F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players Crawley Town F.C. players Carlisle United F.C. players Kilmarnock F.C. players League of Ireland players The Football League players 1982 births Living people People from Logroño Spanish footballers Riojan footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players CA Osasuna players Athletic Bilbao footballers CD Lugo players The Football League players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Kinshasa Democratic Republic of the Congo footballers Association football midfielders Newcastle United F.C. players Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 1985 births Living people People from Gliwice German people from the Polish part of Silesia German people of Silesian descent German people of Polish descent Naturalized citizens of Germany German footballers German expatriate footballers German Roman Catholics Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Premier League players Serie A players 1. FC Köln II players 1. FC Köln players FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players Arsenal F.C. players Inter Milan players Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers FIFA Century Club UEFA Euro 2004 players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy German expatriates in England German expatriates in Italy Galatasaray S.K. footballers Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in Turkey German expatriates in Turkey Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills 1984 births Living people People from Brighton English footballers Egyptian footballers Egypt international footballers Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Bognor Regis Town F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Bury F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Gillingham F.C. players The Football League players English people of Egyptian descent Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Laws of association football 1993 births Living people Arsenal F.C. players Association football wingers Black English sportspeople England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers English people of Jamaican descent People educated at St John's College (Portsmouth) Sportspeople from Portsmouth Premier League players Southampton F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1980 births Living people Czech footballers Czech Republic youth international footballers Czech Republic under-21 international footballers Czech Republic international footballers Czech First League players AC Sparta Prague players Bundesliga players Borussia Dortmund players Premier League players Arsenal F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Germany UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Sportspeople from Prague Expatriate footballers in England Czech expatriate footballers Czech expatriates in England Czech expatriates in Germany FIFA Century Club 1960s British television series 1960 British television programme debuts 1968 British television programme endings CBS network shows Espionage television series Gold Key Comics titles Television series by ITC Entertainment ITV television dramas Television series by ITV Studios The Prisoner