 1947 births Living people Czech football managers Italian football managers S.S.D. Licata 1931 managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers Foggia Calcio managers Parma F.C. managers A.C.R. Messina managers S.S. Lazio managers A.S. Roma managers S.S.C. Napoli managers U.S. Salernitana 1919 managers A.S. Avellino 1912 managers U.S. Lecce managers Brescia Calcio managers Red Star Belgrade managers Delfino Pescara 1936 managers Cagliari Calcio managers Serie A managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Serbia Expatriate football managers in Turkey Fenerbahçe football managers Naturalised citizens of Italy Czech emigrants to Italy A.S. Roma Association football clubs established in 1927 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Rome 1927 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy Cagliari Calcio Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Sardinia Association football clubs established in 1920 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Scudetto winners United Soccer Association imported teams 1920 establishments in Italy Sport in Cagliari Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy Czech Republic Countries in Europe Czech-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1993 Central Europe Motions of no confidence Cagliari Populated places established in the 7th century BC Capitals of former nations Cities and towns in Sardinia Populated coastal places in Italy Mediterranean port cities and towns in Italy Phoenician colonies Roman towns and cities in Italy Wine regions of Italy 1953 births Living people People from Massa People from the Province of Massa-Carrara Italian football managers U.S. Grosseto F.C. managers U.S. Alessandria Calcio 1912 managers Serie A managers A.S. Roma managers