 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1954 births Living people Alumni of the University of Bolton Blackpool F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players British association football commentators British expatriate sportspeople in the United States Coventry City F.C. players English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Ireland English expatriates in the United States English football managers English footballers Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football central defenders League of Ireland managers League of Ireland players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Limerick F.C. managers Limerick F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Notts County F.C. managers People from Dudley Premier League managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League managers The Football League players Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93) players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Football in England Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League Association football clubs established in 1875 Football clubs in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. Sport in Blackburn The Football League founder members Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1875 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England 1948 births 20th-century Swedish people 21st-century Swedish people Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup managers 2006 FIFA World Cup managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers ACF Fiorentina managers A.S. Roma managers Degerfors IF managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in China Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Mexico Expatriate football managers in Portugal Guangzhou R&F F.C. managers IFK Göteborg managers Ivory Coast national football team managers Manchester City F.C. managers Mexico national football team managers Notts County F.C. non-playing staff Örebro University alumni People from Sunne Municipality Premier League managers Serie A managers S.S. Lazio managers Swedish autobiographers Swedish expatriate football managers Swedish expatriates in England Swedish expatriates in Portugal Swedish football managers Swedish people of Finnish descent U.C. Sampdoria managers UEFA Cup winning managers UEFA Euro 2004 managers UEFA Pro Licence holders Västra Frölunda IF players Leicester City F.C. managers 1920s comedy films 1923 films 1920s thriller films American films American silent feature films American comedy films American thriller films American black-and-white films Films set in department stores Hal Roach Studios Films directed by Fred C. Newmeyer Films directed by Sam Taylor Screenplays by Sam Taylor (director) Screenplays by H. M. Walker Screenplays by Jean Havez United States National Film Registry films 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway UEFA Euro 2016 2015–16 in UEFA football 2015–16 in French football UEFA European Championship tournaments Scheduled association football competitions International association football competitions hosted by France Tournament systems Iceland national football team European national association football teams Football in Iceland National sports teams of Iceland Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football friendly trophies 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match Christian songs Songs written by Stuart Hamblen Elvis Presley songs Jo Stafford songs Stuart Hamblen songs Song recordings produced by Stephen H. Sholes 1951 songs 2000 greatest hits albums Odetta compilation albums Ancient Greek theatre Literary concepts Narratology Plot (narrative) Poetics Rhetoric Concepts in ethics Virtue Social agreement Modernism Art movements Architectural styles Modern art Theories of aesthetics Methodology Decision theory Thought Planning Autonomy Concepts in metaphysics Free will Philosophy of life Justice Human rights Social concepts Liberty symbols Civil rights and liberties Social justice Motivation Propositions Logical expressions Philosophy of language Semantic units Statements Syntax (logic) Mental content Mathematical logic Propositional calculus Ontology 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification (AFC) 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification FIFA World Cup qualification (AFC) 2015 in Asian football 2016 in Asian football 2017 in Asian football Russia national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Russia 1992 establishments in Russia 1971 births Living people English footballers Norwich City F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. The Football Association Place of birth missing (living people) 2012 establishments in England The Football Association Football academies in England Football in Staffordshire Buildings and structures in Burton upon Trent Hilton Hotels & Resorts hotels UEFA Euro 2000 France at UEFA Euro 2000 Italy at UEFA Euro 2000 Netherlands at UEFA Euro 2000 1999–2000 in Turkish football 1999–2000 in Portuguese football Spain at UEFA Euro 2000 1999–2000 in Romanian football 1999–2000 in Yugoslavian football European national association football teams Football in Slovakia Slovakia national football team National sports teams of Slovakia 2010–11 in European football UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying UEFA European Championship qualifying 2018 FIFA World Cup 2018 in association football 2018 in Russian sport FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by Russia Scheduled association football competitions Bolton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester West Pennine Moors FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Association football terminology Sports terminology Bolton Wanderers F.C. 1877 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1877 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bolton Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Football League Trophy winners Premier League clubs Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1963 births Living people People from Setúbal Portuguese footballers Association football midfielders Primeira Liga players Rio Ave F.C. players C.F. Os Belenenses players Portuguese football managers Primeira Liga managers S.L. Benfica managers U.D. Leiria managers FC Porto managers Premier League managers Chelsea F.C. managers Serie A managers Inter Milan managers La Liga managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Golden Globes (Portugal) winners UEFA Cup winning managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Technical University of Lisbon alumni Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Spain Portuguese expatriate football managers Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Italy Portuguese expatriates in Spain Portuguese Roman Catholics Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group 1947 births Living people A.F.C. Bournemouth managers A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football midfielders Brentford F.C. players English autobiographers English footballers English football managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players People from Poplar, London Portsmouth F.C. managers Premier League managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Seattle Sounders (1974–83) players Southampton F.C. managers Sportspeople from London The Football League managers The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. players 1948 births Living people Alumni of St Peter's College, Oxford British television presenters English people of Welsh descent Chief executives of the Football Association BBC North West newsreaders and journalists BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom English football organisations Association football trade unions 1979 births Living people Sportspeople from Plymouth English footballers England semi-pro international footballers Association football midfielders Norwich City F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players English football managers Yeovil Town F.C. managers The Football League managers Yeovil Town F.C. non-playing staff European national association football teams National sports teams of Portugal Portugal national football team 2006 FIFA World Cup 2006 in association football 2005–06 in German football FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by Germany 1961 births Living people Sportspeople from York Footballers from North Yorkshire English footballers Hull City A.F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Lincoln City F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players The Football League players English football managers Middlesbrough F.C. managers England national football team managers FC Twente managers VfL Wolfsburg managers Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Derby County F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers Eredivisie managers Bundesliga managers The Football League managers Derby County F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Queens Park Rangers F.C. non-playing staff UEFA Pro Licence holders British expatriates in the Netherlands Expatriate football managers in Germany Expatriate football managers in the Netherlands English expatriates in Germany 1868 births 1947 deaths Liverpool F.C. managers Oldham Athletic A.F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Walsall F.C. managers Stockport County F.C. managers 1957 births Living people English chief executives People from Reading, Berkshire Manchester United F.C. directors and chairmen Alumni of the University of Birmingham Members of the UEFA Executive Committee FIFA officials 1960 births Living people People from Corbridge English footballers England youth international footballers England B international footballers Association football defenders Wallsend Boys Club players Gillingham F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players English football managers Sheffield United F.C. managers Huddersfield Town A.F.C. managers Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Crystal Palace F.C. managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Hull City A.F.C. managers The Football League managers Premier League managers English people of Irish descent Norwich City F.C. captains Hull City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in England Sport in Kingston upon Hull Football clubs in the East Riding of Yorkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1904 establishments in England Government occupations Management occupations Titles Local government in the United States Heads of local government A.F.C. Bournemouth Association football clubs established in 1899 Sport in Bournemouth Football League Trophy winners 1899 establishments in England Football clubs in Dorset Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs 1977 births Living people People from Amersham English footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders A.F.C. Bournemouth players Portsmouth F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players The Football League players English football managers A.F.C. Bournemouth managers Burnley F.C. managers The Football League managers Premier League managers North American national association football teams United States men's national soccer team United States Soccer Federation 1964 births Living people People from Göppingen Sportspeople from Baden-Württemberg 1990 FIFA World Cup players 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup managers 2006 FIFA World Cup managers AS Monaco FC players FC Bayern Munich managers FC Bayern Munich footballers Inter Milan players FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club FIFA World Cup-winning players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Bundesliga managers CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning managers Association football forwards Footballers at the 1988 Summer Olympics Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Monaco Expatriate soccer players in the United States German expatriate footballers German expatriates in Italy German expatriates in Monaco German expatriates in the United Kingdom German expatriates in the United States German footballers German football managers Germany international footballers Germany national football team managers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany youth international footballers Kicker-Torjägerkanone Award winners Ligue 1 players Recipients of the Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Orange County Blue Star players Olympic bronze medalists for West Germany Olympic footballers of West Germany Sportspeople from Newport Beach, California Premier League players Serie A players Stuttgarter Kickers players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players U.C. Sampdoria players UEFA Euro 1988 players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning captains United States men's national soccer team managers Premier Development League players VfB Stuttgart players West German footballers Olympic medalists in football German expatriate football managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers BBC Living people BBC newsreaders and journalists British broadcasters Collaborative projects Social media Mass media Revolutionary tactics 1965 births Living people People from Wallsend English footballers Association football fullbacks Association football midfielders Wallsend Boys Club players Carlisle United F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Everton F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players England under-21 international footballers The Football League players Premier League players Player-coaches UEFA Pro Licence holders English football managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. non-playing staff Carlisle United F.C. managers The Football League managers Lincoln City F.C. non-playing staff Blackburn Rovers F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. non-playing staff English expatriates in Sweden Blackpool F.C. managers Film studios Film production companies Entertainment companies American film studios Canadian film studios Cinema of Southern California Hollywood history and culture Film distributors of the United States Film production companies of the United States 2006–07 in European football UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying UEFA European Championship qualifying UEFA Euro 2008 UEFA European Championship tournaments 2007–08 in European football 2007–08 in Austrian football 2007–08 in Swiss football International association football competitions hosted by Austria International association football competitions hosted by Switzerland Austria–Switzerland relations