 1991 births Living people A.F.C. Tubize players Belgian expatriates in France Belgian expatriates in England Belgian footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgium youth international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Chelsea F.C. players Ligue 1 players Lille OSC players People from La Louvière Premier League players Walloon sportspeople 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football wingers Terminology used in multiple sports Association football terminology Basketball terminology Tennis terminology Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1962 births English football referees Living people Sportspeople from St Helens, Merseyside FA Cup Final referees The Football League referees Premier League referees Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England  Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1957 births Living people Republic of Ireland football referees FA Cup Final referees Sportspeople from County Dublin BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs 1978 births Living people People from Bootle Sportspeople from Liverpool English people of Irish descent English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations 1948 Summer Olympic venues Arsenal F.C. Sport in Islington Sports venues in London Defunct football venues in England Art Deco architecture in London Grade II listed buildings in London Sports venues completed in 1932 Sports venues completed in 1936 Sports venues completed in 1993 Premier League venues Demolished buildings and structures in London Olympic football venues Sports venues completed in 1913 1913 establishments in England Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Belgium 1831 establishments in Belgium Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Federal monarchies French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1830 Western Europe Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1978 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football central defenders Black English sportspeople Doping cases in association football English autobiographers English film producers English footballers England international footballers English people of Irish descent English people of Saint Lucian descent English sportspeople in doping cases English television personalities England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players People from Peckham Premier League players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Sportspeople from London The Football League players West Ham United F.C. players 1865 births 1927 deaths People from Sigmaringen People excommunicated by the Roman Catholic Church Romanian people of World War I Romanian Roman Catholics Knights of the Garter Knights of the Golden Fleece Grand Crosses of the Virtuti Militari Recipients of the Star of Romania Order Grand Crosses of the Order of the Crown (Romania) Grand Crosses of the Order of Carol I Recipients of the Order of Michael the Brave Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus Recipients of the Order of the Black Eagle People from the Province of Hohenzollern Kings of Romania Princes of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen Roman Catholic monarchs Honorary members of the Romanian Academy Romanian people of French descent Romanian people of German descent Romanian people of Portuguese descent Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath 1977 births Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Living people England B international footballers English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. players People from Bury Premier League players Twin sportspeople from England UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players Salford City F.C. British association football commentators English expatriates in Spain English football managers Association football tactics and skills Stoke City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1863 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Football clubs in Staffordshire Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners The Football League founder members Sport in Stoke-on-Trent United Soccer Association imported teams Southern Football League clubs 1863 establishments in England English footballers English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain England international footballers England B international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Liverpool F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers FIFA 100 European Footballer of the Year winners World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners La Liga players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners English Football Hall of Fame inductees People from Flintshire Sportspeople from Chester 1979 births Living people England youth international footballers English expatriates in Spain 1963 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent British people of Syrian descent British people of Middle Eastern descent England international footballers England B international footballers Arsenal F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Premier League players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players First Division/Premier League top scorers English television presenters English radio personalities Members of the Order of the British Empire Black English sportspeople English Football Hall of Fame inductees Black British television personalities British association football commentators People from Woolwich Living people Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1989 births Living people Footballers from Cardiff Welsh expatriate footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Association football utility players Southampton F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Premier League players The Football League players La Liga players BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year People educated at Whitchurch High School FA Cup Finals FA Cup Chelsea F.C. Football club television channels in the United Kingdom Television channels in the United Kingdom 2001 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 2001 Premier League on television Laws of association football Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports Terminology used in multiple sports Sports terminology Tournament systems 1980 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football central defenders Chelsea F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Living people Nottingham Forest F.C. players People acquitted of crimes People from Barking Premier League players Senrab F.C. players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1978 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers FIFA Century Club Manchester City F.C. players People educated at Brentwood School (Essex) People from Romford Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players West Ham United F.C. players Conservative Party (UK) people Members of the Order of the British Empire New York City FC players English expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players 1960 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid UEFA Cup winning managers Spanish football managers Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla managers Liverpool F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Valencia CF managers CA Osasuna managers CF Extremadura managers CD Tenerife managers Real Valladolid managers La Liga managers Segunda División managers Premier League managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy UEFA Pro Licence holders Polytechnic University of Madrid alumni Linares CF players S.S.C. Napoli managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Spanish expatriate football managers Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy Football venues in Wales Rugby union stadiums in Wales Swansea City A.F.C. Ospreys (rugby team) Sports venues in Swansea Stadiums in Swansea Buildings and structures in Swansea Sports venues completed in 2005 Premier League venues Football League venues 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Wolverhampton English footballers Welsh footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Hednesford Town F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople English people of Welsh descent 1985 births Living people Sportspeople from Paris French people of Senegalese descent French footballers French Muslims Senegalese footballers Senegal international footballers Senegalese Muslims Association football forwards FC Rouen players R.E. Mouscron players TSG 1899 Hoffenheim players West Ham United F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Shanghai Shenhua F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Premier League players Süper Lig players Chinese Super League players Senegalese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate footballers in China Senegalese expatriates in Germany Senegalese expatriates in France Senegalese expatriates in Belgium Senegalese expatriates in Turkey 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players Senegalese expatriates in England 1964 births Living people People from Frederiksberg Danish footballers Association football midfielders Danish Superliga players Kjøbenhavns Boldklub players Brøndby IF players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players S.S. Lazio players La Liga players FC Barcelona players Real Madrid C.F. players J.League players Vissel Kobe players Eredivisie players AFC Ajax players Danish football managers Danish Superliga managers Brøndby IF managers La Liga managers Getafe CF managers RCD Mallorca managers Russian Football Premier League managers FC Spartak Moscow managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Lekhwiya SC managers Denmark under-21 international footballers Denmark international footballers UEFA Euro 1984 players 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1995 King Fahd Cup players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club UEFA Golden Players Danish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Japan Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate football managers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Russia Expatriate football managers in Wales Expatriate football managers in Qatar Danish knights Danish expatriate football managers 2010s ballads 2013 singles 2013 songs 2014 singles American songs Best Original Song Academy Award winning songs Billboard Dance Club Songs number-one singles Demi Lovato songs Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media Pop ballads Song recordings produced by Emanuel Kiriakou Songs from films Songs from Frozen (2013 film) Songs with feminist themes Songs written by Robert Lopez Songs written by Kristen Anderson-Lopez Walt Disney Records singles