 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology Sweden Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe Scandinavia Year of establishment unknown Swedish-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Austria Countries in Europe Central Europe Federal constitutional republics German-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nuclear-free zones States and territories established in 1955 Erasmus Prize winners Germanic countries and territories Western Europe 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players Faroe Islands Extinct volcanoes Germanic countries and territories Island countries Northern Europe Paleogene volcanism States and territories established in 1948 Volcanoes of Denmark Regions of Europe with multiple official languages Former Norwegian colonies Norwegian Empire The Beach Boys songs 1965 songs Songs written by Brian Wilson Songs written by Mike Love Song recordings produced by Brian Wilson Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe 1982 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Shelbourne F.C. players Livingston F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Premier League players Belvedere F.C. players Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports 2002 songs 2003 singles Sarah Connor (singer) songs Songs written by Kay Denar Songs written by Rob Tyger X-Cell Records singles Articles with hAudio microformats Norwich City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1902 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Norwich Premier League clubs 1902 establishments in England Football clubs in Norfolk