 Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange 1983 establishments in the United States AT&T Bell System Companies based in Dallas, Texas Companies established in 1983 Internet service providers of the United States Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Tier 1 networks Telecommunications companies of the United States American brands Rangers F.C. 1903 establishments in Scotland 2012 Summer Olympic venues 2014 Commonwealth Games venues American football venues in Scotland Athletics (track and field) venues in Scotland Sports venues completed in 1903 Buildings and structures in Glasgow Defunct speedway venues in Scotland Football venues in Scotland Music venues in Glasgow National stadiums Olympic football venues Queen's Park F.C. Rugby World Cup stadiums Rugby union in Glasgow Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Scotland national football team venues Scottish Football League venues Sports venues in Glasgow Scottish Professional Football League venues UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Govan BBC Scotland Television channels and stations established in 1952 Football clubs in Scotland Kilmarnock F.C. Association football clubs established in 1869 Defunct Scottish rugby union clubs Scottish Premier League teams Kilmarnock 1869 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners South of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Football Association founder members Scottish League Cup winners Sports venues completed in 1899 Category B listed buildings in Glasgow Football venues in Scotland Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Govan Listed sports venues in Scotland Rangers F.C. Sports venues in Glasgow 1899 establishments in Scotland 2014 Commonwealth Games venues Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Scottish Professional Football League venues Scotland national football team venues Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Sports museums in Scotland Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Economy of the United Kingdom Types of business entity United Kingdom company law Public sphere Public Limited Companies Credit Debt Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Scotland national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Scotland 1872 establishments in Scotland 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Association football goalkeepers Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Hull City A.F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players Süper Lig players Premier League players Scottish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Turkey Scottish expatriates in Turkey People educated at Forrester High School 1986 births Association football forwards Kilmarnock F.C. players Living people People from East Ayrshire Rangers F.C. players Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish people of Welsh descent Scottish people of English descent Everton F.C. players Premier League players Norwich City F.C. players 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Association football defenders Association football utility players Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Hibernian F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scottish Premier League players People educated at Lasswade High School Centre Norwich City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Lothian Thistle Hutchison Vale F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1885 Scottish Premier League teams 1885 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons Scottish Football League First Division Scottish Football League Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1975 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Dundee F.C. Sport in Dundee Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1893 1893 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Scottish Football Association Football governing bodies in Scotland UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1873 1873 establishments in Scotland Organisations based in Glasgow Football League Third Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe 1970 births Living people Alumni of the University of East Anglia British businesspeople Association football executives Norwich City F.C. non-playing staff People from Devon Scottish Premier League Scottish Professional Football League Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England 2008–09 in English football Economic theories Poverty  2001–02 in English football Football clubs in England Doncaster Rovers F.C. Sport in Doncaster Association football clubs established in 1879 Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1879 establishments in England Southern Football League 1894 establishments in England Football leagues in England Sports leagues established in 1894