 Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 Programming language topics 1207 establishments Liverpool Cities in North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated coastal places in Merseyside Populated places established in the 13th century Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Port cities and towns in England Towns in Merseyside Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Local government districts of North West England NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom 1969 births Living people People from Edmonton, London English businesspeople Birmingham City F.C. directors and chairmen English autobiographers English journalists English columnists English television personalities English television presenters The Apprentice (UK TV series) English people of Irish descent English people of Italian descent People educated at Aldenham School West Ham United F.C. directors and chairmen Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Female life peers Conservative Party (UK) life peers Chauvinism Discrimination Hatred Prejudices Sexism Sexuality and gender-related prejudices Social problems Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips English football referees 1985 births People from Coventry Living people FIFA Women's World Cup referees 1957 births Living people British association football commentators Cycling announcers People from Coventry Sky Sports presenters and reporters Association football commentators Political pundits Political occupations 1955 births Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Aston Villa F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Everton F.C. players First Division/Premier League top scorers Living people Notts County F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish association football commentators Scottish Football League players Scottish footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Scottish league football top scorers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. The Football League founder members Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Association football clubs established in 1877 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners United Soccer Association imported teams Sport in Wolverhampton 1877 establishments in England 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. Sport in Wolverhampton Football venues in England Sports venues in the West Midlands (county) Sports venues completed in 1889 Football League venues Wolverhampton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in the West Midlands (region) Local government districts of the West Midlands (region) Metropolitan boroughs NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Populated places established in the 10th century History of Staffordshire 985 establishments Black Country Local Enterprise Partnership 1951 births 1974 FIFA World Cup players 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. players Cumbernauld United F.C. players English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players Scottish league football top scorers Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England The Sun (United Kingdom) National newspapers published in the United Kingdom News UK Newspapers published in Ireland 1964 establishments in the United Kingdom Publications established in 1964 1980s British television series 1990s British television series 2000s British television series 2010s British television series 1988 British television programme debuts ITV television programmes English-language television programming Television series by ITV Studios  England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Association football clubs established in 1885 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Millwall F.C. Southern Football League clubs 1885 establishments in England BBC Governors Alumni of the London School of Economics British television executives Living people 1955 births Dames Commander of the Order of the British Empire Business speakers English people of Jamaican descent People from Kingston, Jamaica Jamaican emigrants to the United Kingdom British businesspeople BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom Gender Males Men Sex