 West Ham United F.C. Football venues in London Premier League venues Boxing venues in the United Kingdom Buildings and structures in Newham Sports venues completed in 1904 Football League venues Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Football clubs in England Sheffield United F.C. Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Sheffield Association football clubs established in 1889 Football clubs in South Yorkshire FA Cup winners Sports clubs established in 1889 Football League Championship clubs 1889 establishments in England Bobby Moore 1941 births 1993 deaths UEFA Golden Players English expatriates in the United States English football managers English footballers England international footballers England under-23 international footballers Association football central defenders Fulham F.C. players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players San Antonio Thunder players Seattle Sounders (1974–83) players Southend United F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. players 1962 FIFA World Cup players 1966 FIFA World Cup players 1970 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning captains UEFA Euro 1968 players BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners People from Barking Officers of the Order of the British Empire Burials at Putney Vale Cemetery The Football League players The Football League managers FIFA Century Club Deaths from colorectal cancer English Football Hall of Fame inductees British association football commentators Sportspeople from London Testicular cancer survivors Eastern AA coaches The Football League representative players Oxford City F.C. managers Arsenal F.C. English reserve football teams Eastern Counties Football League Metropolitan League Plymouth Argyle F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Football clubs in England The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs Sport in Plymouth 1886 establishments in England Football clubs in Devon Association football clubs established in 1879 Football clubs in England Fulham F.C. Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1879 establishments in England Fulham The Football League clubs