 Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology Football clubs in England Huddersfield Town A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1908 Football clubs in West Yorkshire The Football League clubs FA Cup winners 1908 establishments in England Reading F.C. Association football clubs established in 1871 Sport in Reading, Berkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs 1871 establishments in England Football clubs in Berkshire Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1990 births Living people German footballers SpVgg Greuther Fürth players SpVgg Unterhaching players SV Wacker Burghausen players Dynamo Dresden players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players 3. Liga players Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match American football terminology Baseball terminology Basketball terminology Cricket terminology Association football terminology Ice hockey statistics Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England Football League Cup seasons 2012–13 domestic association football cups 2012–13 in English football 2012–13 Football League 1990 births Living people German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers TSV 1860 München players TSV 1860 München II players 2. Bundesliga players 1993 births Living people People from Loughborough English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Leicester City F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Black English sportspeople 1993 births Living people Sportspeople from Oxford English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Black English sportspeople Association football fullbacks Association football wingers Reading F.C. players Barnet F.C. players Gillingham F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players The Football League players 1991 births Living people English footballers Sportspeople from Bradford Association football midfielders Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Sportspeople from Yorkshire West Yorkshire Metropolitan counties Counties of England established in 1974 Huddersfield Kirklees Market towns in West Yorkshire Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns in West Yorkshire 1971 births Living people Eintracht Frankfurt players Eintracht Frankfurt II players 1. FSV Mainz 05 players SV Darmstadt 98 players FC Schalke 04 players United States men's international soccer players American soccer players German people of American descent German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Bundesliga players FC Gütersloh 2000 players Germany youth international footballers Huddersfield Town A.F.C. managers The Football League managers Expatriate football managers in England Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1990 births Living people Association football midfielders Australia international soccer players Australia youth international soccer players Australia under-20 international soccer players Australian soccer players Australian people of Dutch descent New South Wales Institute of Sport alumni Bolton Wanderers F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players Western Sydney Wanderers FC players Melbourne City FC players Scottish Premier League players A-League players Soccer players from Sydney Australian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Australian expatriates in Scotland Expatriate footballers in Scotland  Football League Second Division play-off finals 1992–93 Football League Second Division Port Vale F.C. matches West Bromwich Albion F.C. matches 1993 Football League play-offs 2007 establishments in England 2012 Summer Olympic venues American football venues in the United Kingdom Buildings and structures in Brent England national football team FA Cup Final venues Football venues in London Music venues completed in 2007 Music venues in London National stadiums National Football League venues Olympic football venues European retractable-roof stadiums Rugby league stadiums in London Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues completed in 2007 Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Retractable-roof stadiums UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Neo-futurism architecture 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Warrington English footballers Association football defenders Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players The Football League players 1992 births Living people People from Haan German footballers German people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent Borussia Mönchengladbach players Borussia Mönchengladbach II players VfL Osnabrück players Hertha BSC II players Hertha BSC players SC Paderborn 07 players FC Ingolstadt 04 players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players 3. Liga players Association football forwards Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers 1981 births Living people People from Muscat, Oman Omani footballers Omani expatriate footballers Oman international footballers Omani Muslims Association football goalkeepers Al-Nasr S.C.S.C. players Lyn Fotball players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Reading F.C. players Tippeligaen players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Norway 2004 AFC Asian Cup players 2007 AFC Asian Cup players 2015 AFC Asian Cup players Kniksen award winners FIFA Century Club Footballers at the 2002 Asian Games Fairies Fairy tales Fantasy genres Fiction Folklore Literary techniques Persuasion techniques Football League One play-off Finals 2012 Football League play-offs 2011–12 Football League One Sheffield United F.C. matches Huddersfield Town A.F.C. matches Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Germany Central Europe Countries in Europe Federal republics G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1871 Western Europe Articles containing video clips Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Lower Saxony VfL Wolfsburg Multi-sport clubs in Germany Association football clubs established in 1945 1945 establishments in Germany Volkswagen Group Football League Championship play-off Finals Blackpool F.C. matches Cardiff City F.C. matches 2010 Football League play-offs 2009–10 Football League Championship Events at Wembley Stadium 2009–10 in Welsh football 2010 in London  AFC Asian Cup-winning countries Australia national soccer team Oceanian national association football teams Asian national association football teams Men's national sports teams of Australia Football Federation Australia Association football clubs established in 1922 Soccer in Australia Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester No Doubt Gwen Stefani Reggae fusion artists Third-wave ska groups American ska punk musical groups American ska musical groups Alternative rock groups from California Musical groups from Orange County, California Musical groups established in 1986 Musical quartets Interscope Records artists Reggae rock groups Grammy Award winners Articles which contain graphical timelines 1986 establishments in California