 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club 1975 births Living people People from Consett English football referees English people of Canadian descent National League (English football) referees The Football League referees Premier League referees UEFA Champions League referees Olympic football referees Football referees at the 2012 Summer Olympics Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Belfast Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland youth international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Manchester United F.C. players Royal Antwerp F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Belgian Second Division players Expatriate footballers in Belgium People educated at Belfast High School Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Laws of association football Laws of association football Association football terminology Daily Mail journalists 1963 births Living people People from Hitchin People from Tring English football referees UEFA Champions League referees 2006 FIFA World Cup referees FIFA World Cup referees FA Cup Final referees 2002 FIFA World Cup referees Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Guadalajara, Jalisco Footballers from Jalisco Mexican Roman Catholics Mexican footballers Mexico international footballers Liga MX players C.D. Guadalajara footballers Premier League players La Liga players Bundesliga players Manchester United F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Bayer 04 Leverkusen players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Germany Mexican expatriate footballers Mexican expatriates in the United Kingdom Mexican expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Mexican expatriates in Spain Mexican expatriates in Germany Mexico youth international footballers Articles containing video clips 1989 births Living people People from Basingstoke English footballers Association football midfielders Bradford City A.F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Watford F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Everton F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics England international footballers Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1974 births Living people People from Oswestry Welsh footballers Wales international footballers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Bradford City A.F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players F.C. Halifax Town players Farsley Celtic A.F.C. players