 Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange 1983 establishments in the United States AT&T Bell System Companies based in Dallas, Texas Companies established in 1983 Internet service providers of the United States Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Tier 1 networks Telecommunications companies of the United States American brands Inverness Clan Fraser Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Shinty Aberdeen F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1903 Sport in Aberdeen United Soccer Association imported teams Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish Premier League teams Former Highland Football League teams 1903 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Inverness Caledonian Thistle F.C. Sport in Inverness Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1994 Scottish Premier League teams 1994 establishments in Scotland Inverness Thistle F.C. Caledonian F.C. Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football Association Football governing bodies in Scotland UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1873 1873 establishments in Scotland Organisations based in Glasgow Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Rangers F.C. Association football clubs established in 1877 Football clubs in Scotland St Mirren F.C. Scottish Premier League teams 1877 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Paisley Sport in Renfrewshire Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Football leagues in Scotland Football league systems in Europe Association football terminology Sports terminology Scottish Football League First Division Scottish Football League Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1975 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland St Johnstone F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Perth, Scotland Association football clubs established in 1884 Sport in Perth and Kinross Scottish Premier League teams 1884 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Aberdeen Council areas of Scotland Fishing communities in Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Port cities and towns in Scotland Port cities and towns of the North Sea Royal burghs Grampian Heart of Midlothian F.C. Football clubs in Edinburgh Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1874 Scottish Premier League teams 1874 establishments in Scotland Gorgie Scottish Football League teams Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Dundee United F.C. Sport in Dundee Irish diaspora in Scotland Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1909 Diaspora sports clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Scottish Premier League teams 1909 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Dallas Tornado Hibernian F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1875 Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Edinburgh United Soccer Association imported teams Leith Scottish Premier League teams 1875 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners East of Scotland Football League teams Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Bankruptcy Corporate law Insolvency The Amazing Race Television franchises American game shows Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Sports venues completed in 1899 Category B listed buildings in Glasgow Football venues in Scotland Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Govan Listed sports venues in Scotland Rangers F.C. Sports venues in Glasgow 1899 establishments in Scotland 2014 Commonwealth Games venues Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Scottish Professional Football League venues Scotland national football team venues Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Sports museums in Scotland 1950 births Living people Scottish businesspeople Scottish football chairmen and investors Aberdeen F.C. directors and chairmen Commanders of the Order of the British Empire People from Marr Association football clubs established in 1886 Football clubs in Scotland Motherwell F.C. Sport in North Lanarkshire Scottish Premier League teams 1886 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Football clubs in Scotland Kilmarnock F.C. Association football clubs established in 1869 Defunct Scottish rugby union clubs Scottish Premier League teams Kilmarnock 1869 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners South of Scotland Football League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish Football Association founder members Scottish League Cup winners  Ayrshire Counties of Scotland 1943 births Association football forwards Dundee F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Kilmarnock F.C. players Living people Montrose F.C. managers Montrose F.C. players Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Sportspeople from Dundee Dundee United F.C. non-playing staff Scottish league football top scorers Soft drinks Scottish beverages Scottish brands Carbonated drinks 1901 introductions 1901 establishments in Scotland History of Glasgow Economy of Glasgow British beverage brands Scottish Football League Third Division Scottish Football League 1994 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe Falkirk F.C. Sport in Falkirk Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1876 1876 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams 1980 births Living people Sportspeople from Dundee Scottish footballers Association football forwards Dundee F.C. players Forfar Athletic F.C. players Plymouth Argyle F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Ross County F.C. players Arbroath F.C. players Forfar Albion F.C. players Scottish Football League players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Professional Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish Junior Football Association players 1869 introductions American football Ball games Football codes Sports originating in the United States Gridiron football Dunfermline Athletic F.C. Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1885 Scottish Premier League teams 1885 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons Dundee F.C. Sport in Dundee Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1893 1893 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Football League Second Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Ross County F.C. Sport in Highland (council area) Former Highland Football League teams Ross and Cromarty Association football clubs established in 1929 1929 establishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Football League teams Scottish Challenge Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Contract law Legal documents Donation Generally Accepted Accounting Principles Microeconomics Income Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Booting BIOS Boot loaders