 Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata Inter Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1908 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1908 establishments in Italy Unrelegated association football clubs A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Banfield footballers Atalanta B.C. players A.C. Cesena players Calcio Catania players Inter Milan players U.S. Sassuolo Calcio players Parma F.C. players A.C. Chievo Verona players Serie A players Serie B players Association football midfielders People from Buenos Aires Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine people of Ligurian descent Naturalised citizens of Italy Italian people of Argentine descent 1989 births Living people Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Ljubljana Slovenian footballers NK Domžale players Slovenian people of Bosniak descent Slovenian people of Bosnia and Herzegovina descent Slovenian expatriate footballers Slovenian expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Italy F.C. Treviso players S.S. Lazio players A.C. Rimini 1912 players Udinese Calcio players Inter Milan players Slovenian PrvaLiga players Serie A players Serie B players Association football goalkeepers Slovenia under-21 international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players Slovenia international footballers 1977 births Living people People from the Province of Milan 2002 FIFA World Cup players A.C. Milan players A.C. Monza Brianza 1912 players Atlético Madrid footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Association football goalkeepers Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Italian expatriate footballers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Italian footballers Italian Roman Catholics Italian neo-fascists Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Juventus F.C. players Olympic footballers of Italy Serie A players Serie B players La Liga players Torino F.C. players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Italian footballers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Association football forwards Serie A players Serie B players People from Savona Genoa C.F.C. players Calcio Padova players A.C. Milan players AS Monaco FC players A.S. Roma players Italian people of Egyptian descent 1992 births Living people 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Italian Muslims Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Monaco Italian expatriates in Monaco Association football terminology 1986 births Living people Association football defenders People from Ehime Prefecture Japanese footballers Japanese expatriate footballers Olympic footballers of Japan Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Japan international footballers J1 League players Serie A players F.C. Tokyo players A.C. Cesena players Inter Milan players Expatriate footballers in Italy Japanese expatriates in Italy 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 AFC Asian Cup players AFC Asian Cup-winning players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 AFC Asian Cup players Meiji University alumni Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills 1984 births Living people Association football midfielders Liberty Professionals F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Udinese Calcio players Inter Milan players Sunderland A.F.C. players A.C. Milan players Ittihad FC players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Serie A players Premier League players Saudi Professional League players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Saudi Arabia Ghanaian footballers Ghana international footballers Ghanaian expatriate footballers Ghanaian expatriates in Italy Ghanaian expatriates in the United Kingdom Ghanaian Muslims Ghana under-20 international footballers Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology A.C. Milan Inter Milan Italian football derbies Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy A.C. Milan Inter Milan Sports venues in Milan Italian fascist architecture 1934 FIFA World Cup stadiums 1990 FIFA World Cup stadiums Football venues in Italy Rugby union stadiums in Italy UEFA Euro 1980 stadiums Museums in Milan FIFA Women's World Cup stadiums CONCACAF Gold Cup stadiums National Football League venues American football venues in Massachusetts Major League Soccer stadiums Soccer venues in Massachusetts New England Patriots stadiums College lacrosse venues in the United States New England Revolution NCAA Men's Division I Lacrosse Championship venues Buildings and structures in Norfolk County, Massachusetts Visitor attractions in Norfolk County, Massachusetts Foxborough, Massachusetts UMass Minutemen football College football venues High school football venues in the United States 2002 establishments in Massachusetts Sports venues completed in 2002 Lacrosse venues in the United States Living people 1988 births Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Association football midfielders Club Atlético Vélez Sarsfield footballers Inter Milan players Sunderland A.F.C. players U.C. Sampdoria players Argentine Primera División players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England Argentina international footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people Uruguayan people of Italian descent Uruguayan people of Spanish descent Uruguayan footballers Danubio F.C. players S.S.C. Napoli players Inter Milan players Parma F.C. players Uruguay international footballers 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players Uruguayan Primera División players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy Uruguayan expatriate footballers Uruguayan expatriates in Italy Association football midfielders 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Copa América-winning players 1984 births Atalanta B.C. players ACF Fiorentina players U.C. Sampdoria players Inter Milan players A.C. Milan players Hellas Verona F.C. players Association football forwards Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Living people People from Pescia Serie A players Serie B players Italy international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players Italy youth international footballers 1992 births Sportspeople from Milan Living people Italian footballers Association football defenders Association football fullbacks A.C. Milan players Serie A players Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Laws of association football Sports rules and regulations Sports venues by type Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Berlin German people of Ghanaian descent German footballers Ghanaian footballers Association football midfielders Association football forwards Serie A players Premier League players Bundesliga players FC Schalke 04 players A.C. Milan players Genoa C.F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Borussia Dortmund players Hertha BSC players Hertha BSC II players Füchse Berlin Reinickendorf players Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Ghana international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Ghanaian football personalities Sprint (running) Athletics (track and field) terminology Events in athletics (track and field) Running Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills 1978 births Living people Slovenian people of Bosniak descent Slovenian people of Bosnia and Herzegovina descent Sportspeople from Ljubljana Slovenian footballers Association football goalkeepers NK Svoboda players NK Olimpija Ljubljana players NK Triglav Kranj players Expatriate footballers in Italy Slovenian expatriate footballers Slovenian expatriates in Italy Slovenian PrvaLiga players Serie B players FC Koper players Mantova F.C. players Empoli F.C. players NK Maribor players Slovenia under-21 international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players Slovenia international footballers Ballistics Firearm terminology Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills 1976 births Living people Italian footballers Association football defenders Bologna F.C. 1909 players Italian football managers Inter Milan managers Udinese Calcio managers Serie A managers Panathinaikos F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Greece 1982 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Association football forwards Huracán de Tres Arroyos footballers Boca Juniors footballers Banfield footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players People from Bahía Blanca Argentine Primera División players Serie A players Genoa C.F.C. players Inter Milan players Expatriate footballers in Italy Argentine people of Spanish descent Argentine emigrants to Spain Naturalised citizens of Spain Argentine expatriates in Italy Bella Vista de Bahía Blanca footballers 1986 births Living people People from Boyacá Department Colombian footballers Association football midfielders Envigado Fútbol Club players Argentine Primera División players Boca Juniors footballers Ligue 1 players AS Saint-Étienne players Primeira Liga players FC Porto players Serie A players Inter Milan players Chinese Super League players Shanghai Shenhua F.C. players Colombia under-20 international footballers Colombia international footballers 2005 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Colombian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Argentina Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in China Colombian expatriates in Portugal Colombian expatriates in Italy Colombian expatriates in China 1982 births Living people People from Bari Italian footballers Association football forwards Serie A players F.C. Bari 1908 players A.S. Roma players U.C. Sampdoria players A.C. Milan players Inter Milan players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Parma F.C. players Engineering vehicles Building engineering Geotechnical engineering Articles containing video clips