 Political pundits Political occupations Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Laws of association football Association football terminology Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 1957 births Living people British association football commentators Cycling announcers People from Coventry Sky Sports presenters and reporters Association football commentators 1955 births Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Aston Villa F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Everton F.C. players First Division/Premier League top scorers Living people Notts County F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish association football commentators Scottish Football League players Scottish footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Scottish league football top scorers Scotland national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Scotland 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology English football referees 1985 births People from Coventry Living people FIFA Women's World Cup referees Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. The Football League founder members Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Association football clubs established in 1877 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners United Soccer Association imported teams Sport in Wolverhampton 1877 establishments in England 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. Sport in Wolverhampton Football venues in England Sports venues in the West Midlands (county) Sports venues completed in 1889 Football League venues