 1961 births Living people Access to Knowledge activists Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge American bloggers American lawyers American legal scholars American people of German descent Articles containing video clips Computer law scholars Copyright activists Copyright scholars Harvard Law School faculty Law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States Massachusetts Democrats Members of the Creative Commons Board of Directors Open content activists People from Rapid City, South Dakota People from Williamsport, Pennsylvania Political writers Sexual abuse victims activists Scholars of constitutional law Stanford Law School faculty South Dakota Democrats Technology in society United States presidential candidates, 2016 University of Chicago faculty Webby Award winners Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania alumni Wired (magazine) people Yale Law School alumni Lawrence Lessig United States presidential election, 2016 History of the United States (1991–present) Harvard University V-12 Navy College Training Program Democratic Party (United States) 1828 establishments in the United States Political parties established in 1828 Political parties in the United States Progressive parties in the United States Liberal parties in the United States Social liberal parties in the United States Campaign finance reform in the United States White House Houses completed in 1800 Buildings of the United States government in Washington, D.C. Houses on the National Register of Historic Places in Washington, D.C. National Historic Landmarks in Washington, D.C. Presidential residences in the United States Presidential palaces Palaces in the United States Rebuilt buildings and structures in the United States Reportedly haunted locations in Washington, D.C. Federal architecture in Washington, D.C. Neoclassical architecture in Washington, D.C. Presidential museums in Washington, D.C. Historic house museums in Washington, D.C. Neoclassical palaces Buildings and structures in the United States destroyed by arson YouTube 2005 establishments in California American websites Companies based in San Mateo County, California Companies established in 2005 Entertainment websites Google acquisitions Google services Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2005 Multilingual websites Recommender systems Video hosting Video on demand services Android (operating system) software IOS software Firefox OS software Alphabet Inc.  George W. Bush presidential campaign, 2004 Internet slang American political catch phrases Political internet memes  Philosophy of physics Science fiction themes Time travel