Budget 2012: George Osborne's statement - as it happened
8.20am: John Bercow's campaign to stop George Osborne revealing the contents of his budget in advance, before parliament has been told, doesn't seem to be going too well. In fact, he's failing dismally. According to one source, the Treasury have already put out 11 budet-related stories and the broad outline of the tax changes being announced are already in the public domain. The personal tax allowance will rise to above £9,000 in April 2013 - to £9,205, according to ITN's Tom Bradby - and the 50p top rate of tax will be cut to 45p. These measures will be funded by taxes that hit the rich,including stamp duty going up from 5% to 7% on properties worth more than £2m,a crackdown on aggressive tax avoidance and some kind of limit on the amount of tax relief the very wealth can claim.You can read all the Guardian's budget coverage here, where there are full details of what has already come out.The cabinet were meeting at 8am to be briefed on the budget. But ministers could be forgiven for staying in bed because there is so much out there already.
So should we all pack and go home? Of course not. It's a budget, and so there's a plethora of announcements to report, plus all the drama, plus - all importantly - the politics. I'm Andrew Sparrow (AS) and I'll be covering it all in detail on this live blog today with my colleague Graeme Wearden (GW). We'll use initials to show who's writing what; if there are no initials on a post, that'll be because we think it probably doesn't matter. Broadly, I'll be writing about the politics and Graeme will be writing about the economics.
Here are two key timings that you need to know.
This is a coalition budget, but coalitions are about negotiation and I'll be interested in trying to assess today's winners and losers. In particular, there are three conflicts worth focusing on.
1. The Tories v the Lib Dems. The Lib Dems wanted to increase the income tax threshold, and the Tories wanted to cut the 50p top rate of tax. Both sides appear to have chalked up significant wins. But is this a happy compromise, or has one side come out on top? We'll get a better idea by the end of the day.
2. The rich v the poor. In some respects this is similar to the first conflict, because the Lib Dems have said that helping those on low and middle incomes is their priority. But they are already describing it as a "Robin Hood budget", which is an extravagant boast. We'll see if it stands up.
3. The coalition v Labour. Oppositions do not attract much attention on budget day. But some Labour figures believe that a decision by Osborne to cut tax for those earning more than £150,000, at a time when all the polls suggest that that would be unpopular, would be a catastrophic political mistake. It could take weeks, or even longer, before we find out for sure whether or not that's true. But by 6pm tonight we'll be in a better position than we are now to guess how that debate is going to unfold. AS
8.25am: Even without the deluge of leaks, the City isn't expecting many shocks today. George Osborne's hands are rather tied by his promise to deliver a fiscally neutral budget. That means any additional spending would have to be balanced by higher taxation.
And just a week ago, credit rating agency Fitch warned the chancellor not to ease up on the pace of fiscal consolidation, as it cut the UK's outlook to negative. Giveaways are firmly off the menu.
The latest economic forecasts may be encouraging, with predictions that GDP growth for 2012 could be revised to 0.8%, from 0.7%. That reflects the fact that today's Budget is being delivered in a calmer economic climate than last November's autumn statement, when the eurozone debt crisis was raging.
Economists also believe that Osborne may be able to announce that the UK deficit will drop back below the £100bn mark in 2012/13, thanks to the decision to take over the Royal Mail's pension scheme (something critics dismiss as an 'accounting trick').
Business leaders, thirsty for loans, want to hear full details of the new credit easing plans, and would also welcome any credible measures to stimulate growth (Sir Richard Branson, for example, has called for a new fund to encourage young entrepreneurs). And having led the attacks on the 50p top tax rate, they're likely to cheer the loudest if Osborne announces he is abolishing it. GW
8.33am: If you want to follow us on Twitter, here are the links. Andrew Sparrow
8.46am: As usual, there's been lots of budget comment on the early news programme. Here's a selection. I've taken the quotes from PoliticsHome.
8.57am: Trying to assess whether a budget succeeds or fails is a complex business, and all judgments are ultimately successful, but, for those short of time, there is one fairly simple measure we can use today. If the headlines are all about the tax cut for the 20m people who pay the basic rate of tax, then Osborne is doing well. But if the headlines are all about a tax cut for those on £150,000 who pay the 50p rate, then Osborne (and his spin doctors) are doing badly.
Judging by the papers, Osborne is doing well. The Daily Telegraph and the Times have both splashed on the budget, with stories focusing on the tax cut for lower and middle-income earners. And the Financial Times has splashed on the stamp duty increase, which is also the main focus of the Guardian's main budget stories.
But, worryingly for Osborne, the broadcasters want to talk about 50p. Michael Fallon (pictured), the Conservative deputy chairman, was asked about it on Radio 5 Live. He said it had to go because it was "the third highest tax on the planet".
Owen Smith, the shadow Treasury minister, was on the same programme and seized on the "planet" reference.
Lord Lawson, who cut the top rate to 40p when he was chancellor in the 1980s, joined the argument on Radio 4. As you would expect, he defended Osborne's decision to get rid of the 50p rate.
I've taken the quotes from PoliticsHome. AS
9.13am: One boast that George Osborne can't repeat today is that Britain's borrowing costs are below Germany's.
In the Autumn Statement last Novemberthe chancellor pointed to the UK's 'safe haven' status, telling parliament that: "Yesterday, we were even borrowing money more cheaply than Germany".
Not any more. This morning in the bond markets the interest rate on 10-year gilts (called the yield) is 2.43%, versus just 2.06% for Germany's 10-year debt. The 'spread' between the two yields has been rising since the crisis in the eurozone calmed. That shows that investors expect a higher rate of return when they buy new UK bonds rather than the German equivalent.
In historic terms, Britain's borrowing costs remain low. Bond experts reckon that sovereign bond yields are rising because 'the markets' are anticipating higher levels of inflation. As city firm M&G put it, the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England and the European Central Bank "all have a clear and visible inflationary bias." Inflation, of course, is a classic way of dealing with a country's debts. GW
9.21am: Ed Miliband will be responding to the budget statement today. He's put out a press statement giving us an early flavour of what his message will be. It doesn't contain any surprises.
9.29am: The troubled state of the UK retail sector was highlighted this morning by Game Group, which has moved closer to collapse. Game asked the London stock exchange to suspend its shares, admitting that the company no longer has any value.The company employs 10,000 staff, and there are fears that half its 600 UK stores may close.
Game had blamed slumping sales on the general consumer slowdown, but in truth the high street chain has also suffered from tough competition online. Still, it's not the ideal backgroup to the budget. GW
9.33am: To coincide with the Lib Dem spring conference, the Times published a negative profile of Danny Alexander, the chief secretary to the Treasury, suggesting that his Lib Dem colleagues thought he was turning Tory. In the spirit of even-handedness,the Times have today published a negative profile of George Osborne (paywall). It's by Sam Coates. Here's an extract.
9.53am: David Laws (pictured), the Lib Dem former chief secretary to the Treasury, was on BBC News earlier defending the decision to get rid of the 50p top rate of tax.
According to PoliticsHome, Laws also offered his version of the Lib Dem test for the budget.
This is broadly similar to what Tim Farron was saying (see 8.46am), but note the subtle difference. Farron said he wanted to know that the wealthy were paying more. Laws just said it was important to ensure that they were not paying less.
As a reminder of how fast the Lib Dem position on the 50p rate has shifted, it's worth remembering that just last summer Danny Alexander was saying that the Tories calling for the abolition of the 50p top rate of tax were living "in cloud cuckoo land". AS
10.03am: The latest public sector borrowing figures have dealt a blow to George Osborne, just three hours before he begins the Budget speech.
The UK's public sector net borrowing hit £15.2bn in February, up from £8.9bn a year earlier. That's a record high for a February, and much worse than expected. City experts had forecast a figure of around £8bn (the data excludes the cost of the government's intervention in the banking sector).
The pound dropped sharply, losing almost half a cent against the US dollar to $1.584.
The immediate reaction in the City is that this gives the chancellor less wriggle room. Economists had predicted that UK borrowing for this year might be slightly lower than forecast -- this morning's data suggests any undershoot will be smaller.
Separately, the minutes of the Bank of England's last monetary policy committee found that two policy makers wanted more quantitative easing (buying government bonds with newly created money), but were outvoted. The Bank also said it was "more certain" that UK growth would pick up in the near term, but that "significant' downside risks remained. GW
10.14am: While Ed Balls may enjoy today's Times, which is having a blast at George Osborne (see9.33am), he should probably avoid the Independent, where he's the subject of a vicious hatchet job by Matthew Norman. AS
10.21am: Lots of people have been using this joke today. Here it is, just in case you haven't heard it.
10.31am: And here a budget day tweet from Ed Miliband.
10.46am: You can read all the Guardian's budget coverage here.
As for the rest of the papers, here are some stories and articles that are particularly interesting.
• Daniel Finkelstein in the Times (paywall) says we should not over-estimate the importance of today's budget.
• George Parker in the Financial Times (subscription) says the Tories are confident that it will be seen as a Tory budget.
• Andrew Grice in the Independent says a survey of business opinion shows that only 21% of them think that their sector of the economy is growing.
• Robert Winnett in the Daily Telegraph says George Osborne will announce spending cuts in the budget.
• Tom Newton Dunn and Steve Hawkes in the Sun say a YouGov poll shows that cutting fuel duty would be the most popular tax cut Osborne could introduce.
• Martin Taylor, the former Barclays chief executive, says in an article in the Financial Times (subscription) that crackdowns on tax avoidance won't work.
• Willie Walsh, the British Airways chief executive, says in an article in the Telegraph that the government has not done enough to promote growth.
10.51am: We learnt overnight that George Osborne is going to increase stamp duty on homes worth more than £2m. Here's a stamp duty reading list. • Polly Curtis at Reality Check says raising stamp duty to 7% for homes worth more than £2m would only raise an extra £56.6m.
• Gavin Kelly on his New Statesman blog explains why putting up stamp duty is popular with politicians.
• Robert Peston on his BBC blog says he doubts whether Osborne will find it easy to close the loophole that allows the rich to avoid stamp duty.
11.05am: One of the many (many!) budget details that have appeared in the newspapers in the last few days is thatthe Treasury will take the Royal Mail final-salary retirement scheme on to the government's books. The scheme holds assets of £28bn, which can be set against borrowing for the 2012/13 financial year.
Last November, the OBR predicted that the UK would borrow £120bn in the next financial year. Adding the Royal Mail pension scheme into the mix should bring the deficit below £100bn for the first time 2008/09, when the financial crisis began.
Good news? Perhaps not. For one thing, the Royal Mail pension fund has liabilities of £37bn, so taxpayers are actually picking up an €9bn shortfall. This has prompted the Daily Mail to blast MPs as 'hypocrites' for planning such a move, while Rachel Reeves, Labour's shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, dismissed it as 'smoke and mirrors'.
Open Europe, the think tank, points out that Portugal has made similar accounting changes recently. This allowed the country, which was bailed out by the IMF last year, to "magically" improve its public finances. Portugal, which may yet need a second aid package, is hardly an ideal role-model for the UK.
As Open Europe's Raoul Ruparel told us: "this is far from a free lunch and the money should be used conservatively. GW
11.09am: We've launched our Budget glossary this morning, explaining some of the terminology which the chancellor may use in his speech. It's here, covering everything from alcohol duty to the winter fuel allowance.
Our colleague Simon Goodley has also rounded up the latest Budget betting, here. The bookies reckon we're odds-on to hear Osborne (who apparently is the thirstiest chancellor on record) to mention Britain's "triple A rating". You can also get 5/1 on Vince Cable shaking his head during the speech.
11.19am: In the comments below, readers have come up with some great ideas for Budget Bingo.
Politics Home has handily created its own budget bingo board, so here are some popular choices for our own bingo card (with thanks to our colleague Laura Oliver)
IntravenousDeMilo came up with:
And we had some good suggestions over Twitter:
@GdnPolitics 'clearing up the mess left by xxx - [insert party of choice] #budgetbingo from @paulonpolitics .
@GdnPolitics "we inherited from previous government" from @Spiller32 .
So do play along at home if you can.
11.26am: We've had a lot of pre-budget polling over the last week or so. Here's a guide to some of the key findings.
• A YouGov poll for the Sun today (pdf).It shows that cutting fuel duty would be the most popular tax cut, closely followed by increasing the personal allowance to £10,000.
• A post from Anthony Wells at UK Polling Report summarising the findings of various YouGov budget polls. Among other points, he says YouGov polling shows "widespread opposition to the abolition of the 50p rate".
• A ComRes poll from the weekend with figures for various possible budget measures (pdf).
Here's the summary of the findings from the ComRes news release.
• Ipsos MORI in the Evening Standard yesterday.It suggests people will not believe George Osborne if he says the rich will pay most.
11.39am: George Osborne has left Downing Street for the House of Commons. At Westminster the TV helicopter overhead is making a racket.
11.42am: My colleague Shiv Malik has sent us this.
11.46am: Today George Osborne is expected to announce a crackdown on aggressive tax avoidance. He will be following up ideas set out in a report for the Treasury by Graham Aaronson QC, which was published last year. Aaronson proposed a "narrowly-focused" general anti-abuse rule (GAAR).
Here is some background on the proposal.
• The Treasury press notice about the Aaronson report. • The Aaronson report in full (pdf).
• A blog from Richard Murphy saying the Aaronson plan would only have a limited effect.
11.55am: Here's George Osborne on the steps of Number 11.
11.56am: The BBC's live coverage is running into problems. Jon Sopel was trying to interview Tim Farron, Claire Perry and Chris Leslie on the open-air platform on Abingdon Green, opposite Parliament. But he had to wind it up early because protesters were shouting so loudly. I think they were shouting tax the rich.
12.00pm: Labour has seized on this morning's disappointing public borrowing figures(at £15.2bn, the worst February data on record).
Rachel Reeves MP, Labour's shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said it was proof that the government's fiscal plan is "wildly off track". She said:
A Treasury spokesman has blamed the figures on "growth in departmental spending" and "weak" income tax receipts.
Vicky Redwood, chief UK economist at Capital Economics, has analysed the data and concluded that borrowing for the current financial year will only be "a couple of billion pounds" below previous forecasts. That's not enough to fund many budget giveaways.
12.01pm: PMQs is underway. David Cameron has just attacked Ed Miliband for pulling "a sickie" when he was meant to be addressing an NHS rally.
12.03pm: Ed Miliband asks about the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan. Cameron says further progress on the plans will be made at the Nato summit in Chicago.
12.04pm: Miliband asks about the discussions Cameron has had about this with Hamid Karzai, the Afghan president. Cameron says he has been in "permanent touch" with the Afghans about the transition.
Intriguingly, he says George Osborne will be talking about the need to "make the most" of the transition in his budget statement.
Does that mean Osborne has found a peace divident to spend?
12.10pm: Cameron says the car industry is doing well. Car firms are expanding.
That's very good news for manufacturing, he says.
12.12pm: George Osborne hasn't started, but we are already on taxes. Cameron has a go at Ken Livingstone's tax arrangements. He says Livingstone has offered to pay his taxes in full (ie, not to channel earnings through a company, legally) if he wins the mayoral election. Cameron says he has some political advice for Livingstone. It's best to start paying your taxes at the beginning of your campaign, he says.
12.14pm: Ed Miliband asks about the riots. Only around half of those who have made claims under the Riot Damages Act have had compensation, he says. Does Cameron agree that that is not good enough?
Cameron accepts this. He will chase this up. But other compensation funds were set up too, he says.
Miliband mentions a particular victim still waiting for compensation. Cameron says he will look into that case.
Miliband says proper information about compensation payments needs to be released, a minister needs to be put in charge and Cameron needs to come back to the Commons with answers.
Cameron says he will put information into the library of the Commons. Nick Herbert, the policing minister, is in charge. But Cameron is taking an interest too, he says.
12.18pm: In the City, traders are poised for the budget to begin -- but there's disappointment that much of the speech already appears to have leaked.
Josh Raymond of City Index predicted that construction, retail and bank shares could be moved by Osborne. As he pointed out, shares in Tesco, Sainsburys and Morrisons have already rallied this week following reports that Sunday trading hours could be relaxed.
Michael Hewson of CMC Markets predicted that today will be "less about the economics and more about the politics".
"Oh for the days when we really did find out [the Budget details] on the day," he added.
The FTSE 100 is up just 2 points at 5894, so it's really quite calm. GW
12.22pm: Back in the Commons Labour's Graham Allen asks Cameron if he will agree to ensure that next year's budget focuses on early intervention.
Cameron says that making a budget submission this early is a particularly good example of early intervention. He says he will look at the idea, and applauds Allan for all he has done to promote early intervention as a solution to social problems.
12.24pm: Labour's Mary Glindon asks about tax cuts for the rich and cuts to child tax credit.
Cameron says tax credits have gone up. And, with reference to the "very richest", he says: "After this budget they will pay more tax."
12.28pm: Nick Boles, a Conservative, says that leading conservatives like Lord Tebbit and Lord Satchi have been arguing for years for the low-paid to be taken out of income tax. Does Cameron agree that this is a thoroughly Conservative idea.
Cameron tells the Speaker that this is a kaleidescope budget (referring to John Bercow's speech yesterday, which has been widely mocked in today's papers).
Bercow says he is glad Cameron is using his language.
12.31pm: The statement is about to start.
The Treasury tweet during the budget. Here is their feed.
He says this budget rewards work.
But it will also be a reforming budget, that repairs the "disastrous" decisions taken under Labour, when manufacturing declines.
Millions of the lowest paid will be lifted out of tax altogether.
And revenues from the richest will increase.
12.34pm: Osborne says the report from the OBR reminds us of the risks to recovery.
The OBR are sharply revising down their forecast for Eurozone growth.
• World growth forecest also downgraded, by 0.2% and 0.3%.
But Britain will avoid a technical recession. • Growth forecast for 2012 revised up to 0.8%.
For 2013, growth of 2% is forecast, followed by 2.7%, then 3%, then 3%.
• Unemployment to peak this year at 8.7%.
• Claimant count forecast down. Now expected to peak at 1.67m.
12.38pm: Osborne says quantitative easing will remain in place.
• Deficit falling, and forecast to reach 7.6% next year.
This is a fiscally neutral budget, he says, achieved by a "modest reduction" in taxation and spending.
• Borrowing forecast to be £126bn this year - £1bn less than forecast last year.
12.39pm: Osborne says the OBR says the government is on course to eliminate the structure deficit by 2016-17.
• Public sector net debt to peak at 76.3% in 2014-15.
12.40pm: Osborne says he will not abandon his deficit reduction plan.
He will not spend the windfall from the Royal Mail pension scheme. Instead, he will use it to pay off debt.
12.41pm: Osborne says welfare needs to be curbed.
He is publishing information showing that welfare spending would have to be cut by £10bn in the next spending review if the system carries on as it is.
12.43pm: Osborne says UK forces will cease combat operations in Afghanistan in 2014.
Operations will cost £2.4bn less than planned over this parliament, he says.
Some of the benefit of the lower cost will go to soldiers.
• An extra £100m to be spent on accommodation for soldiers.
• Family welfare grant for service families to be doubled.
It will explore the case for gilts with longer redemption periods (ie, 100 year ones) and ones which are never redeemed at all, but which pay perpetuable income.
Osborne says Britain's gold reserves would be worth six times as much now as they were worth when Gordon Brown sold them off.
There will be extra funding to pay for new homes, he says.
Stability and credibility are necessary for growth, he says. But they are not sufficient.
Britain must ensure it is not left behind countries like Brazil. This is the govenrment's resolve.
12.48pm: Osborne says Britain is in the top 10 of countries deemed good place for doing business. But it must do better.
Britain has a reputation as a "remarkably open place" for investment. Protectionist rhetoric must not be allowed.
Osborne says he wants the Chinese currency to be traded in London.
12.50pm: Osborne says the government must confront the lack of airport capacity in the south east.
We cannot cut ourselves off from growing markets, he says.
Turning to transport, he says Network Rail will upgrade lines in the north of England. They were neglected under Labour, he says.
12.51pm: Osborne says the government has struck a deal with Manchester to develop infrastructure in the city.
Turning to London, he says he will work with Boris Johnson on new infrastructure projects. There will be a £70m development zone, he says.
Twenty four enterprise zones are going ahead across the UK.
Enhanced capital allowances will be created for enterprise zones in Scotland.
12.53pm: Osborne says renewable energy will play a crucial role in the future.
But he will be alert to the costs. What is environmentally sustainable must be fiscally sustainable too, he says.
Gas will be the largest source of energy in coming years. A new gas generation strategy will be set out in the autumn.
Taxation for the North Sea oil and gas industry will change.
• A £3bn new field allowance will be created for investment west of Shetland.
12.55pm: Osborne says the government is supporting the life sciences sector. Taxes on patents are being cut.
12.56pm: Britain's government debt has strengthened slightly since the budget began, pushing down the yield (effectively the interest rate) on 10-year gilts to 2.38%.
The news that Britain may sell perpetual bonds (which will never be repaid) didn't cause any alarm (perhaps because the proposal emerged last week).
The pound has also crept a little higher against the US dollar to $1.584. There was little impact from the new GDP forecasts, with the prediction of 0.8% growth this year (from 0.7%) balanced from the lower forecast of 2% growth in 2013 (down from 2.1%).
Alexandra Jones, chief executive of Centre for Cities, said that Osborne's prediction that the UK will avoid a technical recession this year was welcome, but pointed out that "we're still recovering much more slowly than we did from the last recession in the early 1990s." GW
12.56pm: Back to the statement, Osborne announces tax breaks for the film industry. It is the policy of this goverment "to keep Wallace and Grommet exactly where they are", he says, to loud cheers.
That's because Ed Miliband is sometimes depicted as Wallace.
12.58pm: Osborne says Lord Heseltine has been asked to review how the government could work better on development projects with the private sector.
Britain has lost job because firms could not get planning permission.
Next week, the new planning rules will be published.
Guidance running to 1,000 pages will be replaced by guidance running to just 50 pages.
• New planning rules to come into force next Tuesday.
• Sunday trading laws will be relaxed for eight Sundays only, starting on 22 July.
1.00pm: Osborne says he is exploring enterprise loans.
• Young people could get loans to start up businesses.
Labour introduced this for the Court Service, he says. And Labour is now in favour of regional benefit rates, he says.
The pay review bodies will consider regional public sector pay. Today the Treasury is publishing its submission.
1.02pm: Osborne turns to taxation. And he quotes Adam Smith's principles of good taxation, including simplicity and the rich paying most.
• Treasury to consult on a new cash system for small firms with a turnover of up to £77,000. That would make it easier for them to fill in their tax returns. • A consultation on merging tax and national insurance payment systems to be published next month.
• Age-related allowances to be simplified. Many pensioners do not understand them, he says. • A new single personal allowance for pensioners. No pensioner will lose in cash terms, he says.
Osborne says the government wants to simplify the pensions system. It is too complicated, he says. • A new single-tier pension worth about £140 will be introduced. It will be based on contributions and cost no more than the current system.
1.06pm: Osborne says the Tory MP Ben Gummer recently propsed giving taxpayers a statement saying what their money goes on.
Osborne says this is an excellent idea. He will introduce it from 2014.
1.07pm: Osborne says he wants to make the tax system more competitive for business.
Tax for small firms has already been cut. And national insurance for employers has been cut.
• An above-the-line R&D tax credit to be introduced next year.
The Treasury will review what more can be done to help firms, he says. • Corporation tax to be cut by 1% this year. From April corporation tax will be just 24%. The two further cuts will go ahead, so by 2014 it will be 22%. This means corporation tax will be "dramatically lower" than in competition countries.
That will put the government within sight of a 20% rate, which would put corporation tax in line with the basic rate of tax.
• Bank levy to go up, so that banks do not benefit from the coporation tax cut.
• Tobacco duty to go up by 5%. A packet of cigarettes will cost an extra 37p from tonight.
• A new machine games duty to be introduced.
Osborne says that, as a result of changes introduced by Labour, online gambling has moved off-shore.
The government will deal with this by taxing gambling based on the place of consumption.
The government has already cut fuel duty, he says, by £4.5bn.
• No further change to fuel duty.
• Vehicle excise duty (VED) goes up in line with inflation.
Under Labour, some wealthy people said they paid less in tax than their cleaners.
Tax evasion is "morally repugnant", he says.
Tax avoidance measures in the budget will save £1bn over five years.
• A crackdown on aggressive tax avoidance to be introduced, in line with the GAAR proposal from Graham Aaronson. (See 11.46am.)
• A new 15% charge on people who buy homes in corporate envelopes.
• A new 7% stamp duty will be introduced on homes worth more than £2m from tonight.
Most rich people pay a lot of tax, he says. But it cannot be right for people to make use of some tax reliefs year after year.
Some tax reliefs are already capped, like pension relief.
• No significant changes to pension relief.
• Anyone claiming tax reliefs worth more than £50,000 will have their total relief capped at 25% of income.
1.20pm: Turning to the 50p rate, he says it has caused "massive distortions".
Income worth £16bn was paid early to avoid the tax, he says.
• The 50p rate has raised just around £1bn, he says.
But other tax losses may cancel that out.
• Top rate to go down to 45p from April next year.
He says no chancellor can justify a tax rate "that damages our economy and raises next to nothing".
Osborne says Ed Balls said the OBR should pass judgment on scrapping the 50p rate.
They have passed judgment, he says.
• Cutting the 50p rate will cost £100m, he says. The OBR says that is reasonable. • Other taxes on the wealthy in the budget to raise £500m.
It won't be withdrawn all at once.
• Child benefit only to be taken from those earning more than £50,000.
• After the £50,000 threshold, it will be removed at the rate of 1% every £100. So there will no be cliff edge, he says.
• Only those earning more than £60,000 will lose out completely.
1.27pm: Osborne says he wants to go "further and faster" (Nick Clegg's phrase) in lifting the income tax allowance.
• Income tax allowance to go up by £1,100 to £9,205.
• Anyone earning up to £100,000 will benefit. They will get £220 a year, or £170 after inflation.
• People on the minimum wage will have had their tax bills halved under the coalition. Some 2m people will have been taken out of tax altogether.
1.31pm: There's a (predictably) mixed reaction to the budget on Twitter, and beyond. Here's an early flavour:
Dr Ros Altmann of the Saga Group criticised the decision to nationalise the Royal Mail's pension scheme.
In the City, the news that the UK will rebuild its gold reserve alarmed trader Nicola Duke, who tweeted:
Accountant and tax researcher Richard Murphy wasn't impressed that Osborne criticised previous chancellors for relying on low-cost borrowing, while also hailing Britain's current low borrowing costs:
Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said Osborne had enjoyed the "rare luxury" of not having to revise his growth forecasts.
Jeremy Cook, chief economist at World First, said the speech has "nothing to spook rating agencies", adding:
1.33pm: Ed Miliband is replying to Osborne now. I'll post full quotes from his speech later, but he summed it all up in his first line.
1.34pm: Snap Verdict: Where's the money coming from? I was told recently by a government source that raising the income tax allowance would cost £3.5bn, but, having heard Osborne's speech, I can't work out where the money is coming from. I do know how Osborne is funding the abolition of the 50p top rate, because he told us this would cost just £100m (do you believe that?) and that he would raise an extra £500m from the rich. But, in terms of a budget, £500m is nothing. These particular tax changes might attract most of the media attention, but in fiscal terms they are insignificant. Which is why the budget spin is even more important than usual today. And, in spin terms, I'm surprised to find myself concluded that Nick Clegg is ahead. At PMQs Nick Boles bravely tried to claim that raising the tax allowance was a Tory idea. But Nick Clegg has been banging on about this in public for so long that he has firmly established ownership of this policy - whether Osborne likes it or not. More later. AS
1.44pm: Snap Economic/City verdict: Economically, the budget forecasts were presented to make the UK resemble the 'least ugly puppy in the shop', at least in Europe. Raising growth forecasts for this year by just 0.1 percentage point is small reward for the progress made in dampening down the fires in Europe. Especially if you then trim 2013 forecast by the same amount. Pointing to the sharp cuts in eurozone growth forecasts showed exactly who Osborne blames for the weak world economy. The increase in the bank levy (to counter cuts in corporation tax) show that the banking sector remains the number one punchbag for politicians of all stripes. Cue another round of rumours that banks might move their HQs? Probably not, because of the chancellor's move on income tax..... Osborne's justification for cutting the 50p top tax rate to 45p smelled fishier than Grimsby pier to some critics, but it will be welcomed in financial quarters. Anything that makes London more attractive than Frankfurt goes down well in the City. In the stock markets, the early victim of the budget was upmarket estate agent Savills, whose shares have fallen 3.4%. Is bashing estate agents the new banker bashing? GW
1.48pm: Some reaction to George Osborne's budget from readers on the politics live blog (with thanks to our colleague Hannah Waldram):
Commenters were generally against the announcement on cigarette duty. From Armstrongx15:
parrotkeeper makes a point regarding alcohol and the NHS:
In response to pension changes: BigD shares what the changes will mean for their situation:
1.50pm: Did the Budget go too fast for you? You need Katie Allen's round-up of key points from the statement, here.
1.54pm: You can read all the budget documentson the Treasury's website.
And here's the Red Book, the key document with the charts explaining what everything costs (pdf).
1.58pm: Smallprint Alert: Under the headline "simplification" in the Red Book, there are figures showing how much the chancellor will raise from freezing age-related allowances. Osborne said in his speech that he wanted to make taxation for pensioners simpler. But it's also a substantial money-raiser - and by 2014-15 it will raise more than any other measure in the budget. In 2014-15 it will raise £670m and by 2016-17 it will raise £1.250bn. AS
2.11pm: Here is some reaction to the budget that has already come in.
From Simon Walker, director general of the Institute of Directors
From Andy Atkins, executive director of Friends of the Earth
From Nick Pearce, director of the IPPR thinktank
From Peter Rollings, chief executive of estate agent Marsh and Parsons
From Professor Stephen Glaister, director of the RAC Foundation, said: "The Chancellor's decision to go ahead with the summer rise in fuel duty is as unsurprising as it will be disappointing to 34 million drivers, especially when the Chancellor acknowledges there is likely to be a further spike in oil prices.
2.30pm: Here's the HMRC report on the impact of the 50p top rate of tax (pdf).
Here's a key extract from the summary. You'll see how tentative they are abou their findings.
2.44pm: The Treasury has released data showing the impact of today's Budget on households. It shows that in 2014-15 the richest 20% will have felt the largest total impact of the tax, tax credit and benefit changes made by the chancellor. But the poorest fifth of families will suffer nearly as much.
According to the Treasury, the graph shows that "the top quintile continues to make the greatest contribution towards reducing the deficit as a per cent of their income and benefits in kind from public services."
But while those richest 20% will pay more through a higher tax take (or so the Treasury estimates), those less well off will suffer through lower tax credits and benefits. These are the people that Chris Johnes, director of Oxfam's UK poverty programme, describes today as Britain's "squashed bottom", adding:
Johnes added that the proposal to cut £10bn from welfare payment would be "catastrophic" for working families on low incomes. GW
2.47pm: The Red Book has details of how the much-anticipated Tycoon Tax could develop. From April 2013, the Government will introduce a new cap on income tax reliefs for those on higher incomes.
As Paul Belsman, RSM Tenon's head of tax explains, this means that for anyone seeking to claim more than £50,000 of relief, a cap will be set at 25% of earnings of income.
Belsman says we should look to America's Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) for evidence of how this could snare less wealthy people in the years ahead:
2.57pm: The full text of Ed Miliband's response is now on the Labour party's website.From what I heard, it went down well.
Here are some extracts.
Miliband also had fun asking cabinet ministers sitting on the government front bench to say how many of them would benefit from the abolition of the 50p rate. (Cabinet ministers earn less than £150,000, where the 50p rate cuts in, but some of them have wealthy spouses and other family income.) He invited them to nod if the answer was yes.
3.06pm: Smallprint Alert: In his budget speech Osborne said this in relation to alcohol duty.
Tom Stainer from the Campaign for Real Ale has been in touch to say that that does not tell the full story.
3.09pm: Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor, has also been reading the HMRC report on the 50p rate. (See 2.30pm.) Here's what he told the BBC. I've taken the quotes from PoliticsHome.
Balls has taken the £3bn figure from p51 of the HMRC report. That's what cutting the 50p top rate would cost without making allowance for what HMRC call "behavioural impact", which refers to their calculation that the Treasury would lost £2.9bn from the £3bn the 50p rate could have raised because taxpayers would have taken avoidance measures.
3.21pm: Paul Johnson, director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies, has just told Sky that George Osborne's budget figures do add up - but only if he really gets as much from his crackdown on tax avoidance as he says he will, and only if scrapping the 50p rate really costs just £100m. He sounded slightly sceptical on both points.
3.30pm: Earlier we posted one of the charts showing the distributional impact of the changes in the budget. If you want to read more on this,look at Annex B of the Red Book (pdf),starting on page 89.
These charts take into account the impact of all the changes introduced by the government, not just today's changes.
As Ed Balls pointed out on the BBC earlier, these figures do not include the impact of the abolition of the 50p top rate of tax. That's because "the behavioural response is estimated to reduce the theoretical yield by around 97%", the document shows.
The most embarrassing chart for the government is chart B.2. It shows that those in the bottom three deciles - the poorest 30% - lose more, as a proportion of their income, than the richest 10% from the government's changes to tax, tax credits and benefits. And they do far worse than people in the second highest decile - the top 60 to 80% - who have done best of all. AS
3.43pm: Smallprint Alert: The Treasury is tightning up various VAT loopholes, in a move that will impact, among others, self-employed hairdressers.
Section 2.179 of its Budget Policy decisions, called "VAT: correcting anomalies and closing loopholes", states:
The issue of hairdressers' chair rental came before the High Court a few years ago - details here GW.
3.51pm: The Office for Budget Responsibility has just held its press conference following the budget statement.
OBR chairman Robert Chote has described today's measures as "broadly neutral", and warned that weak consumer spending will continue to drag on the UK economy until 2014 (remember, the OBR has trimmed 0.1 percentage point off its growth forecast for 2013, to 2.0%).
Chote also revealed that the OBR now expects general government employment to fall by 730,000 between start 2011 and early 2017. That is an extra 20,000 more job cuts than it predicted last November.
Our colleague Katie Allen attended the briefing, and reports that the OBR said it was "too early" to make assumptions about behavioural responses to the cut in the 50p tax rate to 45p. Chote made it clear that the OBR isn't going to commit itself on this issue today.
Chote was also asked whether the UK had reached the point where higher taxes were counter-productive and would bring in less revenue (a theory promoted by economist Arthur Laffer). He responded that "we are strolling across the summit of the Laffer curve".
The OBR press conference finished with its panel saying they hope the next one, to be held after the next Autumn Statement, is "more exciting". Fingers crossed.... GW
3.52pm: Some praise for the chancellor's budget, from the Centre for Economics and Business Research.
The think tank has welcomed the changes to planning reform, corporation tax, and the abolition of the 50p tax, saying:
However, CEBR CEO Douglas McWilliams also suggested that the OBR's growth forecasts may be too optimistic, saying:
Today, it expects growth of just 0.8%. GW
4.07pm: In a Smallprint Alert at 1.58pm I pointed out that pensioners are some of the biggest losers in this budget. Ros Altmann, the director general of Saga, has now put out this statement about it.
And this is from Joanne Segars, the chief executive of the National Association of Pension Funds
The Telegraph website is leading its budget coverage on this. Osborne may be getting worried.
4.10pm: Here are some highlights from the Guardian's budget coverage.
• The verdict from the Comment is free panel.
• Julia Kollewe rounds up reaction to the budget from interest groups. And you can find all our coverage here.
4.16pm: Smallprint Alert: The Charities Aid Foundation is saying that philanthropists could be deterred from making big donations to charity under today's budget proposals.
4.18pm: It looks as if George Osborne's decision to freeze allowance for pensioners (see4.10pm)is going to dominate the headlines tomorrow. This is one of the few big money items in the budget - it is going to raise more than £1bn a year by 2015-16 - but you would not have guessed from the way Osborne talked about it in his speech. This is what he actually said.
In other words, he was presenting a tax raid as an attempt to spare pensioners from some unnecessary paperwork. This is precisely the kind of lack of candour for which Gordon Brown became famous. AS
4.26pm: Here's our story on the tax raid on pensioners - already dubbed the "granny tax" in the lobby.
4.28pm: Smallprint Alert. This one's from the Spectator's Fraser Nelson.
4.33pm: The Resolution Foundation has published a very good analysis of the budget which you can read in full here (pdf).
This grap shows the impact of changes to the personal tax allowance, and here's the key paragraph explaining the changes:
4.48pm: When George Osborne announced his plan to cut child benefit for high earners, he said that one of the advantages of his plan was its simplicity.
Now it has become a muddle. Instead of being linked to the point at which you pay the higher rate of tax, Osborne has created two new thresholds: £50,000, where the child benefit cut will kick in, and £60,000, beyond which families will not be eligible for any child benefit at all. Between those two points, child benefit will be cut according to a sliding scale.
This is what Ed Balls had to say about it.
4.55pm: Here's some more reaction to the budget.
From John Cridland, director general of the CBI
From Patrick Nolan, chief economist of Reform, the centre-right thinktank
From Ian Brinkley, director at The Work Foundation
From Sarah Woolnough, director of policy at the charity Cancer Research UK
From Stephen Joseph, chief executive of the Campaign for Better Transport
5.15pm: Smallprint Alert: The Open Europe thinktank has been in touch to point out that the budget documents show that Britain's net contribution to the EU was £9.2bn in 2010-11, not £8.1bn as estimated last autumn. And it says that over four years Britain's contribution will be £33.1bn, not £31.3bn.
5.20pm: George Osborne will face the music next week over the flood of leaks that preceded today's statement.
The Treasury Select Committee has just announced that it will hold five sessions next week into Budget 2012, with the chancellor expected on Tuesday afternoon.
One of its tasks will be to compare the content of the budget with the various media reports of the past few days, to decide whether details of the budget were leaked, or whether the nation's journalists merely took some 'educated guesses'.
A year ago, the TSC warned that it "deprecate both leaks, and any advance briefing". Osborne may have some explaining to do. GW
5.22pm: Nick Clegg has put out a statement about the budget. Here it is in full.
5.45pm: Fitch has become the first credit rating agency to comment on today's budget.
The good news is that Fitch (which lowered the UK's outlook to 'negative' last week), has not changed its assessment that Britain merits an AAA rating. The less-good news is that Fitch still reckons that the triple-A rating is "vulnerable to adverse shocks".
6.06pm: Wondering how the budget affected you? Our colleagues on the Money desk have created this online calculator, which should indicate whether you are likely to be better or worse off in the next tax year.
6.21pm: Fitch's announcement that the Budget has not changed its view of the UK rather sums up the City's reaction. With the FTSE 100 closing just 0.01% higher, and the pound now trading around its opening level of $1.5956, the financial markets have given George Osborne's Big Speech a half-hearted shrug.
That was always likely, in truth, given the chancellor's commitment to delivering a fiscally neutral budget. The main priority is clearly to cling onto the AAA rating, so Fitch's comments should please the Treasury
Osborne also has the luxury of announcing economic growth projections that were barely changed from last November. That kind of stability should be welcomed. But behind today's calm, there is still concern in the City that the eurozone crisis could flare up again in the months ahead. If so, Osborne's forecasts may again look too optimistic by the autumn. GW
6.44pm: Remember the fuss about the 75p pension increase, more than a decade ago? It was actually quite reasonable – an indexed increase when inflation was very low – but the pensioner lobby are particularly vocal and powerful and Tony Blair ended up having to apologise to them at Labour conference for having the temerity to not be more generous to them. I'm not sure whether George Osborne will end up apologising for the "granny tax" (see 4.26pm), but the row about this measure may dominate the headlines for the next 12 hours or so.
If it does, it will obscure some of the other aspects of the budget. Earlier I identified three budget battlegrounds. Here's my analysis of how they look now.
1. The Tories v the Lib Dems. In the past we've had coalition budgets. But this time the two coalition partners negotiated in public and we've got something that feels very much like a double-headed measure: a Liberal Democrat tax allowance increase bolted onto the Tory abolition of the 50p top rate of tax. I've no doubt at all that Osborne is pleased about being able to take 2m people out of tax, but Nick Clegg has successfully branded this as a Lib Dem policy. Will it do his party any good at the local elections? Possibly not. But for a minor party in a coaltion, it's a result.
2. The rich v the poor. Osborne now always feels the need to be able to present his budget measures as progressive. Today he wasn't very convincing when he did so - it's very hard to believe that the 50p top rate of tax raised quite as little as he said - but at least the Treasury now produces a distributional analysis which allows arguments about the impact of these measures to get underway. The poor will fare very badly this year, but largely as a result of measures in the pipeline before Osborne stood up today. The tax allowance increase will increase millions of people on low income. But, as the Resolution Foundation has already established (see 4.33pm), those on above-average incomes will benefit more.
3. The coalition v Labour. Labour are hammering the line that this is a budget for the rich and if this sticks - which it may well do - the coalition is in trouble. But at this stage it's probably too early to tell how the public will reaction. Gordon Brown's decision to cut the 10p rate of tax ended up doing him enormous political damage, yet I don't remember many people predicting that the evening after he made his statement.
For all that, it's probably important to point out that the key thing about this budget is that it does not change a great deal. The tax allowance increase and the corporation tax cut are the only big number items in the Red Book (if you accept Osborne's claim that abolishing the 50p rate will not cost much) and even the "Granny Tax" only starts to raise more than £1bn after the general election. Osborne has already taken his most important strategic decisions, relating to the spending cuts. At one point in his speech he said that at the next spending round he could have to cut another £10bn from welfare. If you want a really big budget story, wait unitl he announces the details of that.
On that cheery note, we're off. Thanks for all the comments. AS