Burma: EU observers will not declare historic Myanmar by-elections free and fair
The victory, if confirmed, marks a major milestone in the Southeast Asian nation, where the military has ruled almost exclusively for a half-century and where the government is now seeking legitimacy and a lifting of Western sanctions.
The victory claim was displayed on a digital signboard above the opposition National League for Democracy's headquarters in Rangoon.
Earlier, the party said in unofficial figures that Ms Suu Kyi was ahead with 65 per cent of the vote in 82 of her constituency's 129 polling stations.
As polling got under way in the first election ever contested by the country's Nobel laureate, EU officials said while they welcomed the Burmese government's invitation to observe 45 parliamentary by-elections, they had not been given enough time to carry out a credible monitoring operation.
Observers from the EU, the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), foreign diplomats and local pro-democracy groups have been given free access to officials and polling stations for the first time as part of Burma's campaign to persuade the European Union and United States to lift economic sanctions.
Britain's foreign secretary William Hague said EU sanctions could be lifted later this month if the by-elections are seen to be free and fair.
EU observers, led by its head of Democracy Support and Elections division Malgorzata Wasilewska, visited polling stations throughout the country as they opened to voters this morning, and found them calm and peaceful.
Ms Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy expects to win 80 per cent of the seats – 36 in total – to match its showing in its last campaign in 1990 when it won a landslide victory in the constituent assembly polls.
Aung San Suu Kyi greets supporters as she travels across the constituency where she is standing as a candidate in Kawhmu (AFP/Getty Images)
Those results were ignored by the ruling military junta.
In its first campaign in 22 years, which follows a series of government reforms to lift censorship, release political prisoners and end media restrictions, the NLD has alleged intimidation and sabotage by officials and supporters of President Thein Sein.
Last week Ms Suu Kyi called on EU and other observer teams to investigate allegations of irregularities in the run up to today's elections. "I hope they will take into consideration the fact that the freeness and fairness of an election does not depend merely on the day of the polling itself but on what went before that day and I hope you will find out as much as possible about what's been taking place over the last couple of months," she said.
But according to EU official Malgorzata Wasilewska, her team had not been given sufficient access in time to carry out a full observation.
"The UN declaration on principles of observation means observation is a long term presence and analysis of the whole process not just election day.
The invitation is extremely welcome, a sign of a first step towards transparency and openness we're here because it's an interesting moment but not in a position to assess whether these elections are credible," she told The Daily Telegraph.
"But it is important to be here and people are saying it is very different to how elections were conducted in 2010." She inspected Rangoon's 90th Street polling station in Mingala Taungnyant constituency which had opened half an hour earlier than its official 6am start.
Voters wait in line to vote in a polling booth in a school in the rural remote constituency where Aung San Suu Kyi is standing for parliamentary by-elections (EPA)
Voters cast their votes in a calm and orderly atmosphere and party election agents were allowed to watch the proceedings. But observers noticed a number of apparent irregularities and questionable practices which they could not clarify.
Although ballot boxes were shielded with blue screens for privacy, they were sealed only with removable gaffer tape. Election officials said there were 1975 registered voters, but lists posted at the station showed only 1870. The polling station itself was in the private home of an unidentified donor.
They were also concerned that there was no system to identify those who had already voted to prevent multiple votes. "The only way to verify a person has not voted several times is to use [indelible] ink," said Ms Wasilewska.
But she stressed there was no way to establish the significance of initial concerns in the absence of a full, long-term observer mission. "There's no way of verifying what this means without a proper mission," she said.
Tin Maung Thann, a local observer from the Myanmar Egress policy group, said in the 2010 elections, which gave the governing Union Solidarity and Development Party a commanding majority, electors had no privacy when they cast their votes into a single ballot box. "Before people could see from behind. They can't now and that is key," he said.