Where is Chen Guangcheng?
As if the ongoing excitement around fallen Chongqing Communist Party boss WASN’T already enough, news arrived Friday that blind legal activist Chen Guangcheng — a prominent human-rights advocate confined to his home for a year and a half — has escaped.
Mr. Chen, who made waves several years ago with a campaign against forced abortions, spent more than four years in prison on charges of disturbing public order and had been subject to “soft detention” in his home village of Dongshigu in Shandong province since September 2010.
Repeated attempts to visit Mr. Chen by activists and others, including actor Christian Bale, have occasionally resulted in violent confrontations with men hired to guard the entrance to his village.
Chen Guangcheng was driven to Beijing on Sunday after evading his guards, according to He Peirong, his friend who says she traveled with him. Chen, 40, had prepared for his escape for months, He Peirong said, by lying in bed for prolonged periods so that the guards wouldn’t be suspicious if they didn’t see any activity from him for a long time. Once escaped, Chen asked He Peirong and a few other activists for help, according to He Peirong. They met him at a rendezvous point, and then drove him to Beijing and hid him in a safe house, she said.
In an interview Friday afternoon, Bob Fu, president of the U.S.-based Christian human rights group ChinaAid, confirmed that Mr. Chen escaped on April 22 and said the activist was now in Beijing in a “100% safe location.”
“I can’t say more as there might be some diplomatic issues,” added Mr. Fu, who said his group had acted as a “facilitator” in the escape, helping to brief the U.S. government and diplomats.
The Associated Press cites He Peirong, the activist mentioned in the CNN report above, as denying a report from Singapore-based Chinese-language newspaper Lianhe Zaobao that said Mr. Chen had entered the U.S. embassy in Beijing on Thursday night.
The U.S. embassy declined to comment on Friday. Asked about Mr. Chen’s escape at a regular press briefing China Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Weimin said he had “no information” about the case.
Attempts to reach Ms. He through her cell phone were unsuccessful. Mr. Fu said he was talking to Ms. He at 11 a.m. Beijing time when she told him public security agents had arrived at her door and hung up. He has not been able to reach her since, he said.
Meanwhile, the Durham, N.C., Chinese-language website Boxun has posted a video of Mr. Cheng, purportedly filmed after he fled, to its channel on YouTube:
“Dear Premier Wen Jiabao, with great difficulty, I’ve escaped,” the activist, clad in a black Nike jacket and black aviator sunglasses, says at the beginning of the video, proceeding from there to detail the conditions of his confinement, including beatings by local thugs.
“My mother, my wife, my child are still in their clutches,” he says, expressing fears that they may be subject to “mad revenge” now that he has left.
He goes on to say he thinks local authorities have “no intention of resolving” his case. “Those who make the decisions are afraid their crimes will be exposed,” he says. (CNN’s Steven Jiang has posted an English transcript to his personal blog here)
Mr. Chen’s case “highlights the yawning divide between the government’s often lofty rhetoric about rule of law and the far grimmer reality endured by people like Chen who challenge the status quo,” said Phelim Kine, senior Asia researcher at New York-based Human Rights Watch, in an emailed statement.
ChinaAid’s Mr. Fu said he had spoken with Mr. Chen after the escape, offering to help him leave China, but that Mr. Chen had refused.
Like China Real Time on Facebook for the latest updates.