Blow for Afghan President Hamid Karzai as MPs reject most of his cabinet nominees
The powerful warlord Ismail Khan, the sole female nominee and several close Karzai allies were among the cabinet picks voted down by lawmakers.
The justice, commerce, energy, economy, public health and communications portfolios are among those still open after parliamentarians delivered their embarrasing public slap in the face to the president, who was re-elected amid reports of vote rigging last year.
Allegations of rampant corruption, political nepotism and incompetence associated with the Karzai administration complicated US president Barack Obama's protracted decision over a troop surge for Afghanistan.
The president's standing took another major blow on Saturday. "Karzai was unsuccessful before the presidential election and he is unsuccessful after the election. His choice and his decision is not correct for parliament and it is not correct for the country," said Ahmad Shah Ahmadzai, a former prime minister. "The president should now resign, he must resign."
In parliament, the laborious voting lasted much of the day and ended with the rejection of more than two-thirds of Mr Karzai's nominees. Half of those he picked had served in his previous administration and some of them had been chosen again partly to satisfy US and Western desires to keep trusted hands in place.
Among those the president wanted to keep was Mr Khan, a warlord from Herat who had served as minister of water and power. But that raised many hackles and critics said the decision showed how far Mr Karzai was beholden to regional power-brokers at the expense of the interests of the country as a whole.
"I think, unfortunately, that the criteria were either ethnicity or bribery or money," lawmaker Fawzia Kufi said before the voting.
The rejection of the women's affairs minister was another embarrassing blow to Mr Karzai, who has pledged to place more women in high government posts in the traditionally male-dominated society.
Mr Karzai did not propose a nominee for foreign minister. He has asked incumbent Rangin Dadfar Spanta to stay in the post until after the Jan 28 international conference in London that is to discuss Afghanistan's future.
In another high-stakes political decision, Ali Najafi, the chief of Afghanistan's elections commission, the IEC, said that the country would press ahead with parliamentary elections in May despite widespread international concern that the electoral system needs serious reform before a vote can be held.
Mr Najafi told a news conference that the national vote will be held May 22.
However, he said Afghanistan needs about $50 million from the international community to meet the election's estimated budget of $120 million. It was not clear whether the vote would or could be held if donor countries don't provide the money.
In the wake of last August's heavily disputed presidential election, many critics have pushed Mr Karzai and his government to delay the parliamentary vote. The president has insisted that the constitution, which specifies the elections be held by May, must be observed.
A US Congressional delegation that met with Karzai in Kabul last week said it had warned the president that holding the election without first enacting substantive electoral reform could undermine support for American aid to the country.