As it happened: Gillard survives as challenge fizzles
Julia Gillard has declared Labor's leadership ructions "completely at an end" after being elected unopposed as leader following a farcical Caucus leadership spill.
Labor once again revealed its deep internal divisions as the spill, called for 4:30pm AEDT, fizzled out following former PM Kevin Rudd's announcement that he would not run.
The Prime Minister was duly re-elected unopposed and unanimously, along with her Deputy Wayne Swan.
The spill was called after a dramatic intervention from party elder Simon Crean, who demanded the leadership be put to a vote to end the "disunity" which he said was killing the party. 
Speaking after the Government withdrew its contentious media reform bills because they had failed to attract enough support in the House of Representatives, Mr Crean had called on Mr Rudd to show his hand and stand against the PM. 
"I don't want any more games, I'm sick to death of it, it's about time he stood up and instead of having his camp leak things, actually have the courage of his conviction and his belief," Mr Crean said. 
But just 10 minutes before the ballot, Mr Rudd said he would not dishonour his previous promises not to stand.
Look back at how the day unfolded using our live blog (All times AEDT):
7:30pm: That's where we leave today's live blog. If you'd like a more detailed wrap, check out a full summary of the day's extraordinary events from our chief political correspondent. You can follow more developments at the ABC News home page, or by watching ABC News 24. Here are the main players giving their take on the challenge that never was:
7:10pm: Leigh Sales is interviewing Simon Crean. Watch live on ABC News 24. Mr Crean says he is surprised that Kevin Rudd didn't challenge in the end.
Mr Crean says he has no regrets about bringing the tensions to a head today:
He finishes with a plea to the party, who he says are capable of putting their best foot forward and "inspiring a nation" again in the vein of the Hawke and Keating years.
7:06pm: Moments ago we received this statement from one of the Prime Minister's spokesmen:
6:50pm: Kevin Rudd backer Richard Marles has resigned from the Government's frontbench.
He served as parliamentary secretary for foreign affairs and Pacific island affairs.
6:28pm: Greens leader Christine Milne says the Labor Party is a complete shambles.
She says, however, that her party still wants to work with the Government.
6:16pm: The dramatic events of this afternoon have been described by the independent Member for New England, Tony Windsor, as sad to watch.
6.03pm: Defence Minister Stephen Smith says a number of people need to reconsider their positions after today.
Mr Smith said Joel Fitzgibbon, a known Rudd backer, has already flagged that he will consider his role as chief whip.
5:39pm: It's hard to say what the Labor Government has gained from today's events, if anything at all.
Despite declarations that this is over once and for all, Federal Labor has revealed its deep internal divisions once again.
Julia Gillard is still Prime Minister, but this is hardly likely to give Labor a lift in the polls.
On a day when crowds gathered for an apology to the victims of forced adoptions, and the day after the National Disability Insurance Scheme passed Parliament, valuable hours were devoted to this issue by MPs and the press corps.
5:32pm: Tony Abbott is responding to what he says is a "very big day". He says Andrew Wilkie, Rob Oakeshott, and Tony Windsor all voted with the Coalition in support of today's failed no confidence motion, and calls for the election date to be brought forward.
5:31pm: Here's video of Julia Gillard and Joel Fitzgibbon speaking after the spill.
5:16pm: Julia Gillard is delivering a brief statement now.
Wayne Swan echoes his boss's words, saying: "I think today's result does end these matters once and for all."
5:14pm: Lost in all the political drama has been today's official apology to those affected by forced adoptions:
Annabel Crabb says many Australians would be feeling disappointed the speech was overshadowed.
5:11pm: Chris Uhlmann declares that today's drama has been an "utter farce".
While for Annabel Crabb it's "been like a piece of performance art" conducted by "genuinely confused people".
4:54pm: Joel Fitzgibbon,whose comments yesterday set the hounds running, says he is reconsidering his position as the Government's Chief Whip.
4:45pm: Returning Officer Chris Hayes says no-one challenged Julia Gillard. That's it. Gillard and Swan elected unopposed.
4:43pm: As it stands, there is a leadership spill without a contender.
In a stunning development, Kevin Rudd has said he will not stand for the leadership in this afternoon's caucus ballot.
There's still the chance a third person will nominate.
But in every likelihood Returning Officer Chris Hayes will emerge within the next half hour or so, to report that the position of leader was thrown open, Julia Gillard was the only one to nominate and was therefore re-elected unopposed.
As far as the Deputy PM position goes, we know Simon Crean has said he will put his hand up against Wayne Swan. But without a "running mate" even that is now in doubt.
Or, to put it another way...
4:39pm: Insiders' Barrie Cassidy says Kevin Rudd waited until 11th hour to say he wouldn't challenge because he was waiting to see if he had numbers.
The ABC's Jonathan Green is live-blogging events here.
4:33pm: Here's video of Kevin Rudd dramatically ruling himself out of today's ballot.
4:30pm: The Caucus meeting is getting underway now. It's unclear if anyone will challenge Ms Gillard, who was flanked by a large cohort of supporters as she entered the room.
And another titbit - this is the first time in his parliamentary career that Simon Crean has been off the front bench.
4:26pm: Anthony Albanese says he believes Mr Rudd has made the "right decision in the party's interest".
Mr Albanese also says he will "never support a spill motion against a sitting Labor prime minister" and predicts Ms Gillard will still be PM after the Caucus meeting.
4:22pm: Here's what Rudd told reporters outside the Caucus room just now.
4:17pm: Here are the key videos since the spill was called:
There are reports Anthony Albanese is in Kevin Rudd's office. Mr Albanese was one of Rudd's supporters in the last challenge, but has since declared support for Gillard.
Here are the numbers as the ABC understands them - although it is still unclear if Kevin Rudd will stand:
3:43pm: The ABC's Barrie Cassidy hints that there will be no winners this afternoon:
3:41pm: The ABC has been told there are about 20 MPs in Kevin Rudd's office urging him to run in this afternoon's ballot.
ABC 7.30's political editor Chris Uhlmann tells ABC News24 that today's Labor crisis is a "foot soldiers' revolt" as opposed to the initial Rudd-Gillard spill which he called a "Generals' revolt":
3:14pm: 100 members of the Labor Caucus will vote in the leadership ballot at 4:30pm.
Two members - Bob Carr and Dick Adams - are overseas and will not be able to vote.
It's believed that in the event of a tied result, the winner will be decided by the toss of a coin.
We're working on a list of who's voting for you.
3:08pm: Labor MP Graham Perrett says he doesn't think Kevin Rudd will be throwing his hat in the ring in this afternoon's ballot:
2:56pm: Richmond MP Justine Elliot says she is "definitely" voting for Kevin Rudd.
2:53pm: ABC election analyst Antony Green says if the Labor leadership changes, the new leader is not bound to the September 14 election date.
The ABC's Lyndal Curtis says we still do not know if there will be a challenger in this afternoon's leadership ballot.
Julia Gillard responds to Tony Abbott calling a motion of no confidence in the Government:
2:20pm: "For your party's good, you should go. For our country's good, you should go. You should go," Mr Abbott wraps up.
"Let's have a new prime minister and a new government."
There's a Fairfax photo doing the rounds on Twitter of a beaming Kevin Rudd arriving for Question Time.
"A House that is divided against itself cannot stand," Mr Abbott says. "That is why standing orders must be suspended, because this cannot go on."
Some info: There has never been a successful motion of no confidence in the Government in the House of Representatives.
Tony Abbott is seeking leave for a no confidence motion. "This House has no confidence in the Prime Minister."
2:01pm: GILLARD SAYS THERE WILL BE A BALLOT FOR THE LEADERSHIP AT 4:30PM.
"In the meantime, take your best shot," she told the Opposition.
2:00pm: It's Question Time.... the Speaker kicks off with a fiery warning about taking photos.
1:55pm: The ABC understands the spill petition is circulating, with Ursula Stephens the first to sign.
1:53pm: The ABC's chief political correspondent Mark Simkin says the Coalition's tacticians are deep in talks:
1:51pm: Stephen Smith just walked into the PM's office.
1:50pm: Labor Senator Ursula Stephens responded to a message from a fake Kevin Rudd account that claimed he would be running...
1:42pm: If there is a leadership spill, it will be the third in just three years for the Labor government. Mr Rudd lost the last leadership challenge which he launched in February 2012.
1:40pm: Simon Crean's former chief of staff Simon Banks says Mr Crean is a "compromise" candidate in the deputy role.
"We don't yet know if Kevin Rudd has been convinced to stand.
"He would need to be convinced to stand to go against what he has said consistently since February last year.
"There may be some levels of confidence among his supporters that he stands. I don't know. You don't usually get these opportunities presented to you often if you want to be leader, and you tend to take them when you get them. These decisions have not been made yet."
1:30pm: Sam Dastyari has hit Twitter to deny ordering the NSW Right to turn on Gillard.
1:28pm: Question Time is on for 2:00pm
1:25pm: Simon Crean commenting on whether his actions will affect the current deal with the independent MPs:
When asked whether he had lost confidence in Wayne Swan and whether Anthony Albanese should be the one to serve as a deputy to Mr Rudd, Mr Crean replied: "It is a matter for Caucus."
1:20pm: Fairfax's Phil Coorey has tweeted that NSW Right boss Sam Dastyari has ordered the faction to unite against Julia Gillard.
1:16pm: Crean is still speaking: "There is no ticket between me and Kevin. Let's get that right. I am not saying I am only doing this if he nominates me as his deputy."
1:15pm: Simon Crean said the Prime Minister's reaction was to say that she would not be calling for a spill:
1:13pm: Crean says he has not spoken to Kevin Rudd in the last 48 hours.
1:09pm: Crean says he won't stand for the leadership, but will offer himself up as deputy.
1:05pm: "Kevin Rudd, in my view, has no alternative but to stand for the leadership. He can't continue to play the game that says he is reluctant or he has to be drafted."
1:00pm: Crean: "The party through the Government is in a stalemate position. Something needs to be done to break this deadlock."