Hundreds of protesters turn backs on Margaret Thatcher's coffin
Some stand in silence while others shout 'Tory scum' as funeral procession passes on way to St Paul's
Hundreds of protesters turned their backs on Margaret Thatcher's funeral procession as it passed through central London on Wednesday during a day of highly charged but peaceful demonstrations.
In the former mining community of Goldthorpe in South Yorkshire, an effigy of Thatcher was put in a mock-up coffin and carried to wasteland where it was set alight to cheers and cries of: "Scab, scab, scab."
Celebrations were held in former mining areas in the north-east of England and in South Wales. In Liverpool, the radical bookshop News from Nowhere said party packs – containing black balloons and party poppers with the politician's face on and bearing the legend: "Still hate Thatcher" – sold out in two days.
In Scotland, trade unionists and socialists were due to hold a rally on Wednesday evening to remember the "industries and communities who suffered" under her government".
In London, protest organisers had called for people to silently turn their back on Thatcher's coffin. But as it came into view at 10.45am, there were shouts of "What a waste of money" and "Tory scum". Similar shouts at other points on the route were drowned out by pro-Thatcher clapping.
Rebecca Lush Blum from Hampshire, who set up a Facebook group to organise the protest event on the route at Ludgate Circus, said she was pleased people had been allowed to voice anger at Thatcher's legacy.
"We have shown the world that not everyone in this country thinks Margaret Thatcher was a great thing for this country … today felt like an important moment in the battle over what her legacy is and what sort of country we want so I'm pleased our voice was heard."
Police had told Blum the protest could go ahead and by 9.30am about 100 people had gathered at the normally busy junction in central London. As the first ceremonial military band went past just before 10am, there were boos and chants from protesters. Thatcher supporters – including one man wearing a suit and Thatcher T-shirt on a balcony overlooking the crowd – clapped and cheered.
Numbers of protesters swelled and by the time the coffin went by, police at the scene estimated there were about 300 protesters. The atmosphere was tense, with military personnel gathered at the other side of the road, clapping and cheering.
Dave Winslow, 22, an anthropology student from Durham – who was holding a placard reading "Rest of us in Poverty" and wearing a T-shirt with the messages "Power to the people" and "Society does exist" – was one of those who wanted a silent protest.
"We want to maintain a dignified protest," he said. "It's counterproductive to catcall and sing Ding Dong! The Witch Is Dead. The message is that spending £10m on such a divisive figure in times of austerity, especially when austerity is being imposed on the poor, is wrong, especially when harm is being caused to the disabled and the NHS."
There was a big police presence with "liaison officers" mingling with the crowd and armed police guarding the barriers along the route. Surveillance officers took up positions on surrounding buildings.
Once the coffin had passed, some protesters were visibly moved. One man, who did not want to give his name, had tears in his eyes. He said: "She ruined my family's life. She took my dad's job, everything … I promised myself I would come here for this day years ago."
Julie Guest, who had been in Iraq in 1998, said she pledged she would come when she saw a six-year-old Iraqi boy die because sanctions had stopped him getting medical treatment.
"The consequences of her policies have spread a long way in this country and abroad and I said to myself when I saw that boy die that I would remember him when this day came."
The funeral procession passed within a few minutes and the crowd began to disperse. Police confirmed there were no arrests.
Blum, who had been besieged by media since an article about her planned protest appeared in the Guardian on Monday, said she was pleased and moved by what had happened.
"It's provocative to have a state funeral for such a controversial politician, and I wanted to remember and respect all those who suffered under Margaret Thatcher. I think we did that today."
A few miles south of St Paul's Cathedral, a group of 19- to 25-year-olds were discussing her legacy at Kids Company, a charity based in south London. Outside, the traffic was perhaps more modest than usual but otherwise it felt like a normal day. "If it was Tony Blair, it might mean more to people," said Amee, 20. Still, she said, we are living in the world Thatcher created. "Because of what she did, our benefits are dropping. Average working people can't afford to have a mortgage. Soon everything is going to belong to private companies. I look at my three-year-old and wonder how I'm going to put him through school."
"If I have any respect for her it's because she was a fierce leader," said Monique, 21. "She was decisive and stuck to her beliefs. Most politicians today are wishy-washy but she kept her word." Amee added: "She did a lot to affect the whole system and how it works. She is still in the system even though she is out of power; even though she is dead."