Italy needs new government to replace Enrico Letta's, says Matteo Renzi
Italy's centre-left leader, Matteo Renzi, has called for a new government to replace that of Enrico Letta, telling a meeting of their Democratic party (PD) that the eurozone's third-largest economy needs "a new phase" and "radical programme" to push through reforms.
In a speech before the party's 140-strong national committee, the 39-year-old mayor of Florence paid tribute to Letta's government, saying the meeting was not intended to put it "on trial". But, without directly proposing himself as the next prime minister, he outlined his belief in "the necessity and urgency of opening a new phase with a new executive".
While the option of new elections might appear tempting, he said, a vote under the existing rules risked doing nothing to fix the country's problems.
The other option – which has been dubbed la staffetta, or relay – was a "difficult choice" full of risk, but would be worthwhile were a new government to last until 2018 and carry out the necessary reforms, he said.
"We have to offer a way out of the quagmire with a radical programme and profound change," he said, adding that the party and the country were at a "crossroads".
The proposal has divided his supporters, many of whom are dismayed at the idea that the man who spoke of a "new politics" appears poised to carry out a very old-style political manoeuvre.
But Renzi defended the option, saying: "This is not a matter of a relay or a non-relay. A relay is when you go in the same direction and at the same speed, not when you are trying to change the speed."
He added: "Whoever goes into politics has to take risks sometimes."
The two Tuscan politicians have been engaged in an intense power struggle for days.
Letta, who on Wednesday night unveiled a new action plan for 2014 and resisted calls to resign, stayed away from the PD meeting, explaining he would wait for its outcome at Palazzo Chigi. Italy's president, Giorgio Napolitano, has said he expects the party to make it clear where it stands.