President Obama seeks to make 30 per cent cut in US carbon dioxide emissions by 2030
Under pressure to change ... Emissions spew out of a large stack at the coal-fired Morgantown Generating Station in Maryland. "The flexibility of our Clean Power Plan affords states the choices that lead them to a healthier future. Choices that level the playing field, and keep options on the table, not off," McCarthy said in remarks prepared for delivery on Monday. The plan has come under pre-emptive attack from business groups and many Republican lawmakers as well as Democrats from coal-heavy states like West Virginia. Even before its release, the regulation has prompted heavy lobbying from industry and environmental groups, and the ensuing battle promises to become, as the Natural Resources Defence Council climate director Peter Altman put it, “the Super Bowl of climate politics.” But the plan looked less restrictive than some had feared, with targets arguably easier to reach because carbon emissions had already fallen by about 10 percent by 2013 from the 2005 baseline level, partly due to retirement of coal plants in favour of cleaner-burning natural gas.
After failing to introduce large changes in emissions targets in his first term, President Obama has now directed the EPA to introduce cuts of up to 30 per cent in carbon dioxide emissions by 2030. The National Association of Manufacturers has argued that the plan will hurt American competitiveness. The plan gives states several ways to achieve their emission targets. Those include improving power plant heat rates; using more natural gas plants to replace coal plants; ramping up zero-carbon energy, such as solar; and increasing energy efficiency, said sources briefed on the proposal. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Administrator Gina McCarthy looks up after signing new emission guidelines. States also have an option to use measures such as carbon cap-and-trade systems as a way to meet their goals.
Share prices for major US coal producers like Arch Coal (ACI.N), Peabody Energy (BTU.N) and Alpha Natural Resources (ANR.N) were mixed on Monday but already near multi-year lows. Monday's rules cap months of outreach by the EPA and White House officials to an array of interests groups. The country's roughly 1000 power plants, which account for nearly 40 per cent of US carbon emissions, face limits on carbon pollution for the first time. Climate change is a legacy issue for Obama, who has struggled to make headway on foreign and domestic policy goals since his re-election.
But major hurdles remain. The EPA's rules are expected to stir legal challenges on whether the agency has overstepped its authority. A public comment period follows the rules' release. Last week the US Chamber of Commerce warned the rules could cost consumers $US289 billion ($312.40 billion) more for electricity through 2030 and crimp the economy by $US50 billion ($54.05 billion) a year. That assessment keyed off a more stringent proposal by the Natural Resources Defense Council, an influential environmental group. The NRDC had proposed cutting emissions by at least 30 per cent from a 2012 baseline by 2020. The National Association of Manufacturers also argued on Monday that the plan will hurt American competitiveness. McCarthy noted on Monday that the regulations could yield over $US90 billion ($97.29 billion) in climate and health benefits.
From a public health perspective, soot and smog reductions that would also be achieved through the plan would translate into a $US7 ($7.57) health benefit for ever dollar invested in the plan, she said. The EPA estimates that reducing exposure to particle pollution and ozone could prevent up to 150,000 asthma attacks in children and as many as 3300 heart attacks by 2030, among other impacts. The rules, when finalised, are expected to have an impact that extends far beyond the United States. The failure to pass "cap and trade" legislation in Obama's first term raised questions about how the United States would meet commitments the president made to reduce US greenhouse gas emissions roughly 17 per cent by 2020 compared to 2005 levels.
The new EPA caps are meant to answer those questions. They could also give Washington legitimacy in international talks next year to develop a framework for fighting climate change. The United States is eager for emerging industrial economies such as China and India to do more to reduce their emissions, too. "I fully expect action by the United States to spur others in taking concrete action," UN climate chief Christiana Figueres said in a statement on Sunday. Chinese and Indian negotiators have often argued that the United States needs to make a more significant emission reduction because of its historical contribution to climate change. Obama will hold a conference call on Monday with public health groups, hosted by the American Lung Association.
The regulations also could affect natural gas-fired power plants, which emit about half as many greenhouse gases as coal plants. EPA said that natural gas-fired combined cycle plants in the United States are 14 years old on average.