New Zealand Labour Party Elects New Leader After Election Defeat
New Zealand’s main opposition Labour Party elected its fourth leader in six years as it seeks to recover from an historic election defeat.
Andrew Little, 49, narrowly beat former deputy leader Grant Robertson for the top job after David Cunliffe resigned in the wake of Labour’s worst election result since 1922. Little, a lawyer who headed New Zealand’s largest private-sector union for 11 years, needed the support of Labour’s affiliated unions to win the leadership ballot.
Little must restore Labour’s share of the vote after it plummeted to 25 percent in the Sept. 20 national election, giving Prime Minister John Key’s ruling National Party a third term in office. Little indicated today that Labour will drop some of the policies that hampered it during the election campaign, such as its proposed capital gains tax, to try to win the next poll in 2017.
“We need to make sure that the policies we go into 2017 with are the policies that are New Zealanders’ priorities, and that they are clear and understood,” he told reporters in Wellington. “The most important task is to reach out to those hundreds of thousands of New Zealanders who used to vote for us but who no longer do.”
Little won the leadership in the third round of the ballot with 50.52 percent to 49.48 percent for Robertson, who would have been Labour’s first openly gay leader. The other two contenders, Nanaia Mahuta and acting leader David Parker, were eliminated in the first and second rounds.
Labour’s voting process allocates a 40 percent weighting to the caucus, which favored Robertson, and a 40 percent weighting to the wider party, which also voted more heavily for Robertson. It was Little’s strong support among affiliated unions, which have a 20 percent weighting in the ballot, that got him across the line.
“Our National Executive unanimously endorsed Andrew because of his experience, ability and dedication to the rights of working New Zealanders,” said Bill Newson, who succeeded Little as head of the Engineering, Printing and Manufacturing Union. “Now is time for the Labour Party and the wider labor movement to unite and get back into a strong position to hold the government to account and ultimately win in 2017.”