Tonga election: Strong turnout as voters dump half their incumbent MPs
Tongans have dumped half their members of parliament in a general election as the tiny Pacific island kingdom faces up to a grim economic outlook.
Official results released by the Tongan Electoral Commission show 12 of 17 people's representatives and one of nine nobles - members of the extended royal family - were voted out of office in the 26-seat parliament.
"I did not think there would be so many," deputy prime minister Saimiu Vaipulu said.
Tonga Broadcasting Commission journalist Fatai Fainga'a said the major parties again failed to secure a majority in the popular vote.
The people's representatives and nobles will soon elect a prime minister from among themselves, who will then select a cabinet.
The Asian Development Bank said the Tongan economy was estimated to have expanded by 1.5 per cent in the year to June - an improvement from 0.3 per cent in 2013 - as agriculture, tourism and trade lifted growth after Cyclone Ian devastated the country in January.
But the nation's official unemployment rate still stands at more than 13 per cent nationally and is considerably higher among under-21s, who make up half the population.
Mr Vaipulu said the economy and job creation, particularly for the young, would have to be addressed by the incoming parliament.
"I think the government should still concentrate on trying to develop the economy to create more jobs for youth and more opportunities," he said.
Social issues such as youth violence would be tackled "by creating more jobs", he added, saying plans were already underway.
The United Nations Development Program's Douglas Armour said there appeared to have been a strong voter turnout.
"Just looking up at the polling both there's a good turnout," he told the ABC's Pacific Beat.
"People here take their civic responsibility very seriously."
Mr Armour said Tonga was going through a "developmental stage" with its democracy.
"Tonga does have a democratic system, it has a fully functional legislative body, it has oversight from the society organisations, so yes there is a very strong democracy and growing, over time, tradition," he said.
"But it is one which is going through changes, it is one that's going through a developmental stage.
"It's not as advanced, as other countries, perhaps, but it is fully enthusiastic from our point of view and determined to get there."
Nine members of Tonga's 26 seat parliament are chosen by the country's nobility.
The other 17 seats are elected by the people.
Thursday's election was only the second in which Tongan commoners have been able to elect the majority of MPs.
Prior to the last election in 2010, the king held the power to appoint the government.
Although the 105 candidates in this week's vote included a record 16 women, all the elected MPs were male.
A record number of Tongans were also registered to vote in this year's poll.
Mr Armour said he believed this year's poll was more advanced than others with more polling stations and there was more awareness of the election in the community.
Local publisher Pesi Fonua said the election had been peaceful.
"The build up was very intense and a lot of activities, candidates campagining," he said.
"But today has been very quiet and people turned up for voting, very orderly, nothing unusual."