Abbott’s Coalition Loses Government in Victoria State Election
Prime Minister Tony Abbott’s Liberal-National coalition lost power in Victoria state, increasing pressure on the federal government that’s trailing in Australian polls amid budget spending cuts.
Labor leader Daniel Andrews claimed victory last night after the election in Australia’s second-most populous state. The coalition’s ousting marks the first time since 1955 a party has lost in Victoria after serving a single term.
“Labor will form a strong and stable majority government in Victoria,” Andrews, 42, said in his victory speech in Melbourne. “The people of Victoria have today said no to tired, negative politics.” Outgoing premier Denis Napthine, 62, conceded defeat.
Abbott’s government is under attack from Labor, which says its plans to reduce spending on schools and hospitals by A$80 billion ($68 billion) over the next decade and trim funding for the Australian Broadcasting Corp. amount to broken promises. Federal opposition leader Bill Shorten on Nov. 28 described the Victoria election as a “litmus test” for the coalition’s policies.
“It was a spectacularly, self-inflicted defeat by the Liberals,” said Nick Economou, a Melbourne-based professor at the Monash University School of Political and Social Inquiry. “Governing should have been easy, but instead they turned in on themselves and they’ve now carved a place for themselves in Victorian political history as the first one-term government since the 1950s.”
Victoria’s 3.8 million voters yesterday cast ballots in 1,784 voting centers distributed around the southeastern state, which has been hard hit by the decline of traditional industries such as manufacturing. The state’s unemployment rate was 6.8 percent in October, above the national average of 6.2 percent.
Andrews vowed to create 100,000 full-time jobs and provide A$1.3 billion in new funding for schools and training. His victory means Abbott’s coalition now holds power in five of the eight states and territories.
Australia’s economy grew 0.5 percent in the second quarter, less than half the pace of the prior three months, while the Australian dollar has dropped 8 percent against its U.S. counterpart since the end of July, making it the third-worst performer among the Group of 10 major currencies.
The latest federal Newspoll, conducted Nov. 14-16, put the coalition on 36 percent of the primary vote, down almost 10 percentage points from 15 months ago, compared with Labor’s 39 percent. Shorten led Abbott as preferred prime minister on 43 percent to 37 percent.
Shorten, who hails from Victoria, said Abbott’s absence from the campaign trail in the state showed he realized his “broken promises and lies” were damaging the coalition.
“They wanted a leader who would take orders from Victorians, not Tony Abbott,” Shorten told Labor supporters in Melbourne last night in a speech to introduce Andrews as the new premier. “Tony Abbott wouldn’t come to Victoria this election, so Victorians have gone to him with a clear message.”