Lawrence Springborg elected as new Queensland LNP leader, John-Paul Langbroek as deputy
Lawrence Springborg has been elected as leader of Queensland's Liberal National Party, with John-Paul Langbroek as deputy leader.
Caretaker premier Campbell Newman called the party room meeting after he lost his seat at last weekend's election and declared his political career over. Deputy leader Jeff Seeney stood down.
LNP MPs met at Parliament House in Brisbane on Saturday morning for the leadership ballot.
Mr Springborg was elected to Parliament in 1989 as the Member for Southern Downs as a 21-year-old and has attracted criticism as a "career politician".
He led the Opposition for the LNP to three election defeats in 2004, 2006 and 2009.
Mr Springborg was also deputy to John-Paul Langbroek in 2011 when Mr Newman made his bid to become the premier from outside of Queensland Parliament.
Mr Springborg later became health minister in the Newman government.
After the party room meeting he thanked his LNP colleagues for the trust they had placed in him and Mr Langbroek.
"We believe we have the right level of competence and experience to take our party forward in what are very interesting times in Queensland," he said.
"I think it's probably fair to say for those that have observed politics in Queensland over a long period of time that nothing should really ever surprise us with regards to those particular outcomes."
He said the party understood the people of Queensland were disappointed in certain aspects of the LNP government.
"We understand that the people of Queensland wanted us to be far more empathetic with the concerns they have," he said.
"We understand that the people of Queensland want us to know that as we have to make those particular decisions, which aren't always popular but sometimes we have to make them, that we actually have a proper consideration in a compassionate and real way about the impacts and the consequence of those decisions, as necessary as they may be.
"We're going to be making sure as we travel forward - whether it be hopefully in government or opposition - that we rebuild that faith and trust which the people of Queensland should invariably expect of their elected representatives."
Mr Langbroek, the Member for Surfers Paradise, was the Newman government's education minister.
He had a relatively quiet term in office, following a controversial stint as LNP leader in 2009.
At that time, Mr Langbroek was lambasted in the media for various gaffes and embarrassments, including the revelation that he carried a teddy bear at university, in the style of a character in the novel Brideshead Revisited.
In July 2014, he said he had no interest in returning to the leadership role.
On Saturday, Mr Langbroek said although he was "very proud" the LNP had all its seats returned on the Gold Coast, the LNP would be focused on all of Queensland.
"We want to work together to make sure that whether you're from the Gold Coast or north Queensland or Brisbane - wherever it is in Queensland, we have the commitment to be ministers to deliver services that Queenslanders expect," he said.
"It's that trust that we want to make sure Queenslanders can have in us in uncertain times to make sure we keep delivering for the citizens of Queensland.
"That's my commitment as deputy leader of the LNP."
Mr Springborg said Mr Newman led the LNP "through very, very difficult times".
"I think no-one should actually take away from the things that Campbell Newman actually achieved in government," he said.
"But the people of Queensland ... passed their judgment on our government and they said they would like to have a different direction in the future and I respect that.
"Anyone who actually stands up to put their hand up for public office regardless of what people might think or whatever the case may be, deserve recognition and acknowledgment for that.
"The people of Queensland made their judgment - Campbell actually accepts that, we all accept that, and we move now to a different stage of politics in this state."
With about 85 per cent of the vote counted following last Saturday's election, Labor appears closest to forming a minority government, with independent MP Peter Wellington declaring his support for the ALP on Thursday.
The Electoral Commission of Queensland (ECQ) said it should get a clearer picture of the election outcome by mid next week.
There are several seats in doubt - Ferny Grove, Lockyer, Mansfield, Maryborough, Mount Ommaney and Whitsunday.
On Wednesday, LNP state president Bruce McIver said a by-election in the Brisbane electorate of Ferny Grove would be the "most likely outcome" following revelations Palmer United Party candidate Mark Taverner was an undischarged bankrupt.
That ruled Mr Taverner ineligible from running for Parliament, leaving the ECQ to seek crown law advice on what to do next.