Shenzhen’s party chief Wang Rong appointed Guangdong’s CPPCC chairman
Shenzhen party secretary Wang Rong has been appointed chairman of the Guangdong Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, replacing Zhu Mingguo, who was removed from the position last month  for suspected corruption.
Wang, 56, was voted in unanimously by conference delegates at yesterday’s closing ceremony of the four-day annual plenum in Guangzhou.
Wang pledged to remain “clean and honest” and to adhere to party discipline at all times. “Here, I also hope delegates will take the lead to respect the rule of law … to protect [your] image,” Wang said.
Wang’s appointment technically is a promotion, though most political analysts say he has been sidelined as the position of CPPCC chairman has little influence and no real power.
Wang, a Jiangsu native, rose through the ranks in his home province as party chief of Wuxi and Suzhou before landing in Shenzhen in 2009.
Hours before the official announcement, Wang told reporters at the conference he hoped to improve livelihoods in the city “from a new starting point”, hinting at his next position.
Looking back at his work in Shenzhen in the past five years, Wang said the city had met several main economic goals and completed targets for the 12th Five-Year Plan, now in its final year, one year early.
“If Shenzhen is to get another party secretary or mayor, then the city will be just as successful because it is riding on the foundations and energy generated from 30 years of reform.
He described himself and Mayor Xu Qin as “the best partnership” who had been like “real brothers” over the years.
“[I] will continue to push for Shenzhen’s internationalisation and help improve people’s livelihood from a new starting point,”  he said.
Rumours of Wang’s appointment began circulating last month. Late on Monday, Wang was appointed a member of the provincial CPPCC, paving the way for him to take the job.
Mainland media has previously reported that the design had been completed, and would match the design on the Shanghai-Hong Kong stock connector scheme.
“Many people are wondering when the Shenzhen-Hong Kong Share Link will happen,” Xu said.
“We have carried out a lot of work to prepare for it and I believe it will come to fruition very soon all the relevant technical work and technology is in place and been granted central government’s approval,” Xu said.