He's in: Marco Rubio's presidential challenge
Miami (CNN)Sen. Marco Rubio cast himself as the forward-looking candidate to lead the nation toward a new American century when he announced his presidential bid Monday, framing the election as a "generational choice" for Americans.
"Grounded by the lessons of our history, but inspired by the promise of our future, I announce my candidacy for President of the United States of America," Rubio told supporters at Miami's Freedom Tower.
The 43-year-old freshman senator is the youngest contender in a rapidly-growing race for the presidency, and his speech Monday signaled he'll aim to turn his youth and relative inexperience into a central calling card of his campaign. That offers him a clear and immediate point of contrast with two of the top contenders in the race, both former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who became the first Democratic candidate with her launch on Sunday, and likely GOP contender Jeb Bush.
"Just yesterday, a leader from yesterday," he said, as the crowd erupted in boos, "began a campaign for President by promising to take us back to yesterday. But yesterday is over, and we are never going back."
Rubio's candidacy will also lean heavily on his personal story as the son of Cuban immigrants. In his speech, he told the story of his parents' struggles and said that today, the American Dream seems unattainable for many because "too many of our leaders and their ideas are stuck in the twentieth century."
"My candidacy might seem improbable to some watching from abroad," Rubio said. "In many countries, the highest office in the land is reserved for the rich and powerful. But I live in an exceptional country, I live in an exceptional country, where even the son of a bartender and a maid can have the same dreams and the same future as those who come from power and privilege."
Ortega, a Venezuelan-American who came to America just 11 years ago, said he saw Rubio's ability to win support from both the "Anglo and Hispanic worlds" as one of his major assets. And he was so impressed with Rubio's speech, he said, he'll be calling to sign up to volunteer for the campaign soon.
"Marco Rubio has a certain fluency, and ability to connect with voters, and this will be one of the first times a wider audience has seen it. When people who haven't seen Marco speak finally see Marco speak, they stand back and say, 'Whoa — what have I been missing?'" said Wilson.
His first test as an official candidate alongside other announced and prospective candidates will come this weekend, when he joins nearly the entire GOP field at the the Republican Leadership Summit. Prior to that, he'll stop in New York City for fundraisers on Thursday, and will spent Tuesday and Wednesday back in Washington focused on Senate business.
Rubio has eschewed the bomb-throwing of conservatives like Cruz and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, and the head-spinning vacillations of some of the party's more establishment-minded candidates in favor of what supporters see as a candid pragmatism. His career in politics — which began with a stint as West Miami city commissioner and found him ascending to House speaker before his surprise U.S. Senate win in 2010 — has been centered on that pragmatism, supporters say.
On same-sex marriage He was the first in the 2016 field to declare, without reservations, that parents "absolutely" should vaccinate their children. On same-sex marriage , he said if the Supreme Court rules it's constitutionally protected, "we have to abide" by that ruling. He repeatedly asserted that it was impossible to defund President Obama's immigration executive order by shutting down the Department of Homeland Security.
That strategy means he may not win any of the early nominating states that typically winnow down the field, but the senator and his advisers are banking on top-three finishes that keep him in the game until the flaws in the rest of the field are apparent and voters are looking for another option.
The potential advantages for Rubio in the Cuba issue were varied. It allowed Rubio to introduce himself to an entirely new audience of Americans, as the historic policy shift drew front-page headlines nationwide. It gave him an opportunity to emphasize his compelling personal narrative as the son of Cuban immigrants who left the country due to many of the same hardships imposed by the Castro regime that Cubans continue to experience today.
The freshman senator has been working since his early days in office to build the experience to make that case. He's taken 12 trips abroad since 2010 and co-sponsored more than a dozen bills on issues ranging from Russia's aggression against Ukraine to humanitarian crises in Haiti. He is a frequent and prominent critic of Obama's plan to tackle ISIS, and has slammed the Iran deal as insufficient to prevent the nation from gaining nuclear weapons.