China leaders face increased pressure for freedom of speech
The letter was released as the Communist Party's top leadership gathered in Beijing for its secretive annual meeting to discuss the country's future direction, including a new five-year economic plan for 2011-2015.
The latest open letter is part of renewed turbulent debate in China about whether the current regime of draconian censorship implemented by a ruling party can provide a sustainable future for China.
Earlier this week, following the award of the Nobel peace prize to the dissident Liu Xiaobo, the ruling Communist Party was further embarrassed when a group of 23 Party elders warned the Party would "die a natural death" if did not give people basic rights.
China's leadership has furiously rebuffed calls for reform, attacking the Nobel Prize committee for awarding the peace prize to "a criminal" and printing newspaper editorials accusing Western nations of waging an ideological war against China.
However the Party is facing pressure not just from Western democratic governments, but also from within, as the latest letter praised the Nobel committee and called for the immediate release of Mr Liu and all political prisoners in China.
"China should join the mainstream of civilised humanity by embracing universal values," the letter said, "Such is the only route to becoming a 'great nation' that is capable of playing a positive and responsible role on the world stage." The increasingly bold calls for reform in academic and dissident circles are not expected to have an immediate impact on the Party leadership.
Analysts will be watching to see if China's new five-year-plan contains measures to speed up the rebalancing of China's economy by stimulating domestic demand as China faces growing calls to revalue its currency and wean itself off its reliance on exports.
Political watchers will also be looking for signs that vice-president Xi Jinping, the heir-apparent to current Chinese president Hu Jintao, is still on track to take over the reins of power in 2013.
In a further indication of the pressure for reform that Mr Xi could face when he takes power, China's internet has seized on a blog post by Mr Xi's former doctoral supervisor arguing that the party's refusal to submit to any checks and balances is causing the "social decay" of China.
"Although we have established the framework of a market economy through the past three decades' reform, power is still the nexus of our society," Sun Liping, a sociology professor at Tsinghua University wrote in February, "Thus the foremost symptom of social decay is uncontrollable power. Corruption is just its outward manifestation."
Some activists and scholars have expressed hope that Mr Xi – the head of the so-called "fifth generation" of Communist leaders in China since 1949 – might lead a more reform-minded administration after the tightening of the Party's grip on society under the leadership of Hu Jintao.
However Li Datong, a former senior editor of the state-run China Youth Daily and one of the 100 signatories of the latest letter calling for democracy, said he felt there was little immediate prospect of change in China.
"I see no prospect of the current government accepting the need for reforms," Mr Li told The Daily Telegraph, "I think it is not possible for this generation [of leaders]. But we will have to see what will happen with the 5th generation."