General election 2015: Britain heading for hung parliament
Britain is heading for a second hung parliament in succession after the most drawn-out election campaign since the war appeared to be ending in near deadlock with Labour and the Conservatives tied at 35% each according to the preliminary results of the final Guardian/ICM campaign poll.
Ed Miliband’s party has pulled back three points on ICM’s previous campaign poll, published nine days ago, with the Conservatives remaining unchanged. Previous ICM surveys had reported Conservative leads, ranging from six to two points.
Labour’s recovery appears to have been helped by a last-week squeeze at the political fringe: Ukip and the Greens both slip back two points, to 11% and 3% respectively.
The Liberal Democrats are unchanged on 9%, a buoyant Scottish National party climbs one to a Britain-wide score of 5%. Plaid Cymru are on 1%, and other minor parties are also on 1%.
The Conservatives are still predicting that their dominant message warning against a Miliband government dependent on the votes of the Scottish nationalists will sway the many undecided voters as they enter the polling booths on Thursday.
But on the basis of the ICM survey so far, the long-promised swing back to the Conservatives in the final 72 hours before the election, the central pillar of the strategy organised by Lynton Crosby, David Cameron’s campaign manager, has not materialised.
The survey is ICM’s preliminary prediction poll, with a larger than normal sample size, and will be updated on polling day after additional interviews being conducted into Wednesday night are fed into the data.
The Conservatives are hopeful that the swing to Labour in the key English marginals will be blunted, pointing to the experience of 1992 and previous opinion polls that have over-estimated the Labour share of the vote.
When the Guardian’s poll projection, an average of all the polls made public, is updated to take account of the new ICM data, it places both the Conservatives and Labour on 273 seats – neither anywhere near the 326 required for an absolute majority.
But the huge anti-Tory SNP bloc of 52 gives Miliband the stronger position in the battle to negotiate for control of No 10. The cabinet secretary, Sir Jeremy Heywood, is on hand to prepare for talks, but will not press Cameron to leave Downing Streeet, since it will be his right as prime minister to decide whether to test the opinion of the Commons on a Queen’s Speech.
Behind the scenes all three parties have been preparing for coalition talks. Labour is hoping on Friday to be able to declare that Cameron cannot construct a Commons majority and should resign, challenging Nick Clegg to abandon any thought of a second coalition with Cameron.
Labour sources suggest the closer Cameron is to 280 seats, as opposed to 290, the harder it will be for him to mount a political argument around the illegitimacy of a minority Labour government.
Labour has made plans to make a big appeal to the Liberal Democrats to join it in building a new coalition to take the country from austerity, but in reality all will turn on the precise distribution of seats between the principal parties, something that in turn depends on only tens of thousands of votes distributed in around 30 marginals.
In a final election rally, Ed Miliband insisted the energy in the campaign lay with Labour saying that the Conservative party had run a negative campaign with nothing to say to working people, nothing to offer for the future, just desperate tactics.
David Cameron ended a 36-hour cross-country tour of key marginals and held a final rally at Hetherington Livestock Mart in Carlisle, where he asked for more time to build a better Britain and said the election would define a generation.
ICM’s final survey does not only ask voters about their own voting intention for Thursday but also about their expectations as to what the rest of the country will do.
Voters’ own predictions are less favourable to Labour than the poll headlines suggest. When asked to predict the poll scores, on average, respondents expect Labour to secure only 32%, three points less than the 35% they expect for the Tories.
ICM pressed voters on the government they would prefer. The single most popular choice – picked by 25% – was a Conservative overall majority, followed by a Labour majority, which 23% preferred.
A Conservative-led administration in which the Tories have to strike deals with others is the choice of 22%, while a Labour-led government that had to strike deals was picked by only 19%, a possible sign of success for the Conservative warnings about a SNP-backed “coalition of chaos” installing Miliband in Downing Street.
The public also envisages the Lib Dems outperforming most polls by achieving 14%, and Ukip underperforming somewhat, with 10%.
Martin Boon of ICM Unlimited, who pioneered this “wisdom of crowds” approach, explained: “Most people will have an inkling about how friends and relatives will vote, and in aggregate these impressions may count for more than individuals’ sometimes less-than-clear sense of their own intentions. That’s the ‘wisdom’ theory, and when we put it to the test in 2010 it proved a more accurate gauge of the result than the conventional approach.”
But it is ICM’s headline prediction that has been the more intensely anticipated, because its final survey has got closer than the rest of the polling pack to the final result in three of the last four general elections. In the raw data, Labour is actually ahead – by 37% to the Conservatives’ 33%. But this is misleading, because Labour-leaners are less committed to turning out.
A strikingly high 73% of all voters now say they will definitely cast a ballot, suggesting that the closely fought fight may push turnout up above the 65% level of 2010. But turnout rises further to 85% among Conservatives, and to 79% for Labour supporters. Adjust for this differential, and Labour’s initial advantage shrinks to a single point – 35% against the Tories’ 34%.
ICM then applies its final adjustment – allocating a chunk of those voters who won’t reveal their 2015 plans back to the party they say they backed last time, something which experience suggests many of them will do.
This final tweak pulls the Conservatives up to draw level with Labour, and comes close to pushing the Tories into the lead. “These results are on such a knife edge,” explains Boon, “that assuming that just one or two extra former Conservative or Lib Dem voters will ‘go home’ on Thursday could have dragged Labour down to 34%, and given the Tories the narrowest of leads.”