Labour leadership: Jeremy Corbyn storms to victory with nearly 60 per cent of first preference vote
Leftwinger Jeremy Corbyn made history today by storming to victory with nearly 60 per cent of the vote in the Labour leadership contest.
Mr Corbyn rocked the political world by taking the top job despite starting the contest as the 200/1 outsider.
He took 59.5 per cent of the 422,664 votes cast after just a single round of voting. Andy Burnham won 19pc of the vote, followed by Yvette Cooper with 17pc and Liz Kendall on 4.5pc.
The Islington North MP, 66, told the Queen Elizabeth II Conference Centre in his acceptance speech: “We don’t have to be unequal; it doesn’t have to be unfair; poverty isn’t inevitable. Things can, and they will, change.”
It follows a 100-day campaign which sparked “Corbynmania” and saw hundreds of young people flocking to see the Islington North MP speak.
But his monumental win potentially leaves Labour facing a new challenge given a string of senior figures appear unwilling to serve in his shadow cabinet, while shadow health minister Jamie Reed MP has already quit the front bench.
The MP of some 30 years, who has never been a minister, shadow minister or even a select committee chair and has rebelled against his party more than 500 times, had initially been dismissed as a token leftwing candidate.
Mr Corbyn only made the final shortlist after Labour MPs who admitted they did not support him, nominated him simply to “widen the debate”.
But as campaign hustings began it became clear that party supporters were deserting his centre-ground rivals for the leftwinger’s banner.
New rules implemented by Ed Miliband which allowed a flood of non-party members and union affiliates to vote are also thought to have been instrumental to his success.
After several weeks of polling predicting his win, Blairite candidate Liz Kendall appeared to admit defeat on Thursday.
She went on to warn, as have others from her wing of the party, that his policies would likely mean Labour’s defeat at the next election.
Mr Corbyn, a republican, is now Leader of Her Majesty’s Official Opposition and his first job will be to appoint a shadow cabinet.  
But top Labour figures including Ms Kendall, Yvette Cooper, Tristram Hunt, Chuka Umunna, Mary Creagh, Chris Leslie, Ivan Lewis and Emma Reynolds are all said to be unwilling to serve.
Meanwhile Mr Corbyn’s campaign manager John McDonnell, Angela Eagle and Owen Smith have been tipped for jobs.
Tom Watson MP was revealed as the party's new deputy leader after three rounds of voting earlier this morning.