Paris attacks: Mass rally on eve of climate change talks called off by police amid terror fears
A Paris rally to demand strong action on climate change has been cancelled due to concerns about terrorism.
The demonstration was planned for Paris on November 29, the eve of the United Nations conference in the city at which hundreds of nations will try to negotiate an agreement to prevent climate change from getting out of control.
In the wake of last week's terrorist attacks that killed 129 people, French police have revoked permission for the march to proceed.
Organisers were hoping as many as 200,000 people would have marched.
Environmental campaigners were disheartened by the decision. However they have vowed to find creative ways of drawing attention to the talks.
French Campaigner for 350.org Nicolas Haeringer said: "While this makes it difficult to go forward with our original plans, we will still find a way for people in Paris to make the call for climate justice heard, and we encourage everyone around the world to join a global climate march and raise their voices louder than ever."
Similar marches are planned for cities around the world, with local campaigners confirming the Australian marches would go on.
Official delegates to the climate conference have not been deterred by the terrorism. Environment Minister Greg Hunt said failing to attend the upcoming talks would "hand the terrorists a victory."
"As the Prime Minister has already indicated, we will absolutely be attending the climate change talks in Paris as planned," he said.
"This is the very moment for global action on climate and global resolve on countering terrorism."
The ABC spoke to several people scheduled to attend the talks. All expressed their solidarity with the French people and their determination that the talks should not be derailed.
Professor Frank Jotzo, director of the Australian National University's Centre for Climate Economics and Policy, said he was not aware of anyone altering their arrangements for Paris.
"With security that tight there's a very low risk of anything dangerous happening. It's more going to be a problem for the logistics of the meeting in terms of getting people in and out of the place."
He said that more heads of government may in fact attend, in a show of solidarity with the French government.
However he did note that a cancellation of related events would risk some elements of the meeting being compromised.
"The major effect of that is that it diminishes the value of the event in terms of its aspect as a trade fair. It doesn't have a major effect on the negotiations as such."
"Potential curtailment of civil society activities could have a negative effect on the necessary political pressure for increasing the level of ambition and quality of the agreement overall," he said.
But he said, contrary to expectations, that he had been inundated with emails from colleagues from around the world emphasising their commitment to attend the meeting.
"I think people working on this issue from around the world, irrespective of their different religious beliefs, share a common belief in the potential of humanity to work together to solve problems," he said.
In the wake of the attacks, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull told Insiders on Sunday that: "At this time, the French government is expecting that the conference of the parties - the climate change conference - will go ahead and I have no doubt that it will go ahead. And if it goes ahead, which I'm sure it will, I will certainly be there, as indeed will other ministers."
A spokesperson for Foreign Minister Julie Bishop, who is in the Philippines at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting, said her plans to be at the summit had also not changed.
Nick Nuttall, spokesperson for the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which will host the talks, confirmed "COP21 will go ahead as planned."
"Security is always tight at UN climate conferences, but understandably will be tighter in Paris," he said.