Indiana-bound Syrian refugees redirected to Connecticut
Connecticut Gov. Dannel P. Malloy welcomed to his state Wednesday a family of Syrian refugees diverted from Indiana because of security concerns raised by Indiana Gov. Mike Pence..
"It is the right thing, the humane thing to do," Malloy told reporters. "Quite frankly, if you believe in God, it’s the morally correct thing to do."
The family of three fled from Syria to Jordan when their 5-year-old son was less than 1, and is the first family to be redirected after 26 governors objected this week to accepting Syrian refugees, according to The New York Times.
Indiana has also asked that a Syrian family set to arrive in Indianapolis Dec. 10 instead be sent to a state that’s willing to accept them.
"It's heartbreaking. It's a really sad week for Hoosiers," Carleen Miller, executive director of Exodus Refugee Immigration, told The Indianapolis Star Wednesday. "I don't think this represents Hoosiers as we've been overwhelmed with calls from supportive people wanting to help Syrian refugees. We need to have a welcoming message for refugees in this state."
The state Division of Family Resources sent a letter Tuesday to Exodus and to Catholic Charities Indianapolis asking that all Syrian arrivals be “suspended or redirected to another state that is willing to accept Syrian placements until assurances that proper security measures are in place have been provided by the federal government.”
"We find the letter to be extremely disappointing because this is a family that has been waiting for three years because the security process is so intense," said Heidi Smith, director of refugee services for Catholic Charities Indianapolis."People are calling to offer their time. People are calling to offer their homes."
At least one of the terrorists who attacked Paris on Friday reportedly entered Europe through Greece amid a group of Syrian refugees.
Pence was among 34 governors who participated in a call with Obama administration officials Tuesday night about the refugee screening process. But Pence still has concerns, according to his spokesman.
"Obama's own FBI director said in congressional testimony that there are gaps in intelligence on refugees," spokesman Matt Lloyd said Tuesday night.
FBI Director James B. Comey testified last month there was “less than excellent” vetting in the past on some Iraqi refugees, including two later arrested on terrorism-related charges. Comey said screening has improved dramatically since then. But the data available to check refugees from Syria is not as extensive as the information on Iraq, he added.
"We will work day and night to make sure that if there's information available about somebody, we have surfaced it," Comey told the House Judiciary Committee. “I can’t sit here and offer anybody an absolute assurance that there’s no risk associated with this.”
Malloy said he has "no security concerns at all" about placing the refugees in Connecticut. He wanted to welcome them personally, he said, "to have them understand that not every American, and not every American governor, is the same."
All but one of the governors who have raised objections to Syrian refugees are Republican, and President Obama said Wednesday there’s a lot of “political posturing” that will be a “potent recruitment tool” for terrorists. He particularly complained about New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie’s comment that he would not accept even young orphans from Syria, and comments from other GOP presidential candidates that Syrian refugees be limited to Christians.
“These are the same folks oftentimes who suggest that they’re so tough that just talking to (Russian President Vladimir) Putin or staring down ISIL, or using some additional rhetoric somehow is going to solve the problems out there,” Obama said during a news conference in the Philippines. “But apparently, they’re scared of widows and orphans coming into the United States of America as part of our tradition of compassion.”
If opponents have a specific suggestion how to improve the screening of refugees, they should make it, Obama said.
"But that’s not really what’s been going on," he said.
Miller said having to find the Syrian family a new place to go at the last minute was extremely difficult, but it was made possible with help from Integrated Refugee and Immigrant Services in New Haven, which also coordinates resettlement operations there with Church World Service.
"We didn't want them to be caught up in all this after so long," Miller told the Star. "We just really wanted to help them and make them feel welcome."
While nonprofit organizations handle the resettlement, the state receives money from the federal government for employment training, English language classes, and case management services for refugees. The state also administers benefits such as Medicaid, cash assistance and food stamps.
Whether the state can legally deny such services to Syrian refugees would depend on state law and the terms of the contract between Indiana and the federal government, according to Stephen Legomsky, a Washington University of St. Louis law professor and former chief counsel of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services in the Obama administration.
Still, Legomsky said, even if Pence’s order is consistent with both state law and its federal contract, singling out Syrian refuges “is most likely a constitutional violation” of equal protection guarantees and “the exclusivity of the federal power to set immigration policy.”
About 40 Syrian refugees have been resettled in Indiana since 2010, in Indianapolis and Carmel, according to the State Department.
The Syrian community created a fund to help refugees resettle and has furniture and other supplies ready for the next family, said Ghiath Halwani, a dentist from Fishers, Ind., who came to the state from Syria in 1994.
“We supply them with furniture. We supply them with groceries. We take them shopping when they come in. We have helped other families with purchasing cars,” Halwani said. “We help them at the beginning ... but they work extremely hard.”
Halwani said he hopes Pence will reconsider his decision
“We’re in business. We’re in dentistry. We’re in medicine. And we pay a lot of taxes,” Halwani said of the Syrians in Indiana. “Not to consult with us or get our feedback, it’s kind of disappointing to us.”