Donald Trump, Hillary Clinton win big; Jeb Bush exits
(CNN)Donald Trump did more than win his second easy victory in consecutive presidential primaries in South Carolina on Saturday.
He advanced his takeover of the Republican Party. He proved that he can dominate a race in the Deep South. He vanquished the dynasty that ruled the GOP establishment for decades as Jeb Bush dropped his White House bid.
And in the process, Trump left no doubt that he is the GOP's national front-runner and has the most credible path to capture the party's nomination.
In Nevada's Democratic caucuses, meanwhile, Hillary Clinton deployed an intricately built organizational machine to register a much needed and stabilizing victory over Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, slowing her rival's surge following his stunning rout in the New Hampshire primary.
Her victory, and the looming Democratic South Carolina primary next week in which she is a favorite, doesn't mean the end for the more liberal Sanders, against whom she seems fated to fight in long war of attrition. But it was Clinton's best night for weeks in a crisis-scarred campaign and indicated her firewall of minority voters is still intact and raises the chances that she will eventually claim the nomination — and head on to a possible battle for the ages between her own establishment political dynasty and Trump.
At 11:30 p.m. ET with 99% of the vote counted in the Republican primary, Trump was in the lead at 32.5%, with Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz in an effective tie on 22.5% and 22.3% respectively. Bush trailed in fourth at 7.9% just ahead of Ohio Gov. John Kasich and former neurosurgeon Ben Carson.
Trump now looks even more formidable as he enters the 13 Super Tuesday states — once he has navigated the Nevada GOP caucuses Tuesday — with contests looming in places like Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia and Texas where he polls consistently well.
He summed up his own hardball campaign strategy as he addressed his supporters, reflecting that even for someone who styles himself as the ultimate tough guy, running for president is a hard business.
Another factor in Trump's favor: The opposition to him remains split. The bitter fracas between Rubio and Cruz ended with each of the young pretenders to the next generation of conservative leadership taking nearly a quarter of the electorate.
A jubilant Rubio bounced back after his disastrous performance in New Hampshire to proclaim that the GOP race was now a three-man affair. His campaign expects to pick up disenfranchised Bush supporters and believes it will now start to emerge as the only genuine alternative to Trump.
"If it is God's will that I should serve as the 45th president ... history will say that on this night in South Carolina, we took the first step forward in the beginning of a new American century," Rubio said, delivering what amounted to a victory speech despite finishing well behind Trump — just as he had after his third-place spot in the Iowa caucuses.
But he did not leave without a repudiation of the kind of politics that Trump has introduced into the Republican Party and which is so alien from that practiced by his own family for decades.
"I firmly believe the American people must entrust this office to someone who understands that whoever holds it is a servant, not the master, someone who will commit to that service with honor and decency."