EU, US Advise Postponing Macedonia Elections
Macedonia is not ready for fair elections on April 24, the EU and US said on Sunday, advising a postponement of the pre-term polls that are intended to end the country’s political crisis.
US ambassador Jess Baily outlined the joint assessment in a letter delivered to the Macedonian interim Prime Minister Emil Dimitriev on Sunday evening, mentioning June 5 as a possible alternative election date.
The letter says that although some progress has been made, "at this stage the necessary conditions for organizing credible elections on April 24 are not in place."
The joint assessment points out concerns regarding a credible clean-up of the electoral roll, including field checks, a still non-existent agreement on media reforms that would allow objective and unbiased reporting, as well as insufficient measures to separate state and political party activities.
"We are also concerned at initial reports of pressure and intimidation of voters and others," the letter says.
Urging all political players to stay committed to crisis accord brokered by the EU last summer, the assessment presented by the US Ambassador in front of the government building recommends holding elections at the next earliest possible date.
"We understand that the party leaders have mentioned 5 June as a possible alternative. Serious efforts by all stakeholders are now required to ensure the conditions conducive to a credible electoral process in which all citizens and parties should freely participate," it says.
The joint EU and US assessment is expected to influence the decision on whether to pursue an April 24 election date or postpone polls until all reform priorities envisaged in the EU-brokered crisis accord are met.
However, the EU and US’s views are not binding on the Macedonian authorities.
Just hours before the ambassadors revealed their assessments, the leaders of the four main political parties were summoned to extraordinary talks, unofficially to discuss possible postponement of the elections to June 5. All attended except the recently resigned Prime Minister and VMRO DPMNE party leader Nikola Gruevski.
Meanwhile, on Sunday, the ruling VMRO DPMNE party at a press conference reiterated its stance that there is "not a single credible argument" for postponement of the election date.
The party also said it is stopping all cooperation with the EU mediator in the talks between government and opposition, Peter Vanhoutte, because it has been offended by his posts on Twitter.
The opposition Social Democrats, SDSM on the other hand keep insisting that the date is not as important as the implementation of the agreed reforms, which is overdue.
"There is great interest in fair and democratic elections at which people will be able to make decisions based on their opinion and at which all past pressures on them would be eliminated," Oliver Spasovski from the SDSM told a press conference.
On January 29, Orav and Baily said that more work needed to be done before Macedonia held elections in April, announcing the now published assessment on the state of the reforms.
They made their move after the ruling parties in January unilaterally pushed ahead with April 24 election date - in spite of concern that the opposition might boycott the polls if the promised reforms remained unfulfilled.
This week, the EU-brokered talks in Skopje on media reforms were moving slowly and ended without a deal between the parties.
Another key point in the crisis accord, the clean-up of the electoral roll that many observers say is unusually large and may contain many fake voters, remains a problem. Uncertainty persists over the quality of the clean-up operation and the tight timeframe.
The political crisis in Macedonia escalated last February, when the opposition started releasing batches of covertly recorded tapes, which it said showed that Gruevski was behind the illegal surveillance of some 20,000 people, including ministers.
The opposition insists that the tapes contain incriminating evidence against many senior officials, including proof of high-level corruption, the government’s grip on the judiciary, prosecution, businesses and media, politically-motivated arrests and imprisonments, electoral violations and even an attempted cover-up of a murder of a man by a police officer.
Gruevski, who has held power since 2006, and who resigned last month as part of the crisis accord, says the tapes were “fabricated” by unnamed foreign intelligence services and given to the opposition to destabilize the country.