Libyan presidential council members reach Tripoli defying warnings
Members including new unity government PM designate Fayez al-Sarraj arrive by boat in face of opposition from hardliners
Members of Libya’s presidential council have reached Tripoli, defying opposition attempts to keep them out of the city as they prepare the ground for a UN-backed unity government whose ministers they nominated.
Seven members of the council, including Fayez al-Sarraj, its head and the new government’s prime minister designate, arrived by boat from Tunisia at Tripoli’s Abusita naval base amid tight security on Wednesday.
A separate self-declared government, based in Tripoli, and armed groups that back it have warned the council and the unity government in recent days not to travel to the capital.
Tripoli’s airspace was closed for several hours on Sunday and Monday, a move the council claimed was designed to prevent it from reaching Libya.
The unity government emerged from a UN-mediated deal signed in December aimed at ending the country’s political impasse, resolving its armed conflict and tackling a growing threat from Islamic State.
Western powers have recognised it as Libya’s sole legitimate government but it has faced continuing opposition from hardliners in both of divided Libya’s competing parliaments: the eastern House of Representatives and the rival General National Congress in Tripoli.
Since 2014 Libya has had two competing pairs of parliaments and governments, both backed by loose alliances of armed brigades. The government that has been in Tripoli was brought to power by armed factions that won a battle for control of the capital in 2014.
Tripoli, home to many armed factions, has seen sporadic clashes in the past few days. Early on Wednesday, loud explosions followed by heavy gunfire were heard over the city.
Before its arrival, the council said it had negotiated a security plan with police and military forces in Tripoli, and with some armed groups and has called for an immediate transfer of power, though both the Tripoli and eastern-based governments oppose this.