Bernie Sanders On Green Party Ticket? Jill Stein Offers To Make Way For Vermont Senator’s Presidential Bid
At a time when Americans are demanding an alternative to the two main presidential candidates, the Green party’s probable presidential candidate has offered Bernie Sanders a chance to continue his bid for the White House.
Jill Stein is expected to be endorsed at the party’s August convention in Houston, with 5 percent of the likely voters supporting her, according to a recent Reuters/Ipsos poll. The Guardian reported her as saying that “overwhelming” numbers of Sanders supporters would rather vote for the Greens than Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton.
“I’ve invited Bernie to sit down explore collaboration — everything is on the table,” she said in the interview. “If he saw that you can’t have a revolutionary campaign in a counter-revolutionary party, he’d be welcomed to the Green party. He could lead the ticket and build a political movement,” Stein added, offering to step aside.
As Stein insisted that her presidential bid was capable of reaching the required 15 percent in national polling that would enable her to stand alongside Clinton and Republican nominee Donald Trump in televised election debates, she said she had made the offer to Sanders over email at the end of the primary season. However, she had not received a response.
The move comes days before Sanders is expected to endorse Clinton’s presidential bid at a campaign event at New Hampshire Tuesday, the New York Times reported Thursday.
“If he continues to declare his full faith in the Democratic Party, it will leave many of his supporters very disappointed,” she said. “That political movement is going to go on – it isn’t going to bury itself in the graveyard alongside Hillary Clinton.”
The former Massachusetts doctor-turned-environmental activist is aligned with Sanders' aim to make college education free, even going a step ahead to cancel all existing student debt through quantitative easing. She stands for raising the federal minimum wage to $15 an hour and for the country to run on renewable energy by 2030, Reuters reported.