Emails Released by WikiLeaks Appear to Show DNC Trying to Aid Hillary Clinton
Just days before the Democratic National Convention, Wikileaks has released emails from top DNC officials that appear to show the inner workings of the Democratic Party and what seems to be them attempting to aid the Hillary Clinton campaign during the primaries.
Several of the emails released indicate that the officials, including Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz, grew increasingly agitated with Clinton's rival, Bernie Sanders, and his campaign as the primary season advanced, in one instance even floating bringing up Sanders' religion to try and minimize his support.
“It might may [sic] no difference, but for KY and WA can we get someone to ask his belief,” Brad Marshall, CFO of DNC, wrote in an email on May 5, 2016. “Does he believe in God. He had skated on saying he has a Jewish heritage. I read he is an atheist. This could make several points difference with my peeps. My southern baptist peeps woudl draw a big difference between a Jew and an atheist.”
Amy Dacey, CEO of the DNC, subsequently responded “AMEN,” according to the emails.
During the primary battle, Sanders and his supporters accused both the party and Wasserman Schultz of putting their thumb on the scale for Clinton and these emails may indicate support for those allegations.
Sanders called for Wasserman Schultz to step down, and in an April 24 email she received with an article detailing Sanders talking about the DNC being unfair to his campaign, the chairwoman responded, “Spoken like someone who has never been a member of the Democratic Party and has no understanding of what we do.”
After the Nevada Democratic Convention, where things got out-of-hand over a delegate fight, Wasserman Schultz called Sanders campaign manager Jeff Weaver a “damn liar.” In another instance, she referred to him as an “a--," according to the emails.
The DNC did not respond to requests for comment. The Clinton campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Sanders campaign manager Jeff Weaver told ABC News he was reviewing the documents.
The leak exploded on social media with Sanders supporters expressing anger and frustration that the emails appeared to suggest the party was colluding with the Clinton campaign and plotting against the senator. Some even called on Sanders to revoke his endorsement of the presumptive Democratic nominee.
Mary Alice Parks, Ryan Struyk, John Kruzel, and Noah Fitzgerel contributed to this report.