First vote at Dixville Notch, New Hampshire goes badly
AND they’re off! Kind of.
Voting has begun in the 2016 US Presidential election and it’s not been the smoothest of starts.
Due to an anomaly in the voting rules in New Hampshire, towns with a population of fewer than 100 can begin voting at midnight, rather than waiting until the morning.
Tradition dictates that Dixville Notch is the first to exercise their democratic right.
So seven of the good people of the town, close to the Canadian border, patiently lined up to vote.
It didn’t exactly go to plan.
Live on TV across the world, they flubbed it.
The voter and returning officer both held the voting slip tight, a few centimetres above the ballot box, as the seconds slipped by to midnight. There were two hands to ensure it didn’t fall in to the box early.
But when the clock ticked over to Tuesday, the simple task of releasing the slip fell in a heap.
Despite the ballot box being directly below them, and having more than a minute to survey the right trajectory to get the paper in the slot, they failed.
The paper refused to go in, then just fell on top of the ballot box as onlookers groaned.
“They had one job,” laughed the CNN presenter. “One job”.
Eventually, as panic mounted, the returning officer took matters into his own hand, ripped the slip from the voter, and shoved it in himself.
If you want to get a job done right, it seems, do it yourself.
Despite the debacle, Hillary Clinton will be pleased with the result. According to the votes cast in this one town in this swing state, four voted for her with just two for rival Donald Trump.
Libertarian candidate Gary Johnson won one vote, and there was a write-in vote for Mitt Romney, the losing Republican presidential candidate in 2012. Now that the eight residents have voted the booth has closed.
Two in two other New Hampshire locations, Hart’s Location and Millsfield, also opened just after midnight on Tuesday and closed as soon as everyone had voted. These die-hard voters are proud to have the first word on the big vote.
While Clinton won more votes in Dixville and Hart’s Location, Trump was the overwhelming favourite in Millsfield, with a 16-4 edge.
Under New Hampshire state law, communities with fewer than 100 voters can get permission to open their polls at midnight and close them as soon as all registered voters have cast their ballots.
The main polling booths open in the American’s north east at 6am.