Italy PM Matteo Renzi heading for heavy referendum defeat, according to projections
Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi looks to have suffered a heavy defeat in a referendum over his plan to reform the constitution, according to exit polls and early projections.
The first projection based on the actual vote count, done by the Piepoli Institute/IPR for state broadcaster RAI, estimated those voting Yes to back the reform at 39-43 per cent, compared with 57-61 per cent for No.
The projection pointed to an even wider defeat for Mr Renzi than was suggested by three exit polls published immediately after polls closed.
The Italian Prime Minister has said he would resign if Italians rejected his plan to reduce the role of the Upper House Senate and claw back powers from regional authorities.
The exit polls have just been released and it is bad news for Matteo Renzi, the Prime Minister, who put his career on the line for this referendum.The polls are indicating he's lost his bid to reform the Senate but also this popularity vote that became about him. Certainly the Prime Minister has said he would quit if this vote went down. I think the pressure is certainly going to be on him to follow through with that promise. We already have seen the Euro sliding in the last 15 minutes because of these exit polls. The Italian banks have been fragile. Also, Italy is a founding member of the Eurozone. It is a solid country that has helped these other leaders sort of fight this anti-establishment push, and everyone who was campaigning on the No side are the kinds of group we have been talking about ever since Brexit and Donald Trump — the anti-establishment populist movements — so they have just been given a massive boost in Italy if these exit polls come through to fruition with the actual vote counting.
Mr Renzi is due to address the nation around 10:00am AEDT.
An exit poll by the Piepoli Institute/IPR for state television station RAI, estimated those voting Yes to back the reform at 42-46 per cent, compared with 54-58 per cent for No.
Two other polls — by Tecne for privately owned TV channel Mediaset and by EMG Acqua for La 7 — gave No a similar lead of at least 10 points.
Opposition parties are already calling on the Prime Minister to resign.
The parliamentary leader of former prime minister Silvio Berlusconi's centre-right Forza Italia (Go Italy!) party, Renato Brunetta, said Mr Renzi must step down.
"Renzi is going to go and with him the powerful lobbies who were also defeated," he said.
Matteo Salvini, the head of the rightist Northern League party, said Mr Renzi should resign "in the coming minutes" and called for early elections.