Homeland Security Suspends Implementation of President Trump's Travel Ban
Another airline, Egyptair, agreed: "There is no stopping any passenger if they have a visa," Egyptair's manager for flights to New York, Hossam Hussein, told NBC by phone. He said people from any nation could travel to the United States.
Lufthansa, too, said passengers previously blocked were now free to fly.
The reinstating of visas was met with relief at airports.
Amir Rashidi, 55, of Seattle, said his niece had flown into Boston on Saturday afternoon from Iran. Despite holding a green card, she was previously barred from entering the United States.
Rashidi said he heard from an attorney that Lufthansa was agreeing to board passengers with immigrant visas, and he contacted his niece, Mahsa Fazmali, to buy a ticket. She scrambled to board the next plane.
"She is happy and we’re very thankful," Rashidi said after hearing she landed in Boston safely.
Early Saturday, the International Air Transport Association sent a note to all airlines confirming that the ban, for the moment, was completely inoperative. Visas that were rescinded have now been reinstated, the note said. And business was back to the way it was before Trump issued his executive order.
"It is as if the Executive Order never existed,” the note said.
The Department of Homeland Security issued a statement saying it had "suspended any and all actions" regarding the affected sections of the executive order. "DHS personnel will resume inspection of travelers in accordance with standard policy and procedure."
The statement, however, warned that the Department of Justice intended to file an emergency legal action to overturn the stay.
Trump himself expressed his dismay at the court ruling in a series of tweets on Saturday morning, saying "the opinion of this so-called judge, which essentially takes law-enforcement away from our country, is ridiculous and will be overturned!"
Affected travelers, meanwhile, rushed to find ways to fly back into the United States with the change in rules — worried it wouldn't last.
“I heard about the judge’s ruling and I immediately got on a plane to Frankfurt (in Germany) to see if we got a connecting flight to Boston,” said Saira Rafiei who is Iranian and heard about the news while she was in Tehran.
NBC News spoke to her as she waited for a plane in Frankfurt.
"The Constitution prevailed today," Ferguson said in a statement. "No one is above the law — not even the President."
The restraining order will be in effect until Robart considers a legal challenge filed by the U.S. attorney general, Ferguson’s office said.
The White House press secretary said the administration would seek an emergency stay at the earliest possible time, and initially called the judge's action an "outrageous order." An updated statement issued a short time later dropped the term "outrageous."
"The president’s order is intended to protect the homeland and he has the constitutional authority and responsibility to protect the American people," both statements said.
The executive order, and its swift and seemingly unplanned implementation, had created chaos in airports around the U.S. with people detained and families separated.
Among those reported temporarily detained were an Iraqi refugee who worked with the U.S. government, green card holders, students and professors. Protests erupted at several large airports across the country after Trump signed the order.