Labor Secretary Nominee Andy Puzder Withdraws Nomination
Andy Puzder, President Donald Trump's nominee for labor secretary, withdrew his nomination on Wednesday amid growing questions about his business record and past personal issues, which drew scrutiny from senators on both sides of the aisle.
Puzder, the head of CKE Restaurants, which owns Hardee's and Carl's Jr., came under harsh criticism from Democrats and liberal groups for his opposition to raising the minimum wage, previous controversial comments and the racy ads his properties have used to promote the fast-food chains.
Personal issues also complicated the nomination. A 27-year-old video from "The Oprah Winfrey Show" surfaced in which his ex-wife made domestic abuse allegations. The Oprah Winfrey Network released the video, and the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions provided several viewings for committee members.
But it was Republicans who toppled Puzder. On the day before his confirmation hearing was expected to take place, more Republicans withheld support, saying that they’d like to wait until they hear from him in the hearing.
"After careful consideration and discussions with my family, I am withdrawing my nomination for Secretary of Labor. I am honored to have been considered by President Donald Trump to lead the Department of Labor and put America’s workers and businesses back on a path to sustainable prosperity," Puzder said in a statement posted on his website.
Puzder is the first of Trump's cabinet nominees to withdraw his nomination as his passage in the Senate became more tenuous.
Senior administration officials say the demise of Puzder’s nomination became clear over a period of days. "We saw the erosion of the support" in the Senate, an official said.
Advisers say they do not believe the president specifically told Puzder to withdraw. It was described as more subtle than that, with the White House and its nominee seeing the lack of votes to support him. "We know how to count," said an official.
Puzder came under fire from Democrats concerned about his labor practices as CEO of a company that hires mostly low-wage workers and growing concern among Republicans because of his checkered personal past and his hiring of an undocumented worker in his home.
"This is a nominee, who probably is best suited, in terms of experience, knowing what to do at the Department of Labor and how to get the yoke of federal regulations off of everybody. But obviously we’ll bring up one or two concerns,” said Sen. Pat Roberts, R-Kansas, a member of the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee with oversight of his confirmation. “I’d like to support him, but I want to go through the hearing."