Surge to Vic Coalition could be blessing for Labor
The 2010 Victorian election began on Melbourne Cup day surrounded by horse racing metaphors, and perhaps it should end that way too.
It's often said the position of a horse around the last bend means nothing, so long as its nose crosses the finish line first.
And like a stallion known for its strong final sprint, the Coalition has trailed Labor in all credible opinion polls for months - until now.
Four separate polls over the past 24 hours point to either a narrow Coalition victory, or a dead heat with both major parties receiving 50 per cent of the two-party vote.
While the gap in each poll is within that survey's particular margin for error, their consistency gives weight to the results.
The upside for the Coalition is obvious. It could win.
If the anti-Labor swing is uniform, it might pick up the 13 extra seats required to end 11 years of Labor rule.
How these poll results benefit Labor may not be clear initially, but there is a silver lining.
Like many long-term government seeking re-election, the ALP has been trying to combat the dreaded 'expectation factor'.
That is, the assumption among voters that Labor will win the election, and it's therefore safe to register a protest vote without risking a change of government.
Much of the swing to Labor in Victoria's 1999 state election (which tore down the seemingly unassailable Liberal premier, Jeff Kennett), is attributed to this phenomenon.
If traditional Labor voters had been planning to vote Green or Coalition to make a point, the past day's polls may give them pause.
This may result in a small amount of support 'coming home' to Labor. Possibly even enough for the ALP to be re-elected, albeit with a substantially reduced majority.
That being said, both parties would obviously rather be playing down expectations of a thumping victory than playing mind-games ahead of a tight result.
But it seems neither side has that luxury today.
Ryan Sheales is the ABC's Victorian Political Reporter. You can follow his election tweets through @ryansheales.