#ZumaMustFall campaign to hold National Day of Action
Opposition parties are planning to step up their campaign to have President Jacob Zuma removed from office with a National Day of Action on Wednesday.
The parties — the African Christian Democratic Party‚ African People’s Convention‚ Congress of the People‚ Democratic Alliance‚ Economic Freedom Fighters‚ Inkatha Freedom Party and the United Democratic Movement – will march to the Union Buildings on Wednesday to demand that Zuma step down.
A number of events, marches and pickets aimed at pressuring President Jacob Zuma to quit have been planned across the country. 
The march will start from Church Square in the capital at noon.
The parties said on Saturday that Zuma’s careless Cabinet reshuffle of four Finance Ministers in three years has plunged the country into “junk status”.
“International ratings agencies have downgraded South Africa and this will lead to high interest rates levied on home‚ car and student loans‚ to high food prices and to a bigger fiscal debt‚” they said.
A journalist for Gupta-owned television news channel African News Network 7 had water poured over her by anti-Zuma marchers wearing Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) T-shirts at the Union Buildings in Pretoria. 
They also charged that Zuma had used an “unsubstantiated and bogus intelligence report” to remove a competent Minister and Deputy Minister of Finance‚ and replaced them with under-experienced yes-men. This meant he used state security agencies to fight political battles‚ they asserted.
“Zuma’s Cabinet reshuffle was not in the best interests of the country in that it protected and rewarded incompetent ministers who have rendered state institutions into disarray like Faith Muthambi (SABC) and Bathabile Dlamini (social grants redistribution)‚” the parties added.
Protesters chant 'Zuma must go' outside Gupta compoundAbout 300 people congregated outside the Gupta family compound in Saxonwold‚ Johannesburg‚ at noon on Friday as part of “Black Friday” protests countrywide calling for President Jacob Zuma to leave as president of the country. 
They reminded the country that the Constitutional Court had found that Zuma had “acted illegally‚ unlawfully and failed to uphold‚ defend‚ and respect the Constitution in that he disregarded the Public Protector’s remedial action on the Nkandla corruption”.
“Because this is a violation of the Constitution and his oath of office‚ Jacob Zuma is not eligible to be President of South Africa under a Constitutional democracy and Constitutional supremacy.”
Tens of thousands of South Africans took to the streets countrywide on Friday to demand that Zuma step down as president.