Jakarta election set to go ahead amid high tension as religion enters political sphere
Weaving your way through the small alleyways of the Tambora slum in West Jakarta is quite the experience.
It is dark, damp and full of life.
At every turn comes a new sight, a new smell, a new sound.
The slum is one of the most densely populated areas in the world with an incredible 260,000 people living within 5 square kilometres. There are no high rise buildings in sight.
"The people here have been living in the area for generations," local man Hasbuna told the ABC.
Local woman Risma has called the slum home for 20 years.
"I don't really have a problem living here," she said as she pokes her head out of a small darkened room.
"It is a comfortable place to live. Even though we are living in a densely populated area, we are comfortable, we have a high tolerance here."
On Wednesday the residents of Tambora will be among the more than 7 million Jakartans eligible to cast a ballot in the election for Governor.
"What the current government is lacking at the moment is that they don't pay enough attention to the small people," Risma said.
The poll is the second round of voting in a bitterly fought campaign for Jakarta's top job — a position that is seen as a stepping stone to the presidency.
The incumbent Christian Governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama or "Ahok", who is been on trial for blasphemy throughout the campaign, will come up against a Muslim and a former education minister, Anies Baswedan.
Agus Yudhyono, the son of the former president Susilo Bambang Yudhyono, was knocked out in the first round of voting in February.
"It seems the gap between the two is narrowing," political analyst Djayadi Hanan said of Ahok and Anies during an interview with the ABC.
"I think the difference between the two is about 2 per cent, even less so it would be too close to call."
On the weekend, a survey by polling firm Indikator, found Ahok surging to 47 per cent compared to 48 per cent for Anies Baswedan with the remainder undecided.
This election has been undeniably fought heavily on religious grounds.
Being a Christian and ethnic Chinese, Ahok is from a double minority. Ultra conservative Islamic groups that led mass protests against him last year argue the Koran states that Muslims cannot vote for non-Muslim leaders.
Islamic cleric Ahmad Ishomuddin is one of the few Muslim figureheads who has spoken out against the blasphemy charges against Ahok.
He appeared during the trial in the North Jakarta District Court to argue the Governor had not intentionally insulted Islam when he referenced the Koran during the campaign.
He has since received death threats.
"They want to behead me, they want to kill me," he said.
"These people want to unite everyone within an Islamic state, they want a state based on Sharia law.
"Their main aim is to disintegrate this country, to cause chaos."
Ahmad Ishomuddin was suspended from his position with the powerful clerical body the Ulema Council (MUI) after speaking out.
Ahok faces up to five years in prison if found guilty and on Thursday the prosecutors will outline their sentencing demand before the court.
Dr Hanan said it was hard to predict what would unfold after the poll, but further unrest was unavoidable.
"If Ahok wins and is not in jail there will be the highest potential for instability," Dr Hanan said.
"If Ahok loses and isn't jailed there is still a potential for instability but it is not that high.
"If Ahok wins and he is in jail the potential for instability is also still there."
Another scenario is that Ahok loses the poll and is jailed, leading to a possibility of protests led by his supporters.
Security will be tight across the capital as Jakartans head to the polls, with one police officer and one solider stationed at each of the 13,000 polling stations to ensure voters can vote freely without intimidation.
Jakarta police succeeded in having the Governor's blasphemy trial delayed until after Wednesday's election amid fears it could heighten tensions. A verdict is likely to come in late May.
Ahok is liked in part for his anti-corruption stance and measures he has taken to improve infrastructure in the chaotic Indonesian capital.
Along with his predecessor and now President Joko Widodo, he has dismantled 12 slums across the city and relocated residents into high rise buildings.
But for the residents of the Tambora slum, the fear of being moved from their homes is the reason they will not vote for him.
"They're all comfortable living here," Hasbanu said of his fellow slum dwellers.
"Even though they're living like this."