Ex-CIA Chief: 'Interactions' Between Trump Campaign, Russia
At the same time Coats was testifying, former CIA Director John Brennan appeared before the House Intelligence Committee and said he believes Russia "brazenly" interfered in last year's presidential election and that he knew of contacts between Trump associates and Russian officials.
"I encountered and am aware of information and intelligence that revealed contacts and interactions between Russian officials and U.S. persons involved in the Trump campaign," Brennan told lawmakers.
He added that he is not sure whether "collusion existed" between the campaign and Moscow, but the interactions were enough that he believed the matter warranted an FBI investigation.
"It raised questions in my mind about whether Russia was able to gain the cooperation of those individuals," Brennan said.
The ex-CIA head warned that Moscow often tries to influence Americans, sometimes unwittingly, to act on Russia's behalf. Brennan said he contacted the Russian intelligence service last August to warn them against meddling in the U.S. election, an allegation they denied.
The interference, Brennan said, was aimed at both helping Trump and discrediting Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton, whom the Russians thought would likely win.
“They clearly had a more favorable view toward Mr. Trump and actions they were taking were trying to increase his prospects, even though they probably thought they were not that great," Brennan said. He added that Russian efforts to undercut Clinton would likely have continued into her presidency had she been victorious.
Brennan's testimony is the first time he publicly commented on concerns about the relationship between the Trump campaign and Russia, though he declined to name or describe the role of the Trump associates.
The comments came one day after lawyers for Trump's former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn informed the Senate Intelligence Committee that he would not cooperate with a subpoena for records of communications related to Russia. Flynn misled White House officials, including Vice President Mike Pence, about his conversations with Russia's ambassador to the United States after Trump's election victory, which led to his dismissal.