Photos show Christie lounging at N.J. state beach closed due to government shutdown
New Jersey Governor Chris Christie was photographed lounging at a deserted state-owned beach on Sunday — a beach that has been closed to all other New Jerseyans amid a government shutdown that Christie ordered Friday.
The photos, which were posted to NJ Advance Media’s NJ.com, showed Christie and his family hanging out at the Island Beach State Park on Sunday afternoon before Christie appeared in Trenton for a press conference on the shutdown.
Christie on Friday ordered the shutdown of nonessential services — including state parks — amid a stalemate over whether to include legislation affecting the state’s largest health insurer in the budget. (Christie’s administration placed the photo of Democratic Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto — whom it’s blaming for the shutdown — on signs announcing the parks are closed.)
The shutdown took effect Saturday, shuttering parks and other public sites and disrupting ferry service to Liberty and Ellis islands.
Also closed was Island Beach State Park, where the state owns a residence that the governor can use.
Christie said earlier this week that he and his family were planning to be there for the Fourth of July holiday. (He had amended that Friday to say he would stay in Trenton this weekend if government remained shut down, but that his family would still go.)
Asked Saturday if it was fair for his family to be able to use the park while others couldn’t, Christie was defiant.
‘‘The governor has a residence at Island Beach,’’ he said. ‘‘Others don’t. That’s the way it goes. Run for governor and you can have the residence.’’
During a press conference in Trenton later Sunday, Christie was reportedly asked if he got any sun that day. The governor replied that he hadn’t.
As the photos came to light, a Christie spokesman stood by Christie’s statement, saying, “He did not get any sun. He had a baseball hat on,” according to NJ.com.
In what appears to be an unfortunate choice of words on Christie’s part, the governor also posted a video tweet Sunday evening about the budget impasse accompanied by the phrase, “I’m not the person who has drawn a line [in] the sand here.”
The photos — and Christie’s statement about the governor’s residence — had some people pretty upset with him.