Secret ballot no confidence vote decides Jacob Zuma's fate
Alexandra Township, South Africa (CNN)Simpiwe Madau wears his loyalty on his sleeve, strolling down First Avenue in a faded black shirt bearing the message: "I am ANC."
And, in a way, he is. Like his father before him, Madau is a mobilizer for South Africa's ruling ANC party here in Alexandra, a wedge of informal settlements, government housing, and dusty industry in north Johannesburg.
During elections, he cajoles people on his shack-filled street to vote for the party. On off years, he acts as a kind of informal community liaison.
Madau and thousands like him are the dependable foot soldiers of the party, pointing to its achievements like providing housing, water, and government grants to the residents of Alexandra.
But these are strange times for the party of Nelson Mandela. And lately, the ANC is a hard sell. Nowadays, all everybody wants to talk about is Jacob Zuma.
"It's all about Zuma," says Madau. "If he still loves this organization and if he still loves the country, then he should do the honorable thing and step down for the good of the country."
had acted unconstitutionally In 2016, South Africa's top court ruled that Zuma had acted unconstitutionally when he used $15 million in public funds to upgrade his private home, and ordered him to repay some of the money.
On Tuesday, lawmakers from the opposition Democratic Alliance (DA), will lead a no confidence motion against him. If they can secure a simple majority, Zuma and his entire cabinet will be forced to resign.
DA leader Mmusi Maimane says the time has come to challenge the President: "I think there is a collection of South Africans from all walks that are now standing together when you start to get rid of Zuma."
For the motion to succeed, at least 60 ANC MPs will have to turn their backs on Zuma and join forces with the opposition.
already stood accused of having questionable links with the Guptas Zuma and his closest supporters already stood accused of having questionable links with the Guptas -- a wealthy expat Indian family with vast business interests in South Africa -- after an official report by the former public protector, an anti-corruption watchdog, found evidence of possible government corruption and recommended an official inquiry.
AmaBhungane, the non-profit group that exposed the emails "There are real concerns that the president and those closest to him have undermined those institutions, that they have captured those institutions and they have effectively paralyzed them so that they are too scared to act," said Susan Comrie, an investigative journalist with AmaBhungane, the non-profit group that exposed the emails
Zuma has denied a corrupt relationship with the Guptas from the beginning; he called for the emails' veracity to be investigated by an inquiry, but has yet to launch one.
ANC politicians are already looking to a future without Zuma. The party will meet in December to choose his successor. Many in the ANC would rather dictate their own future than be led by opposition groups.
But for Madau in Alexandra, the equation is simpler. He says the ANC must choose between what is good for South Africa, and what is good for the president.
This story has been updated to correct the year that the Constitutional Court ordered Zuma to repay public funds over house improvements, and the amount he was ordered to pay.