Alan Johnson resigns as shadow chancellor
Alan Johnson resigned as shadow chancellor this evening for "personal reasons" after a difficult debut in which he struggled to master basic details of economic policy.
In a statement issued at 5pm, the former home secretary said that he needed to resign to concentrate on his family.
Ed Miliband, the Labour leader who said he accepted Johnson's resignation "with great regret", conducted a swift reshuffle in which:
• Ed Balls, who was passed over for the shadow chancellorship after a disagreement with Miliband over tacking the fiscal deficit, was immediately replaced to succeed Johnson.
• Yvette Cooper moves from her post as shadow foreign secretary to succeed her husband, Ed Balls, as shadow home secretary.
• Douglas Alexander moves from his post as shadow work and pensions secretary to succeed Cooper as shadow foreign secretary.
• Liam Byrne moves from his post as shadow cabinet office minister to succeed Alexander as shadow work and pensions secretary.
• Tessa Jowell keeps her post as shadow Olympics minister but also succeeds Byrne in the shadow cabinet office role.
In his statement, Johnson said: "I have decided to resign from the shadow cabinet for personal reasons to do with my family. I have found it difficult to cope with these personal issues in my private life while carrying out an important frontbench role. I am grateful to Ed Miliband for giving me the opportunity to serve as shadow chancellor of the exchequer. He is proving to be a formidable leader of the Labour party and has shown me nothing but support and kindness. My time in parliament will now be dedicated to serving my constituents and supporting the Labour party. I will make no further comment about this matter."
Johnson's resignation follows a difficult debut in which he was mocked for failing to know the national insurance rate. He had joked on his appointment that he would have to use an economics primer.
The appointment of Balls will mark a sharper Labour position on tackling the fiscal deficit. Balls was passed over the post in October because he believed that Miliband's position on deficit – to endorse Alistair Darling's plan to halve it over four years – was too fast. In a speech at Bloomberg in August, during the Labour leadership contest, Balls called for a slower deficit reduction plan to protect the recovery and promote growth.
Miliband said: "It is with great regret that I have accepted the resignation of Alan Johnson. As shadow chancellor and a politician who held five cabinet positions, Alan showed real leadership on issues that mattered to families across our country, warning of the dangers posed by the government's gamble on growth and jobs, promoting educational opportunity and delivering neighbourhood policing.
"Ed Balls is an outstanding economist and is hugely qualified to take our economic message to the country. In Yvette, Douglas, Liam and Tessa, we have a team which combines extensive experience in government and determination in opposition.
"I am proud that Labour has a strong, confident shadow cabinet that will expose the mistakes of this Conservative-led government. Together we will put the economy at the forefront of our argument as we work hard to regain the trust of the British people."
Balls said: "It is a great honour to be appointed to this post, and to succeed my friend and colleague Alan Johnson whose commitment to social justice and service to the Labour party is second to none.
"Over the past few months, Alan and Ed have set out a clear direction on economic policy and challenged the Conservative-led government's false claim that our investment in schools, hospitals and police, rather than the global financial crisis, caused the deficit.
"Our task ahead is to take on George Osborne and David Cameron's decision to cut too far and too fast, recklessly putting jobs and growth at risk. We will hold them to account for the decisions they have taken, from raising VAT to scrapping the Future Jobs Fund and Education Maintenance Allowances.
"We will set out to the public that there is an alternative: a fair economy which puts jobs and growth first. I look forward to taking on and winning this argument."