Protests in Egypt and unrest in Middle East – as it happened
That's about it for tonight. Here's a summary of the day's events. We'll have more on major developments on the guardian.co.uk homepage.
• Tens of thousands of anti-government protesters have clashed with police in Cairo and other cities in the largest demonstration in Egypt in a generation. Demonstrators want an end to the authoritarian president Hosni Mubarak's near 30 years of power.
• Three people have been killed in the protests. Reports say two protesters were killed in Suez, while a police officer died after being hit by a rock in Cairo. An Egyptian official said one protester died of respiratory problems after inhaling tear gas, while another was hit by a rock.
• Waves of protesters filled Cairo's central Tahrir Square, vowing to remain in place until the government fell, however police used tear gas and rubber bullets to clear the area at around 1am. Protesters fled to side streets and bridges across the river Nile, some pledging to continue protesting on Wednesday.
• The Egyptian government has reportedly blocked Twitter – which protester used to coordinate movements – and shut down mobile phone and internet networks. Elsewhere unconfirmed reports suggest Mubarak's son, Gamal Mubarak – who is unpopular in Egypt – has fled to the UK with other family members.
Tim Marshall, who is reporting in Egypt for Sky News, tweets:
@ITwitius Cairo Protestors split up and chased towards bridges and side streets. Sirens everywhere. Occasional tear gas still being fired.
My colleague Jack Shenker is still on the ground in Cairo, but reports that his phone access has been blocked, as has internet access in many areas. Here's his latest file from the Egyptian capital:
As midnight approaches in Cairo thousands of protesters are still occupying the Tahrir Square, vowing to remain in place until the government falls. News has reached Egyptians here of deaths in Suez and the capital, as well as unconfirmed reports that Gamal Mubarak – the president's wildly unpopular son and presumed heir apparent – has fled to London, and they appear more determined than ever to hold their ground. "We will stay here all night, all week if necessary," said Youssef Hisham, a 25 year old filmmaker. "There are too many people on the streets for the police to charge – if they did, it would be a massacre. I came here today not as the representative of any political party, but simply in the name of Egypt. We have liberated the heart of the country, and Mubarak now knows that his people want him gone." As fresh waves of protesters broke through police cordons to join the throng in Tahrir, a festival atmosphere took hold – groups were cheered as they arrived carrying blankets and food, and demonstrators pooled money together to buy water and other supplies. "The atmosphere is simply amazing – everyone is so friendly, there's no anger, no harassment, just solidarity and remarkable energy," added Hisham. Drums were banged and fires started as night moved in; having established their lines, hundreds of security forces stayed put and kept their distance, although alarmingly police snipers were seen to be taking up position on nearby buildings. "They are waiting for numbers to dwindle, and then they will switch off the street lights and charge," warned Ahmed Salah, a veteran activist. "We must hold Tahrir through the night and tomorrow, so that every corner of Egypt can take us as an inspiration and rise up in revolt," claimed Salah. "It's a matter of life and death now – what happens over the next 24 hours will be vital to the history of this country. It's a very emotional moment for me." Pamphlets widely distributed amongst protesters declared that 'the spark of intifada' had been launched in Egypt. "We have started an uprising with the will of the people, the people who have suffered for thirty years under oppression, injustice and poverty," read the Arabic-language texts. "Egyptians have proven today that they are capable of taking freedom by force and destroying despotism." They went on to call for the immediate removal of President Mubarak and his government, and urged Egyptians nationwide to begin a wave of strikes, sit-ins and demonstrations across the country until these demands were met. "Long live the struggle of the Egyptian people," the pamphlets ended.
The We are all Khaled Said Facebook group which I linked to earlier is reporting that the two civilians killed are Suliman Saber Ali and Mustafa Reda.
This is unconfirmed as yet.
An Egyptian interior ministry official has confirmed reports that two protesters and one policeman have been killed in demonstrations in Cairo and Suez.
The unnamed official, speaking to AP, said the two protesters were killed in Suez. The official said one of them had respiratory problems and died as a result of tear gas inhalation, while the other was killed by a rock thrown during the protest.
The policeman died during the protest in Cairo after being hit on the head by a rock, the official said.
Reuters is reporting that three people have been killed during protests in Egypt – two in Suez and one in Cairo.
The video journalist Mohamed Abdelfattah has posted some distressing tweets – using the Twitter for Blackberry app – from the scene of the protests, where he says he has been arrested. Here's some of his posts – all filed within minutes of each other and presented here in chronological order.
There are reports that Twitter has been blocked in Egypt in a bid to quell the demonstrations. The protests have been organised in part throught Twitter and Facebook, but TechCrunch says the Twitter website and mobile site have been blocked in the country.
Demonstrators are still able to use third party applications – like Tweetdeck and Hootsuite – however, the US technology website reports. Facebook is still working in Egypt, however, with the group We Are all Khaled Said posting updates every fifteen minutes or so.
Khaled Said was an Egyptian activist who died in 2010, allegedly at the hands of police. One of the recent updates on the group reported that restaurants in Tahrir square – where thousands of protesters are gathered as night falls – are giving away free food to protesters.
Ben Wedeman, CNN's man in Cairo is tweeting away from Egpyt. Here's his latest:
@bencnn 6 troop carriers deployed next to #Egypt TV building in Maspiro, more police on the way. #jan25
Hi all, Adam Gabbatt here taking over from Paul. Here's a summary of the events so far today.
• Tens of thousands of anti-government protesters have clashed with police in Cairo in the largest demonstration in Egypt in a generation. Demonstrators want an end to the authoritarian president Hosni Mubarak's near 30 years of power.
• Police have responded with batons, water cannons and tear gas in a bid to quell the crowd. The demonstration, said to be inspired by the uprising in Tunisia, began peacefully before clashes occurred.
• As night falls in Egypt protests have also broken out in the Mediterranean port city of Alexandria. Roads are also being blocked by demonstrators in the Sinai Peninsula, and large rallies are being reported across the Nile Delta and the Suez Canal region.
• US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has said Mubarak's government is stable despite the demonstrations. Mubarak is an important US partner in the Middle East.
My colleague Jack Shenker in Cairo sends this:
Reuters has rounded up a number of comments from those protesting in Egypt:
Tobar, owner of a sportswear shop that had to close down:
Demonstrators in Ismailia, on the Suez Canal:
Police officer speaking on phone in Cairo near demonstrators:
Mohamed M on a Facebook group that led calls for protests:
Here are the full quotes from Hillary Clinton regarding Egypt:
Meanwhile, in Tunisia, my colleague Peter Beaumont reports the first real divisions over the direction of the jasmine revolution, with the first significant demonstration in favour of the interim government (see picture below). From Tunis, Peter reports:
Hillary Clinton (left), the US secretary of state, has urged all sides in Egypt to exercise restraint in the wake of today's protests. She said she believed the Egyptian government was stable and looking for ways to respond to its people's aspirations.
In the comments, orlandobeetle draws attention to this video which shows dramatic footage, apparently from Cairo today, of a man standing in front of a police truck and being hit with a water cannon.
And here is a gallery of images from Cairo today. The 11th photograph, showing tear gas being fired, is particularly striking.
The situation in Egypt seems to be escalating quite dramatically, but unrest has continued in Lebanon, too.
Protesters burned tyres and blocked roads after Najib Mikati, who is backed by Hezbollah, was named as prime minister. Hezbollah, then in opposition, ousted prime minister Saad Hariri earlier this month because he would not renounce support for a tribunal investigating who killed his father, the former PM Rafiq Hariri; Hezbollah members are likely to be implicated.
Mikati is to start talks on forming a new government on Thursday, and today appealed to the country's political factions to overcome their divisions. Twenty people were injured in protests in Tripoli, called by Sunni Muslims loyal to Hariri. His premiership will be seen as shifting the balance of power in the country towards Syria and Iran.
Speaking at the presidential palace after receiving his nomination as prime minister from the presidnet, Michel Suleiman, Mikati said:
Sayyad Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of Hezbollah, urged Mikati to form a "national partnership government". He said:
Nasrallah claimed Mikati, a Sunni who was last prime minister in 2005, was not the Shia group's candidate, but said it had backed him as a compromise figure.
The biggest Lebanese protests took place in Tripoli, in the north of the country, where 20 people were treated for injuries and protesters set fire to a satellite truck used by Al-Jazeera. Protesters chanted "Sunni blood is boiling" and urged Mikati to withdraw his nomination. In Beirut, protesters blocked a road with burning tyres and overturned rubbish containers. A security source said shots were fired in the air and the army intervened, but no one was hurt.
Hariri appealed for calm and said he rejected demonstrations of violence:
His Future Movement says it will not serve in any government dominated by Hezbollah.
Lebanon's power-sharing political system calls for the post of prime minister to be held by a Sunni – and Mikati is Sunni – but Hariri supporters said any figure who accepted the nomination from the Shia Hezbollah to form a new government would be considered a traitor.
The Associated Press news agency has filed a report on thousands of protesters, some throwing rocks and climbing on top of an armoured police truck, clashing with riot police in the centre of Cairo. Police responded with water cannon, batons and tear gas, as we have reported. Demonstrators were shouting "Down with Mubarak," a reference to Hosni Mubarak, the president, and "demanding an end to Egypt's grinding poverty, corruption, unemployment and police abuses".
AP has interviewed some Egyptian protesters. Eid Attallah, a driver aged 50 said:
He said he had heard about the planned protests from friends but didn't expect them to be so big.
Sayid Abdelfatah, a 38-year-old civil servant who marched with an Egyptian flag, said:
Lamia Rayan, 24, said: "We want to see change just like in Tunisia."
According to AP, nearly half of Egypt's 80 million people live under or just above the poverty line set by the United Nations at $2 (£1.27) a day. "Poor quality education, healthcare and high unemployment have left large numbers of Egyptians deprived of basic needs," the agency writes.
There were also thousands of protesters in Alexandria, in the north of the country, the agency reports.
Tunisia's protests – which led to the ousting of the president – were also sparked by the death of one man, a poor Tunisian vegetable seller who set himself in fire to protest against corruption.
Sally Sami (aka Salamander) tweets the following from Cairo:
Jack Shenker has just sent me this dramatic update from Egypt. He calls central Cairo a "war zone".
On Al-Jazeera, correspondent Rawya Rageh in Cairo is saying there is "clear anger and frustration being let out" on the streets of Egypt. This has been building up in Egypt for years, she says. Previous calls for protests have yielded "meagre results" – today's demonstrations are "unprecedented" for this "highly apathetic populace". Rageh adds: "Economic hardships have reached a choking limit for Egyptians."
Al-Jazeera is calling the Egyptian protests "a day of wrath against poverty".
Jack Shenker has checked in from Cairo. He says the internet, Twitter and phone calls were all blocked there, but they are returning intermittently now. Here is his latest update on the protests there:
Martin Chulov, the Guardian's Iraq correspondent, reports that there were high hopes last week in cyberspace that Egypt's demonstrations would be replicated in Syria today. But according to our people in Damascus, he says, there is "not a peep of protest" there.
My colleagues on the Guardian's video desk have sent this video of Egyptian protesters demonstrating against Hosni Mubarak, the president.

Hi, Paul Owen here, taking over from Haroon Siddique. Here's a summary of key events so far:
• Governments in Tunisia, Egypt and Lebanon are all facing protests on a significant day in the Middle East.
• In Egypt, thousands of anti-government protesters are demanding the end of Hosni Mubarak's nearly 30 years as president. Police have responded with tear gas, batons and water cannon. The "day of revolution" is the largest demonstration Egypt has seen for years.
• In Lebanon, Saad Hariri, the current caretaker prime minister whose supporters are rioting partly in his name, urged people to demonstrate without violence. He was unable to muster the numbers to stay in power and it seems almost certain Najib Miqati, the choice of Hezbollah, will take his place. Hezbollah, then in opposition, ousted Hariri because he would not renounce support for a tribunal investigating who killed his father, the former PM Rafiq Hariri; Hezbollah members are likely to be implicated.
• In Tunisia, the interim government – formed after the president, Zine Al-Abidene Ben Ali, was ousted earlier this month – is looking shaky. At issue is the presence in the new government of allies of the old president – including the interim prime minister, Mohamed Ghannouchi. Protesters taking to the streets today want them out. Army chief Rachid Ammar said his forces would "protect the revolution" but warned that "a power vacuum could lead to dictatorship".
Some confirmation from @geof24 below the line that Twitter has been blocked in Egypt.
I'm going to hand the blog over now to my colleague Paul Owen.
Writing on the Foreign Policy website, Steven Heydemann of the independent - though government funded - United States Institute of Peace, warns that repressive Arab regimes have repeatedly shown their ability to survive unrest - and warns they may yet prove resilient
Hundreds of protesters continue to demand the removal of Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali's former colleagues from Tunisia's government. They are gathered outside the prime minister's office. But on the Foreign Policy blog, Christopher Alexander argues that completely dissolving Ben Ali's RCD party is "unrealistic and potentially dangerous":
Lebanon's "day of rage" is captured in pictures by a Guardian gallery, which includes a photograph of the Al Jazeera vehicle set on fire by supporters of former prime minister Hariri.
Ahram Online, which is providing live updates from Egypt,reports that Twitter is down in Egypt.
On Twitter itself, people are accusingTelecom Egypt of blocking the microblogging site.
Thanks @irel for pointing out the link to a picture of an Egyptian protester giving a policeman flowers. It is a poignant image but unfortunately it seems things have taken a turn for the worse in some parts of the country now.
I've seen discussion below the line on whether Lebanon should be included in this blog, along with Egypt and Tunisia. You might be interested in reading this analysis piece by Martin Chulov, which addresses the common theme running through the protests:
Here's the latest Associated Press take on the Egypt protests:
I've just recorded some dramatic audio of Jack Shenker in Tahrir Square in Cairo where he is in the midst of clashes involving hundreds of young men and riot police. Young men wearing scarves over their mouths are throwing stones and bricks while the police are firing tear gas at the demonstrators and using water cannon. Shenker had to run from a police charge during the recording. He says people are wondering around with blood on their faces.
The Guardian's Martin Chulov says Hezbollah secretary-general Hassan Nasrallah has been speaking live, urging calm while the Lebanese Army battles a Sunni group near Tripoli, after a candidate, who he approved, was sworn in today as Lebanon's PM, replacing the ousted Saad Hariri. He said:
@lewandn is tweeting reports of clashes in Qasr Al Ainy:
The Guardian has video of Hariri's appeal for calm in Lebanon and of the protests by Sunni Muslims.

Another update from Cairo from Jack Shenker:
Another good site for following the Egypt protests is the Facebook page, We are all Khaled Said, the name a tribute to a man allegedly killed by two Egyptian plainclothes police officers after he posted a video online showing them dividing up the spoils of a drug haul. The officers are due to stand trial over his death.
Video has emerged of protesters chanting: "Down, down Hosni Mubarak."
My Arabic-speaking colleague Mona Mahmmod, tells me the demonstrators shown were also singing the Egyptian national anthem, Bilady, Bilady, Bilady by Sayed Darwish, which she says was used as a liberation song to oppose British occupation before being adopted as the national anthem on independence.
Some more from Jack Shenker in Cairo where the crowds seem to be growing, leaving police confused as to how to respond:
There is intense activity on Twitter, particularly with respect to Egypt, using the #jan25 hashtag. Lots of photos are emerging, including this image from Shubra, a district of Cairo, courtesy of @Gsquare86.Here are some pictures taken by @salamander and some more from @laurenbohn, including a particularly striking one of a man defiantly holding a banner saying "enough" in front of a police line.
A selection of some of the tweets from Egypt:
@Alshaheeed If you are in Cairo and you were waiting for something to happen to go to the protest. It's real. Time now to go. #Jan25 #Egypt
@salmander If you are in a cab or speaking with people in the st tell them to break the barriers of fear #jan25
and from Jack Shenker (@hackneylad), reporting for the Guardian
Protesters marching past min of foreign affairs chanting 'Tunis' and revelling in their control of the street #jan25
The Guardian's Martin Chulov has provided more on Hariri's appeal for calm in Lebanon:
After Hariri's call for calm (12.04pm), Reuters is now reporting that Lebanon president Michel Suleiman has just appointed Hezbollah's choice, Najib Mikati, to succeed Hariri as prime minister. Mikati reportedly said he will begin discussions on Thursday to form a new government and urged all Lebanese factions to overcome their differences. How that news will affect the mood of protesters remains to be seen.
A picture of the protests in Cairo has been posted by Lauren Bohn, who says that clashes have begun and she has just been knocked over.
In Lebanon, former - and interim - prime minister Hariri has called for calm and told his supporters to go back home and raise the Lebanon flag.
Protesters in Cairo have broken through police ranks and are heading towards the Nile, Jack Shenker, who is covering the Egypt protests for the Guardian, reports. Some have been beaten by police but the demonstrators remain defiant chanting at the police, most of whom are from very poor neighbourhoods, to join them. Many have sat down in the face of the amassed police ranks. Shenker told me that what started as a protest with three specific aims is now seen by many as an opportunity to bring down the Mubarak regime.
You can listen to Jack Shenker's report from Cairo below.
The Guardian's Ghaith Abdul-Ahad is in Beirut in the neighbourhood of Cola, which straddles a Sunni neighbourhood loyal to the former - and currently interim - prime minister Hariri and a Shia neighbourhood. He says demonstrations have been low key and the army has not intervened heavy-handedly but a significant incident could cause the situation to explode.
The Guardian's Peter Beaumont writes that tension is rising in Tunisia where it appears the interim government is "untenable":
There have been shots fired (in the air) and tyre-burning in Lebanon the Associated Press reports:
It is a big day in the Middle East, where at least three governments are facing sizeable street protests.
• In Egypt, thousands of demonstrators are taking to the streets for a "day of revolution", demanding political reform, including a new term limit on the presidency that would bring to an end the 30-year rule of President Hosni Mubarak. Today is traditionally a national holiday to celebrate the achievements of the police force but an unlikely alliance of youth activists, political Islamists, industrial workers and hardcore football fans are coming together to demand change.
• In Tunisia, there is unfinished business with respect to the Jasmine revolution which forced President Zine Al-Abidine Ben Ali to flee into exile. Protesters are still fighting for the removal of his key allies who hold key posts in the cabinet including the defence and interior ministries. Many demonstrators have been camped in The Casbah in Tunis on the doorstep of interim Prime Minister Mohamed Ghannouchi who they want out. The army chief has promised he "would protect the revolution" but also warned that a "power vacuum could lead to dictatorship".
• In Lebanon, thousands of Sunnis are taking part in a "day of rage" to show their opposition to the prospect of a new government under the control of Hezbollah. The Shia group, which caused the government led by Saad Hariri to fall just under two weeks ago by withdrawing its support, has now won backing in parliament for its own candidate, Syrian-backed businessman Najib Miqati, to succeed Hariri as prime minister. Under Lebanon's power-sharing system, the role is supposed to be reserved Sunnis. (5pm update: Miqati is a Sunni, but Sunni protesters object to his being backed by the Shia Hezbollah.)