Fox suspends Gingrich, Santorum
Fox News has suspended contributors Newt Gingrich and Rick Santorum until they decide whether to run for president.
Anchor Bret Baier announced on air late Wednesday morning that the network “has suspended its contributor arrangements” with Gingrich and Santorum for the next 60 days.
Both, Baier said, “have signaled possible runs for the presidency” and it “is Fox policy” for them to be suspended.
With the suspensions, the network has taken its first big step to address mounting concerns that it could run afoul of campaign finance laws and journalistic ethics by continuing to keep on its payroll people who are maneuvering to run for president. But the suspensions of two contributors also leads to questions about three others on the Fox payroll — Mike Huckabee, Sarah Palin and John Bolton — who are also weighing White House bids.
Conflicting reports have come this week from Gingrich’s camp about whether he’ll be announcing a presidential exploratory committee or taking another clear step in the direction of the race for the 2012 Republican presidential nomination. The former speaker of the House’s office has not responded to POLITICO’s request for comment.
“We can’t have Speaker Gingrich on our payroll while he is in the midst of an exploratory committee to see if he’s going to run for office,” Fox News’s executive vice president of legal and business affairs Diane Brandi told the Los Angeles Times. “It’s a clear conflict.”
Santorum, Brandi added, has indicated that he plans to attend Republican presidential debates, “so that leads us to believe he is seriously considering running.”
In a statement Wednesday, Santorum said he has “appreciated the opportunity to work” with his colleagues at Fox News and is still deciding whether he’ll run for president. “I share in their commitment to ensure news organizations provide balanced coverage of the issues of the day,” he said. “I intend to use the months ahead to continue my evaluation of a potential presidential run, and I will make an announcement on my final decision sometime in the coming months.”
The suspensions will be lifted on May 1 if Gingrich and Santorum notify the network by then that they are not planning to run. If they do not announce one way or the other by the the deadline, their contracts will be terminated, Baier said.
“This is the announcement that’s being made today,” Baier said, but “it does not preclude other announcements that may be made in the future” about other Fox employees who are flirting with White House runs.