The Fateful ‘Foreign’ Donation That Brought Down Japan’s Foreign Minister
Japan’s foreign minister of barely six months, Seiji Maehara, is resigning after becoming embroiled in an illegal political donation scandal. He may have earned himself a distinction: the nation’s shortest-serving foreign minister.
Mr. Maehara was loudly denounced by opposition politicians for having received a reported 250,000 yen (that’s $3,036) from a foreign national. Under Japanese law, it is illegal for politicians to receive donations from foreigners. The regulation was formed out of concern that foreigners could otherwise gain unwarranted influence over the nation’s political decisions or elections.
Japanese politicians were indignant over the donation. “A foreign minister is at the forefront of negotiations with foreign countries. If a person in that post has taken donations from foreign nationals, resignation is unavoidable,” Yosuke Takagi, acting secretary-general of the New Komeito party, said in a televised debate.
So just who is this foreigner trying to exert control over Japan’s political system? She’s a 72 year-old South Korean and a long-term resident of Japan who speaks fluent Japanese, according to Kyodo News. She runs a yakiniku, or grilled beef, restaurant in Kyoto. She has known Mr. Maehara and his family since they moved to Kyoto when he was in the eighth grade.
“I provided him with the support and didn’t know it violated the law,” she told Kyodo News. ”I was not asked to do it and didn’t intend to take advantage.”
Hundreds of thousands of Koreans still live in Japan today, a legacy from the Second World War, and most have retained their South Korean citizenship though they speak Japanese fluently. These individuals are not permitted to vote in elections and are still considered “foreigners,” though many have been living in Japan for decades and paying taxes.
The fact that a relatively paltry donation by a long-term Japan resident could claim the scalp of Japan’s foreign minister underlines the chaos and fractiousness that defines Japanese politics today. The fact that politicians labelled such an individual a “foreigner” may suggest something potentially worse: Japan’s continued problems accepting foreigners in a time of population decline and major questions about the nation’s future.