TUC protest march: as it happened
• Department store Fortnum & Mason is occupied by protesters from breakaway groups, and police kettle thousands of people in the surrounding area.
00.55 Between 50 and 100 still holding out into the early hours. That's it for Saturday's live blog.
23.50 Laurie Penny, a journalist who was in Trafalgar Square and who regularly writes for the left-leaning News Statesman magazine, insisted to the BBC: "The people in Trafalgar Square were here for a little get together and a party. I didn't see any evidence of criminal acvtivity here apart from burning a few placards to keep warm."
23.48 Paul Brandon, the chair of the Right To Work Campaign, claimed those gathering in Trafalgar Square had simply wanted to "send a message of a bit more sustained response rather than an A-B march. Probably the intention at one point was to stay the night. It was people dancing, listening to music who perhaps wanted to carry on, obviously in a peaceful way."
23.45 Richard Livingstone, cabinet member for Southwark council who was at the protest with a 100 strong Southwark Labour contingent, said their experience of the protest was peaceful and meaningful. "I've not seen any violence, just a few vandalised buildings and a bit of graffiti. It's been a remarkably peaceful and friendly march; good natured and well mannered."
23.39 Commander Bob Broadhurst tells the rioters: "Londoners are fed up with your protests. It is time to go home."
23.35 'Sophie', a protester who was being kettled in Trafalgar Square told the BBC that she spoke "as someone who is often in the heart of the action." She insisted: "The Police don't seem to handle the situation well. I understand there are always people at protests who might have an alternative agenda, but you don't have to escalate the whole situation, injure peaceful protesters - and not even protesters, people who are having a dance. I didn't do anything. Are we not allowed to stay in Trafalgar Square and have a dance?"
23.30 Commander Bob Broadhurst of the Metropolitan Police condemned the violence, insisting: "They are not protesters, they are criminals. They tried to damage the Olympic clock, we tried to make an arrest and they attacked the Police. These people don't care whom they hurt or what they damage." He added: "We [the Police] are acting entirely properly."
23.10 One protester is struck by police batons as a rapidly-changing situation briefly turns violent on The Strand. Police once again employ containment tactics and the tension eases. But small knots of anarchists speed off down Craven Street, and so a fresh flashpoint may not be far off.
Police officers stand in front of a fire in Piccadilly after protests in Cental London
22.35 This from reporters Mike Howie and Ben Leach...
At least 300 protesters are involved in clashes with police on Trafalgar Square. Eye witnesses claim trouble flared after police went into the crowd, who had been drinking and dancing, around 9.45pm. "The protesters reacted and then the riot police went in," said one bystander. That "reaction" saw glass bottles being hurled at police, who rushed to the scene in around 20 vans. The troublemakers are being 'kettled' around Nelson's Column by a ring of several hundred officers. Banners have been set ablaze and a few protesters dragged out of the square. One protester was seen with blood coming from a head wound. The Olympic clock has been hit by paint bombs.
22.30 London buses with passengers are caught up in the chaos as police try to regain control.
21.53 Police warn on Twitter: "If you are involved in disorder in Trafalgar Square you will be arrested. Officers are coming under sustained attack."
21.51 Protestors throwing objects at riot police in Traflagar Square as violence flares again. Mixture of anarchists and protestors trying try to stage a sit-in.
21.20 Scotland Yard says the number of arrests stood at 202.
20.15 Update from reporter Michael Howie: "Outside Fortnum & Mason, where the trouble flared, about 40 protesters are being arrested. They have been lined up at the side of the building, are handcuffed and being searched by officers. I have just walked up Piccadilly and counted six premises that have had windows smashed. They include the banks Santander, Lloyds TSB and Pret a Manger. Squads of officers remain vigilant but, here at least, all is now quiet."
20.08 Images from today can be viewed in our online gallery.
20.05 Update from Telegraph reporter Ben Leach: "Police have dispersed a large group of activists who had earlier started a fire in the centre of Oxford Circus. Around 200 protesters had gathered around the fire - drinking alcohol and playing loud music. But dozens of uniformed officers moved in to drive away the group and the area is now back to normal with traffic passing through and normal members of the public far outnumbering protesters."
19.55 Witness reports say a police officer has been injured outside Waterstones in Piccadilly. Inside the ambulance he was seen with a neck brace and ice packs on his legs.
19.50 Many West End threate shows are now cancelled. A large crowd gathered outside The Criterion has been told tonight's show, The 39 Steps, is cancelled. A member of staff appears on the steps and announces the cancellation "for safety reasons". Bronwen Jones, who travelled from north Wales for a weekend in London, says she's "really disappointed". "I've been looking forward to this for a long time," she adds.
19.30 The base of Nelson's Column has been vandalised, with the anarchist symbol spray painted onto masonry.There are several thousand protesters gathered in Trafalgar Square.
At the same time, street fires near Piccadilly appear to have got out of hand, with one reported in Jermyn Street but the London Fire Brigade says it does not yet know the full scale of the blaze.
On Twitter, user @ruthyoung1 says she is trapped in a theatre auditorium by the fire. She writes: "Trapped in Jermyn Street theatre.Buildings on fire. This is hell."
Later she reports that the group is safe.
19.25 Police report that nine arrests have been made. Of those, four were for using threatening or insulting words or behaviour, three for criminal damage, one for violent disorder and one for going equipped with intent to cause criminal damage.
Five officers were injured during the protests. Four were treated with minor injuries and one was taken to hospital with a groin injury.
Commander Bob Broadhurst, who led the policing operation, said video evidence would be used in an attempt to make arrests in the coming days.
He said the demonstrators, many of whom were dressed head-to-toe in black and covered their faces, were in small groups and "quite mobile".
"It's been hard to get hold of them," he said.
The protesters surged along Piccadilly, Regent Street and Oxford Street, chanting "welfare not warfare" as they blocked traffic and forced shops to close. Paint, fireworks and flares were thrown at buildings, while
19.20 A spokesman for civil liberties group Liberty says: "The demonstration appeared to have been infiltrated by violent elements who periodically separated from the main route in order to attack high profile commercial properties and the police before melting into the demonstration once more.
"This minority presented significant challenges for the police and trade union stewards alike and at times jeopardised both the safety and ability to protest of those with peaceful intent."
19.15 Scotland Yard says: "Although the TUC march has passed peacefully there remain pockets of disruption by breakaway groups in the West End."
19.00 A Large bonfire lit by protesters in the eastern end of Jermyn Street appears to be getting out of control, says reporter David Barrett, with buildings now looking at risk.
18.55 Projectiles known as "Thunderflashes" - fireworks containing coins - are understood to have been thrown at police in Piccadilly Circus. Some riot police appear to be removing reflective bibs, to reduce the risk of being set alight.
18.30 Amid clashes between police and protestors, a police officer appears badly hurt, reports Michael Howie from Piccadilly. Half a dozen police medics treat him before he is dispatched to an ambulance, wearing a neck brace.
Meanwhile, protesters are being allowed out of the kettle, but those who do not want to move on are involved in clashes near Piccadilly Circus.
17:59 Daniel Hannan, Telegraph blogger and MEP, questions the negativity of the protest, in the post: 'March for the Alternative'? WHAT alternative?
17.35 Lloyds TSB bank on Piccadilly is under attack from protesters, at least one large plate glass window has been smashed, with banner poles now being used as weapons, while red paint bombs have been thrown. Nearby a protester is being treated for a head wound by police medics.
17.30 Reporter Michael Howie is among a crowd of thousands of people contained within the police kettle surrounding Fortnum & Mason. He sends this report:
"Skirmishes have broken out as police block off the exits to Piccadilly, with protesters charging either end. Shop windows have been smashed as terrified demonstrators and shoppers got caught up in the violence
One father sheltered her distraught little girl in a doorway as missiles were flung at riot police who hit back, striking some with their shield.
Peter and Elizabeth Davies, both 73, from Guernsey, were desperate to escape the clashes.
'I came here to see my mother in a nursing home and we just wanted to find a nice place to eat," said Mr Davies, taking refuge with his wife in a close.
'It's terrifying,' said Mrs Davies. 'I've never seen anything like it before.'"
17.10 In Oxford Circus, many shops are now closed, though shoppers continue to stroll among activists, with the main troublemakers dressed in black, says reporter Ben Leach:
"Many of the shops around Oxford Circus are now closed as hundreds of activists continue to protest outside Topshop. Dozens of police officers are lining the entrance and seven riot vans are parked nearby.
Banners reading 'Keep warm, burn out the rich' are draped from traffic lights, and flags depicting Che Guevara are being carried by the remaining hardcore of protesters.
Shoppers continue to stroll through the area, which is filled mainly with activists, most of whom seem to be either teenagers or in their twenties or early thirties. The main trouble makers are dressed head to toe in black, some wearing face masks, scarves to cover their faces and helmets."
17.00 Police have kettled thousands of protesters in the Piccadilly area, surrounding Fortnum & Mason. From inside the kettle, reporter David Barrett says:
"The police line is advancing from the direction of Arlington Arcade towards Piccadilly. There must be thousands of people contained, and charging towards Piccadilly."
"About twenty protesters have clambered onto the balcony at department store Fortnum and Mason on Piccadilly. They climbed up railings on the outside, while others burst into the store and emerged from first floor windows. Alarmed staff took refuge on the second floor, looking down at the dramatic scenes a few feet below.
Signs were daubed on the walls including slogans "tax the rich" while banners singled out Vodafone, Boots and Top Shop - popular targets of the anti-tax evasion group UK Uncut."
16.50 Police report that four officers have been injured, one is being treated in hospital.
16.30 Protesters set fire to large Trojan horse model on the ground in Oxford Circus.
16.20 Reports that 200 or 300 protesters from UK Uncut and the Socialist Workers Party have occupied Fortum & Mason on Piccadilly, with scenes of chaos outside and displays of confectionary and cakes wrecked inside.
15.55 Police report that all the trouble so far has been associated with a group of around 150 protesters, unconnected with the main march.
15.45 Police are asking retailers in Piccadilly to close. Fourteen protesters have now been injured in central London, 12 with minor injuries, 2 with non-life threatening injuries.
15.45 Reports that more shops have had their windows smashed, including Ann Summers in Soho
15.40 More marchers are still arriving at Hyde Park.
15.30 In Oxford Circus, breakaway protesters are understood to be making plans to occupy an area, at an unidentified location, under plans orchestrated by UK Uncut. A samba band entertains the crowd.
15.25 Paint bombs are thrown at Niketown shop in Oxford Circus.
15.00: TUC sources estimate that up to half a million activists have now taken to the streets.
14.55: The Ritz Hotel in Mayfair has become a target for a breakaway group throwing paint, and using dustbins as missiles.
A police officer kicks away a flare as protesters and police clash outside Topshop on Oxford Street (Getty)
14:44 In Oxford St police in riot gear have formed a defensive line in front of a branch of Dorothy Perkins. Next door but one a McDonald's is also being protected by officers as protesters chant outside.
14.30: Groups of demonstrators have attacked an HSBC bank at Cambridge Circus, throwing paint at police officers and attempting to storm the building.
Anti-capitalist protesters attacked the bank, smashing windows and painting the slogans "smash the banks" and "thieves".
Eye-witness Reece Hughes, 41, from New Zealand, said a gang of "about 300 protesters" attacked the bank around 2.15pm.
"They came down the road and started smashing the place in," he said. The branch was closed but some managed to break in.
Vans of riot police arrived and the gang, faces covered in black scarves, ran off down Shaftesbury Avenue.
One officer said: "We got here. Carnage. Job done."
Two police helicopters were following the protesters and it is thought one protester was being questioned inside the bank.
Ben Leach reports that there are also clashes outside John Lewis in Oxford St. He writes: "There are ongoing clashes between riot police and a group of around 200 anarchists wearing masks, dressed in black and carrying black and red flags and pro-anarchy banners. So far nobody appears to have been arrested or injured and police are being remarkably subdued in the face of constant provocation.
"Same group of anarchists have moved back to BHS and are carrying out a sit- down protest while chanting 'BHS pay your tax'. The shop was being defended at one point by just one police officer, who had to move to one side as protesters started banging on windows."
The pictures of mayhem by a small, but significant minority of protesters contrast with shots of the huge peaceful crowd gathering in Hyde Park to listen to speeches
14.20: Labour leader Ed Miliband has been speaking to the thousands in Hyde Park, claiming the Government wanted to take Britain back to the 1980s. He said:
"We know what the government will say: that this is a march of the minority.They are so wrong.
David Cameron: you wanted to create the big society. This is the big society.The big society united against what your government is doing to our country.
We stand today not as the minority, but as the voice of the mainstream majority in this country.
The midwives from Kingston here to speak up for maternity services.The sure start workers from Hampshire here to speak up for children’s centres.
The small business owners from Liverpool here to speak up for jobs.The teachers and students here to speak up for the next generation.
We speak today for the mainstream of Britain because we are the mainstream of Britain."
14:11 At the pre-arranged time of 2.11pm, crowds numbering about 10,000 in Trafalgar Square cheered, yelled and let off fireworks, as the main procession continued up Whitehall towards Piccadilly and Hyde Park.
14.10 Scotland Yard says lightbulbs filled with ammonia have been thrown at police officers in Oxford St.
13:55 Black bloc anarchists attempted to storm Topman in Oxford St, throwing sticks, setting fire to placards and smashing shop widows.
The signal for the trouble to start appeared to be a green flare let off by one of the masked anarchists. One protester was wrestled to the ground by police and arrested before a line of riot officers managed to form a line to protect the store.
Others shop windows have been smashed in New Bond Street, including Next, and paint thrown over a number of luxury goods stores.
Paint, glass bottles and food were thrown at a Royal Bank of Scotland branch. Many of the protesters covered their faces with scarves and carried black and red flags.
They shouted "whose streets, our streets" and held placards which read "no cuts!".
A line of around 50 police officers were forced to step aside when they were overwhelmed by the number of protesters.
13:45 Reports coming in that 'black bloc' anarchists have broken away from the main march to charge up Regent Street, through China Town, with others in Northumberland Avenue. Some protesters have adopted the tactic of rolling sit-down protests.
UKuncut claim they forced a branch of Boots at Piccadilly Circus to close down (see picture).
@marc_valleeTweets: 500 plus strong Black Bloc on Regent Street. Broke police lines. TSG moving in.
13:25 David Barrett and Michael Howie report that Shaftesbury Avenue was briefly brought to a halt by a break-off protest, involving about 300 people, near the Trocadero Centre. They have now moved on to rejoin the main route at Piccadilly Circus.
There is a brief stand-off between protesters and police in Piccadilly Circus, as officers block the way to a Barclays bank and a Boots.
Meanwhile outside Downing Street around 200 protesters, some with their faces covered in black scarves, have gathered outside the entrance to Downing Street. Boos and whistles ring out, and a yellow smoke bomb is set off.
13:15: TV helicopter footage shows the march snaking its way up the length of Whitehall, with a line of police and barriers keeping protesters away from the gates to Downing Street.
The head of the march has reached Hyde Park, but the rest of it is snaking back for over three miles to the Embankment.
13:00 The TUC says the number of people taking part in the protest has well exceeded their expectations.
There were reports that over 400,000 people were demonstrating, which the TUC could not yet confirm but said they had no cause to doubt.
Protesters were still joining the march more than an hour after it set off.
12:50 Around 50 Gurkhas have joined the demonstration in support of legal aid.
Ragprasad Purja, 44, a Gurkha from Nepal who now lives in Morden, south London, said: "The Gurkhas have fought for this country for 200 years. The cuts to legal aid and benefits will affect many of us. We want to stop them."
Keith Williamson, 55, a teacher at Shelley College, Huddersfield, said: "The Government says it's making no cuts to education, but it's a lie. We're at risk of losing lots of students because they will all lose their Education Maintenance Allowance."
12:45 Our reporter Ben Leach sends this dispatch from the 'dissident feeder march' making its way from London's East End:
"Around 200 protesters left Cable Street, east London at 10.30 this morning. Some of them carried banners reading "Rise up East" and "Fight the Cuts". They marched through the financial heart of the City - Liverpool Street, Bank and Holborn -without major incident, chanting anti-capitalist slogans.
Some marchers were subjected to stop and search by the police, but so far there has been no violence. At around 11.30am they joined the thousands of other protesters on the Embankment, heading west through the capital."
12:36 This placard spotted in the crowd: "David, all artists hate you. Except Tracey Emin and you're welcome to her"
12:32 BBC Newsnight's@paulmasonnewsTweets: #26march now at trafalgar sq peaceful , v socially diverse and from non labour movement demografic as well as unions.
12.30: Our reporter Michael Howie says the south London feeder block - numbering about 2,000 - has ignored police requests to cross the Thames at Blackfriars Bridge and opted en-masse for Westminster Bridge instead, bringing them closer to the head of the main march.
With the south London contingent is a giant 20ft puppet of a Trojan horse, symbol of revolution, apparently.
12:14 Thousands of Unison members were at the head of the march as it set off at 11.45am - 15 minutes earlier than it was due to start - led by Dave Prentis and carrying giant purple-coloured helium balloons, reports the Press Association.
Scores of people in wheelchairs were also at the front, blowing whistles and carrying banners, some of which called for a general strike.
The protesters will march past the House of Commons before heading for Hyde Park.
Len McCluskey, general secretary of Unite, said he believed there were half a million people taking part in the protest.
"This is an absolutely incredible turnout and display of anger which the Government will have to take notice of."
Hundreds of police officers lined up outside Parliament behind metal barriers as the marchers passed by and moved down Whitehall, scene of violence during last year's student protests.
Peter Keats, 54, from Lowestoft, Suffolk, who works for Jobcentre Plus, said: "I'm hoping the government will start to listen with this many out. I'm not so much worried about myself but the customers I deal with are vulnerable and I'm worried about them and I'm worried about the kids of this country."
Alan Dowling, 40, who works for the UK Border Agency in Sheffield, said the cuts there had prompted him to join today's march, leaving home at 4.40am to head for London.
"The other day the immigration minister was on TV saying we need to do more. How are we going to do more enforcement when we are cutting enforcement officers?" he said.
Mr Dowling, a case worker and member of the PCS union, said he believes immigrants who have been in Britain illegally for more than four years will simply be allowed to stay because there will not be enough staff to effect their removal.
"It's going to be hard for them to be removed because of manpower, virtually impossible."
12.10: Dave Prentis, general secretary of Unison, says the turnout for the march is "absolutely enormous".
He says: "We always expected an enormous turnout because Unison alone has laid on 500 coaches and a number of special trains but the numbers are simply incredible.
"These are ordinary families and working people, many with their children to send a strong message to David Cameron to halt the damaging cuts which are leading to the loss of tens of thousands of jobs and the closure of services including libraries and care homes."
12.08:David Barrettreports: "Some minor vandalism in Arundel Street - slogans such as "Bankers **** Off" spraypainted on the hoarding of a boarded-up building. A good-natured crowd, and feeder marches have intermingled due to the sheer mass of people here."
11.45 And here's a brief word from reporter Michael Howie, with the south London feeder march:
About 1500 protesters left Kennington Park, in south London, at 11.30am in one of several feeder blocks. The bewildering variety of groups taking part include the Lewisham Pensioners' Forum and the Latin American Women's Rights Service."
11:44 Our Home Affairs Correspondent, David Barrett, reports from the education feeder march, making its way through central London:
Around 2,000 students and anarchists, some waving the anarchist flag, have set off from Malet St. Many have faces covered with masks, bandannas and scarves.
The front of the march staged a brief sit down in Southampton Row, before running in a mock 'charge'.
Police have surprisingly not closed off feeder march routes, so thousands of protesters are mixing with live traffic. The front of the education feeder march is in Aldwych, which is still open to buses and other vehicles.
Passengers in buses are disembarking in the Strand, as scores of double deckers and bendy buses are trapped by the march. I can count 20 buses stationary in traffic from where I stand at the junction of Strand and Aldwych.
This part of London has been brought to a standstill by the march. It raises questions about the police's preparedness, and their decision not to introduce traffic diversions outside the main march zone. "
11.33: Organisers appeal for people not to join march at the front but at the back instead, because of the sheer weight of numbers.
March26March: Please don't try and join the march from the front by coming down Northumberland Ave. It's full on the Embankment. Move down Strand
11:24 The Education feeder march sets off from the University of London Union, in Malet Street, joined by hundreds of students and teaching staff, but also many anarchist militants dressed in black.
10.55 Reports that the official demonstration is already so long that it stretches back one and a half miles from Embankment tube station to St Paul's Cathedral.
Westminster and Embankment tube stations have closed because of the congestion, as has Hungerford Bridge.
March26March:RT @paul__lewis: Front of #march26 demo at Embankment, with people stretching as far back as St Paul's Cathedral
10:00 Activists squatting the former offices of the Readers Digest in Mayfair have erected this banner outside the building, which is being used as an HQ by radical protesters:
@CarolineLucas, MP for Brighton, Tweets: Train from #Brighton becoming pleasingly full of people who are clearly coming to London for the March #26March
09:30 Education Secretary Michael Gove acknowledges the public are worried about the planned cuts, but insists that the Government will not be deflected from its strategy.
He told BBC's Radio 4 Today: "Of course people will feel a sense of disquiet, in some cases anger, at what they see happening, but the difficulty we have as the Government inheriting a terrible economic mess, is that we have to take steps to bring the public finances back into balance.
Mr Gove said that there were "really big dangers" for Mr Miliband in addressing the rally at the end of the march.
"One is that people will say 'You are calling for a plan B from the Government, you don't even have a plan A. More than that, you are associating yourself with a march which could, I'm afraid, move from being family event into being something darker,"' he said.
09:22 For anyone who intends to sing while marching today, music journalist Dorian Lynskeyhas written a fascinating blog about what sort of protest music is currently inspiring people. He is the author of 33 Revolutions Per Minute: A History of Protest Songs, which Patrick Sawer reviews in The Sunday Telegraph's Seven magazine this weekend.
09:00 Tens of thousands of people are making their way to London for the TUC march, with plenty of them tweeting accounts of their journeys to the capital. Here is a selection:
@samthewestie: Plz RT and support my wife and all the Nurses marching today to protect our NHS
@These_boots: Right. Off to stand up and be counted. Hope it doesn't mean holding board with number on whilst bobby takes my pic.
@JaneBryngwyn: Packed #RCTUnison coach heading for the #MarchfortheAlternative in London. Spirits high.
@MediocreDave: Nine riot vans heading in from Brixton. Was going to ask for a lift but they fired up the blues. Think they were just skipping the lights.
07:00 The Government has been warned it faces a "wipe-out" in May's elections after a new survey showed most people backed the aims of the huge protest against spending cuts.
The TUC, which is organising the demonstration, said a survey it commissioned of 2,700 adults showed that over half agreed with the aim of the protest, with 31% disagreeing.
TUC general secretary Brendan Barber said: "I'm sure that many of our critics will try to write us off today as a minority, vested interest. This poll nails that lie.
"The thousands coming to London from across the country will be speaking for their communities when they call for a plan B that saves vital services, gets the jobless back to work and tackles the deficit through growth and fair tax."
06:00 Here's our news round-up from earlier, looking ahead to theTUC's March for the Alternative:
Up to a quarter of a million people are expected to join the protest in London, the biggest union-organised march for more than 20 years and the largest in the country since the anti-war march in 2003.
Labour politicians including leader Ed Miliband will take part, as well as scores of trade union mermbers, community groups, student and pensioner organisations.
Also joining in will be hundreds of radical activists intent on taking direct action. A number of 'dissident' feeder marches will take place, with militant vowing tooccupy Oxford Streetand occupy key buildings along the route.
Banks and stores in Oxford Street will be targeted by anti-cuts group UK Uncut, along with a "secret" location to be hit by a mass occupation. Other groups are planning to occupy Trafalgar Square overnight.
The TUC, which has been organising the March for The Alternative for months, said it expected a huge turnout of people from communities across the country wanting to show their anger at the Government's "deep, rapid and unfair" spending cuts.
The TUC's general secretary Brendan Barber said on Friday he hoped the Government would take notice of the protest and change its "damaging" policies, which have already led to the threat of more than 170,000 job losses in local government, another 50,000 across other areas of the public sector, and cuts and closures of services ranging from libraries to youth clubs.
He said: "The thousands of trade union members coming on Saturday from across the country, along with representatives of service users and countless other voluntary and community groups who oppose the cuts, know that the objective of this demonstration is to send a strong message to the Government through our unity and a huge turn-out. I want nothing to distract from that.
"I'm confident that our planning and well-trained steward team means this is exactly what will happen."
Around4,500 police officers will be on duty, with the man in charge of the operation, Commander Bob Broadhurst, hopeful that the day will pass without major incident.
The controversial tactic of "kettling" protesters into a confined area will be kept to a minimum, he said, adding: "The issues will be with the fracture groups who might want to spoil the party.
"Groups lodge themselves with someone else's march and use the oxygen of publicity to make their point. Some of them are saying they will make occupations.
"If people come with disorder in mind, then it's our job to try to prevent it, then stop it happening. We might end up in some form of containment. We would hope we can keep that for as few people as possible and for as little time as possible."
Liberty will have 100 legal observers monitoring the policing of the protest and there will be representatives from other human rights groups on hand to offer advice to demonstrators.
More than 800 coaches and dozens of trains have been hired to bring people to London, with many unable to get to the capital because of the massive demand for transport.
Public and Commercial Services union general secretary Mark Serwotka said the march must provide a "springboard to united action", adding: "In just a few short months this coalition Government has sought to blame and punish public sector workers, the low-paid, the sick, pensioners, children, for an economic crisis caused by City speculators and spivs."
Sara Eades, 54, a midwife from East Anglia, said: "It is important that we show solidarity with the whole of the NHS and with all of our colleagues.
"I am concerned about the employment prospects for our student midwives. Up until this year, we have been able to employ all of our trainees, but I am not sure if we will be able to do that in future years.
"If we don't hire more midwives, our current level of work will not be sustainable, especially if we receive more cuts. The cuts will dramatically impact the quality of care that we can give to mothers and babies."
Here is our guide to the TUC's March for the Alternative:
Who is behind it?
The march is organised by the TUC, in association with other anti-cuts campaign groups.
What do they want?
The organisers say that the Government's plans to eliminate the deficit in four years, and to focus on cutting spending rather than raising tax, do not have national support. They want to give a voice to all the people affected by the cuts, and to demonstrate to Westminster that the public rejects the argument that there is no alternative.
Where and when?
The march will gather on Victoria Embankment and form up between Waterloo and Blackfriars Bridges from 11am. It will start moving off around noon, but because of the likely size of the protest the last marchers will not be leaving until after 2pm, and possibly later.
The march will arrive in Hyde Park shortly after 1.15pm, with the rally starting around 1.30pm. It is estimated to finish at 4pm.