Florida congresswoman to head DNC
WASHINGTON — Debbie Wasserman Schultz, a congresswoman from South Florida and a key White House defender, was chosen yesterday by President Obama to become chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee.
The move elevates Wasserman Schultz to a crucial role as Obama looks toward a campaign that will use the DNC to define his likely Republican rivals.
“As Chairman Kaine departs, new leadership must come on,’’ Vice President Joe Biden wrote to members of the Democratic National Committee, which will have to ratify her selection. “In selecting Debbie to lead our party, President Obama noted her tenacity, her strength, her fighting spirit, and her ability to overcome adversity.’’
Wasserman Schultz, who backed onetime Obama rival Hillary Rodham Clinton during the 2008 presidential primary, quickly became a favorite of the Obama campaign. Representing the crucial swing state of Florida, Wasserman Schultz became a high-profile advocate for the Obama campaign and then the White House.
“I couldn’t have gotten through ’08 in Florida without her and she’s been there every step of the way through the first term,’’ said Steve Schale, a political consultant who ran Obama’s Florida operation.
The DNC remained almost $18 million in debt at the end of February. The committee spent heavily in an effort to defend majorities in the Senate and House; Senator Harry Reid, the Nevada Democrat, remains majority leader, but Republicans captured the House and Nancy Pelosi fell from the speaker’s role.
Kaine said he will run for the Senate in Virginia in next year’s election, bolstering his party’s chances of keeping the open seat by having a proven fund-raiser and former governor of the state in the race.
The seat opened up when Senator James Webb said in February he won’t seek reelection. Former senator George Allen, the Republican Webb defeated, is already in the race, along with Republican Jamie Radtke, the Richmond Tea Party chairwoman.
Another Republican toe to test the water in N.H.WASHINGTON — He’s the (soon-to-be-former) ambassador to China and former Republican governor of Utah.
And next month — in a move that will generate waves of political interest — Jon Huntsman Jr. will be stepping more fully into his role as potential presidential candidate, with his first public appearance in New Hampshire.
Southern New Hampshire University’s president, Paul LeBlanc, confirmed last night that Huntsman has accepted an invitation to be the commencement speaker at the Manchester school on May 21.
“The politics of the state of New Hampshire right now are so rancorous and polemical, and a lot of people like the fact that Huntsman seems to defy that ideological rigidity,’’ LeBlanc said.