Nationalist Appears to Lead Peru’s Presidential Election
A runoff would be held in June.
The rise of Mr. Humala, 48, a former military officer who has played down comparisons with President Hugo Chávez of Venezuela, and Ms. Fujimori, 35, who has defended her disgraced father, points to broad discontent with policies that have failed to lift millions out of poverty even as Peru boasts economic growth that is the envy of its neighbors.
“Ollanta will bring the change we need because there’s so much corruption and too much conformism,” said Ariel Chunga, 60, a barber who voted Sunday in Lima. “What can I be scared of? We have to make decisions even if they are scary. You can be nervous of getting married, but you still do it.”
The results also suggest that symbols of Peru’s economic growth that are most evident to its urban moneyed class, like the construction boom that is reshaping Lima’s skyline, mean little to the impoverished residents of the mountainous hinterland.
“Castañeda is the great disappointment,” said Aldo Panfichi, a political scientist at Catholic University in Lima, referring to the city’s former mayor. “The public works of Lima are not visible in the rest of the country; they mean nothing to indigenous groups. Lima is not Peru.”
Mr. Humala’s strong showing had many in Peru questioning whether he would emulate Mr. Chávez, the Venezuelan president, whom he openly admired in his failed 2006 bid for the presidency, or Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the moderate former Brazilian president, from whom he drew inspiration for his campaign this year.
Some voters said that Mr. Kuczynski, a former finance minister and World Bank official, offered an opportunity to extend Peru’s economic performance. “Kuczynski is a first-level professional,” said Aldo Farro, 46, a pharmaceutical salesman. “We are advancing in Peru, and we need people who will further that.”
Others opted for Ms. Fujimori largely out of admiration for her father, who is imprisoned on human rights and corruption charges.
Many Peruvians have fond memories of his 10-year presidency, when Mr. Fujimori, who is 72, was called “El Chino,” a reference to his Asian ancestry.
Ms. Fujimori has said she would pardon her father, who made strides against the Maoist insurgents of the Shining Path in the 1990s.