Mitt Romney makes another attempt at the presidency in 2012
Undaunted by his ill-fated attempt in 2008, Mitt Romney chose an inauspicious moment to announce that he is running for the 2012 Republican presidential nomination.
Romney's announcement came via a video featuring the former Massachusetts governor standing in an empty sports field on a gloomy day in New Hampshire, scene of the first presidential primary next year.
"I have become convinced that America has been put on a dangerous course by Washington politicians," says Romney, reading awkwardly from an autocue. "It's time that we put America back on a course of greatness."
Romney's statement included the phrase "I believe in America," a version of which appears to be his campaign's slogan.
Unfortunately for Romney, his public announcement comes on the eve of the fifth anniversary of the Massachusetts health care insurance reforms that he backed and signed into law as governor – a law that strongly resembles the "ObamaCare" reforms that the Democrats passed in 2010, complete with an individual mandate requiring individuals to have health insurance or face a fine. Before Romney's announcement, Democrats had already planned celebratory "Thank You, Mitt" parties in New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Iowa and elsewhere on Tuesday.
Those reforms are a millstone around Romney's neck, but the thin quality of the Republican field to date means that unlike in 2008 – when Romney was easily beaten by John McCain – this time Romney has a more plausible route to the Republican nomination to run against Obama.
Since 2008 Romney has barely stopped campaigning for the Republican nomination, and has attempted to get close to various Tea Party organisations as well as emphasising his experience as a businessman.
But Romney's record as a governor of Massachusetts and his liberal posture on issues such as abortion during election campaigns there – such as the time he vowed to outdo Ted Kennedy in supporting gay rights – has left its mark. As a result he is regarded with deep suspicion by more conservative Republicans.
Over on Twitter, Massachusetts politics wags amused themselves with a parody competition, #RomneySlogans, including:
So, where do you stand on the issues? Me too!
I was for ObamaCare before I was against RomneyCare
I Believe What I Believe at the Time That I Believe It
Romney's entry means he joins former House speaker Newt Gingrich and former Minnesota governor Tim Pawlenty in the lacklustre Republican field to date.