U.S. appeals court orders that Carl Lewis be placed on N.J. Senate primary ballot
TRENTON — Carl Lewis, arguably the greatest sprinter of all time, finds himself in a marathon only a lawyer could love.
In a much-needed reprieve for the track star’s hopes to run for state Senate, a federal appeals panel in Philadelphia today kicked his case back to a federal district court judge. That allows Lewis’ name to remain on the Democratic primary ballot — at least until the federal judge offers his decision — for the second time.
It’s the latest twist in the legal journey surrounding Lewis’s candidacy since Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno ruled last week that he did not meet the state’s four-year residency requirement for Senate candidates, in part because he voted in California as recently as 2009.
The decision by Guadagno, a Republican who serves as secretary of state and oversees the Division of Elections, has drawn criticism from many of the state’s Democrats as a blatantly political act.
"Under the ruling, the voters, not a partisan elected official, will decide who should be the State Senator in the Eighth Legislative District," said Lewis’s attorney, William Tambussi. "With this order, Mr. Lewis can now focus on the real issues facing the voters."
Now, U.S. District Court Judge Noel L. Hillman — who has already rejected Lewis’s argument that the resident requirement violates the U.S. Constitution’s Equal Protection Clause — will decide under a different set of criteria whether his civil rights were violated when Guadagno tossed him off the ballot.
But that’s only half the legal marathon for the 49-year-old Lewis, a nine-time Olympic gold medalist from Willingboro. He has also appealed Guadgano’s ruling with the state, and the Supreme Court is weighing whether to take up the case.
"We really don’t’ know what’s going to be decided," said Patrict Murray, a pollster at Monmouth University. "It’s really difficult for anybody who’s following this to understand what the courts are actually basing their decision upon."
Lewis turned to the high court after a state appellate court refused to overturn Guadagno’s decision. If Hillman finds that Lewis’s civil rights were violated — something he declined to do the first time around — Lewis gets to run after all.
The order by the three-judge federal appellate court also allows Hillman to decide if he wants to hear the case now or put it off until the state Supreme Court has arrived at its decision. Hillman’s law clerk wouldn’t comment on what the judge will do.
It doesn’t necessarily end there. Democrats are hoping to request documents from the state and to subpoena witnesses, including Guadagno, who initially set the court cases in motion after she rejected the recommendation of an administration law judge to allow Lewis to run.
Will Lewis’s lawyers try to get Guadagno on the stand to explain why she agreed with the Burlington County Republicans who challenged Lewis’s candidacy? "We might," Tambussi said.
Mark Sheridan, a lawyer for the two Burlington Republican leaders, called the prospect "craziness" and said there was "absolutely not a chance" Hillman would allow them to call Guadagno.
To the spokesman for the Burlington Republicans, Chris Russell, the federal judge’s ruling today merely "delays the inevitable."
And even if Lewis prevails in court, he’ll have an uphill run against state Sen. Dawn Marie Addiego in the Republican-leaning 8th Legislative District.
So far, Lewis hasn’t released a campaign platform.
"He hasn’t had a chance to," Tambussi said after one of Lewis’s several setbacks. "He’s been dragged through every court in New Jersey."