ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Prime Minister Julia Gillard has unveiled a complete reshuffle at the top of the Australian Defence Force.
The current Vice Chief of Defence, Lieutenant General David Hurley, will succeed Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston as Chief of the Defence Force from July 4.
The news comes as the ADF mourns the loss of two soldiers who were killed in Afghanistan on Monday.
Announcing the change in Canberra today, Ms Gillard said the change was coming at a "very testing time for the Australian Defence Force, a time of sorrow, of loss".
"I'm absolutely confident the new leadership team will meet these challenges," she added.
Air Marshal Mark Binskin will take over as the new Vice Chief.
Rear Admiral Ray Griggs will be the new Chief of Navy, taking over from Vice Admiral Russ Crane.
Major General David Morrison will be Chief of Army. He replaces the retiring Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie.
Air Vice Marshal Geoff Brown will be Chief of the RAAF, taking over from Air Marshal Binskin.
Air Chief Marshal Houston has been Chief of Defence for the past six years.
Lieutenant General Hurley, 57, has held a number of senior positions in the ADF, including Land Commander Australia and Chief of Operations, and was appointed as Vice Chief in 2008.
Ms Gillard paid tribute to Air Chief Marshal Houston, 63, describing his service as "remarkable".
Saying he was only 13 days short of being Australia's longest-serving CDF, Ms Gillard said he led Defence during the most intense operational period since the Vietnam War.
"He was there when we recommenced our operations in Afghanistan in September 2005 and when we expanded our early operations to include the training we are now doing with the Afghan Fourth Brigade.
"He was there to oversee the deployments to Iraq, to East Timor and the Solomons.
"He's been there to lead his people as they've helped Australians through natural disasters; Cyclone Larry, the Victorian bushfires and most recently through the summer of devastation, particularly in Queensland."
Alluding to the evidence Air Chief Marshal Houston gave casting doubt on the Howard Government's "children overboard" claim, Ms Gillard painted him as a man of honesty.
"He is better known now to Australians as a man of courage and compassion and I really want to congratulate him on his service to the nation - and I'm looking forward to the Festival of Angus," Ms Gillard said.
Defence Minister Stephen Smith, who denies reports his relationship with Air Chief Marshal Houston soured over the handling of the Australian Defence Force Academy Skype sex scandal, said he would be a "big loss".
"He has faithfully and effectively served five ministers for Defence. He was respected and held in high regard by the Australian community before he became Chief of the Defence Force, and that regard and respect has only enhanced."
Mr Smith said the new team would "hit the ground running", with Lieutenant General Hurley scheduled for trips to Singapore and Brussels in the next week for defence talks.
He said Lieutenant General Hurley was a man of "thoughtfulness, decency and integrity".
"The men who have been appointed today have the responsibility of putting our men and women into the field in danger, in pursuit of our national interest. The responsibility and the burden is great."
Lieutenant General Hurley told reporters the appointments had been overshadowed by the deaths of three Australian soldiers in Afghanistan during the past week.
"That will serve as a powerful and constant reminder to this new leadership team of the enormous responsibilities that are being transferred to us," he said.
He promised to give full and frank advice to his minister, Mr Smith, saying "robust interaction" was something that should be expected.
"I don't think at times that should be taken as dissent or a war between the minister and the generals. We're doing our job, and we'll continue to do so."
Air Chief Marshal Houston said he was "uplifted" by the troops in Afghanistan who had performed "superbly".
And he said the low points came when Defence had lost people.
"When we've brought brave, courageous people home after they've been killed on operations, most normally in Afghanistan. That's the low point."