Tony Blair's donation to British Legion receives mixed response
Armed forces charity delighted to accept book proceeds but opponents of war say it will not change their views on former PM
For the former prime minister it was "a way of marking the enormous sacrifice" of the UK's armed forces. For some others it was little more than an attempt to assuage a guilty conscience.
Like so much else about Tony Blair, today's announcement that he will hand over several million pounds in proceeds from his forthcoming memoir to the Royal British Legion has divided opinion.
Chris Simpkins, the director general of the armed forces charity, said he was delighted to accept the "very generous" offer – the largest in the organisation's history – which will help pay for a new rehabilitation centre for injured servicemen and women. But for some families who have lost loved ones in the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan the gift, including all of Blair's reported £4.6m advance, was greeted with suspicion.
Rose Gentle, an anti-Iraq war campaigner whose 19-year-old son, Fusilier Gordon Campbell Gentle, was killed in Basra in 2004, said she was pleased injured troops would benefit but said it would not change the way she felt about Blair.
"I have spoken to other parents and everyone is agreed that this doesn't make any difference. It is OK doing this now, but it was decisions Blair made when he was prime minister that got us into this situation. I still hold him responsible for the death of my son."
In a co-ordinated press announcement between Blair's office and the Royal British Legion, a spokesman for the former prime minister said Blair had decided to donate the money when he left office in 2007.
"In making this decision Tony Blair recognises the courage and sacrifice the armed forces demonstrate day in, day out," added the spokesman. "As prime minister he witnessed that for himself in Iraq, Afghanistan, Northern Ireland, Sierra Leone and Kosovo. This is his way of honouring their courage and sacrifice."
Blair's decision to invade Iraq in 2003 prompted huge antiwar protests and led to splits within the Labour party amid claims the war was illegal. Although US and UK "combat troops" have set out plans to leave the country, there are renewed concerns about increasing levels of violence, and anti-war campaigners are planning to hold a demonstration at his book-signing in central London one week after the memoir is launched on 1 September.
Lindsey German, from Stop The War Coalition, said: "It would have been much better for everyone if he hadn't taken us into these wars in the first place. Blair lied about the Iraq war, he refused to express any regret at the Chilcot inquiry and his attempt to save his conscience will be little comfort to those injured or who have lost their loved ones."
The proceeds from the book will go to the Royal British Legion's Battle Back campaign, a project that will provide a new rehabilitation centre for seriously injured troops returning from the frontline.
Simpkins said: "Mr Blair's generosity is much appreciated and will help us to make a real and lasting difference to the lives of hundreds of injured personnel."
On internet forums and message boards soldiers appeared sceptical of Blair's motives although most agreed his donation was good news for injured troops.
Adnan Sarwar, who lost two friends during tours of Iraq before leaving the army in 2007, said: "It may be a way of trying to say sorry for what he has done, a way of giving something back to the troops, but whatever the reason I think we should accept his money and say thanks very much … This does not change what happened or the decisions that were made. But there comes a time when you have to move on and, not forget or even forgive necessarily, but move on."