Bhattarai elected PM‚ swearing in today
Kathmandu Although prefab was an option available in the market for construction since the year 2003, the demand for prefab structures skyrocketed after the Gorkha Earthquake in 2015. Fast forward two years later, private companies now have the consumers’ attention with the introduction of p...
Can a healthier angel food cake still have flavor? Sure Is there anything dreamier than the tender crumb of a light-as-air angel food cake? I’ve loved angel food cake ever since I first tasted it as a child. It reminded me of cotton candy. No wonder: angel food cake is essentially a fluffy blend of a super-sugary meringue laced with just en...
Xiaomi puts indefinite delay on CDRs in blow to China’s plans for tech listings Xiaomi says has no disagreement with Chinese regulator CFO says it decided better to list first in Hong Kong Xiaomi awarded CEO Lei Jun $1.5 billion worth of shares Executive says smartphone market will grow slowly HONG KONG: Chinese smartphone maker Xiaomi Corp <IPO-XMGP.HK&g...
1st case of H5N1 in poultry since 2014 One of 6 cases of highly pathogenic bird flu this year 1st case on a broiler farm this year   BEIJING/PARIS: China reported an outbreak of highly pathogenic H5N1 bird flu at a farm in its northwest Qinghai province, the Paris-based World Organ...
Revamped collider to shine brighter light on physics mysteries at CERN GENEVA: Europe's physics research centre CERN launched an upgrade of its Large Hadron Collider (LHC) on Friday, six years after the huge particle accelerator solved an enduring riddle by confirming the existence of the elusive Higgs boson. Staff said the overhaul will boost the "luminosity"...
Oprah to serve as godmother of new Holland America ship NEW YORK: Oprah Winfrey will serve as godmother of a new Holland America ship called the Nieuw Statendam (pronounced new STAHT-un-dam). In a video recorded with her pal Gayle King, Winfrey recounted “sailing to Alaska last year” on a Holland America ship, adding that she is “setting sai...