Wyclef Jean not on list for Haiti election for legal reasons, official says
The former Fugee said this week that he had received death threats and been offered security by the incumbent president
The hip-hop star Wyclef Jean's bid to become the president of Haiti appeared to be in doubt last night after an election official said he was not on the list of candidates for the 28 November poll.
The singer's presidential bid has electrified the earthquake-stricken country's election campaign. But yesterday a member of the country's provisional electoral council, who asked not to be named, told Reuters: "He is not on the list as I speak."
The official added that the country's electoral disputes office had ruled that Jean's candidacy did not meet several legal requirements.
Jean, 37, had a meeting with the Haitian president, René Préval, yesterday which the singer described as positive. Over the course of two hours the men discussed a range of subjects, from the hip-hop artist's safety to relations with the neighboring Dominican Republic.
Jean said Préval had offered him security after he had been the target of death threats earlier in the week.
The former Fugees frontman and several dozen other presidential candidates are due to find out later today if the country's electoral council allows them to run for office, when the provisional electoral council publishes its official list.
Jean carries a Haitian passport, but has US permanent residence status and has lived in New Jersey since he was a teenager. Haiti's electoral law requires candidates to have five consecutive years of residency in Haiti, among other requirements, such as tax compliance. Jean has said he meets those requirements.
His lawyers say he has maintained a "constant presence" in Haiti since 2005, and argue his appointment in 2007 as a roving "ambassador-at-large" for Haiti inevitably involved some absences from the country.
Jean had filed documents with the electoral council this month to run as a candidate for the election. He was among 34 contenders for the presidency who filed initial candidacy bids.
The country is struggling to recover from the earthquake in January this year that killed up to 300,000 people and destroyed much of the coastal capital, Port-au-Prince.
Whoever is elected will have a large say in the final use of almost $10bn pledged by foreign donors for post-quake recovery. With this in mind, the UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, has called for transparent and credible elections.
Jean's bid for the presidency has galvanised the Haitian political scene, triggering a new enthusiasm among the country's many unemployed young people, who see him as a symbol of home-grown hope.