Australian election set to be closest in 50 years
Australians vote tomorrow in the country's closest election for 50 years, with some polls predicting a hung parliament.
On the final day of campaigning, one poll put the parties at 50-50, and another said it was 51-49 in favour of Labor. Across the country, commentators say the result is too close to call.
The Greens are almost certain to hold the balance of power in the country's powerful upper house, the Senate, for the first time in their history and may win their first seat at a general election in the lower house.
The closeness of the contest is a huge turnaround from a year ago when the then prime minister, Kevin Rudd, had a 70% approval rating. His decision in April to shelve the centrepiece of his climate change policy, the emissions trading scheme, dealt his popularity a heavy blow, and a fight with the country's big mining companies over tax finished him off.
When Julia Gillard took over on 24 June, Labor party officials breathed a sigh of relief. She was a fresh face, while Rudd was left as the scapegoat for the party's woes. But the respite didn't last long and Gillard's campaign was dogged by leaks against her, party infighting and the presence of Rudd himself. Now she is fighting for her political life. No first-term government has been thrown out in Australia for 80 years.
On the final day of campaigning, Gillard focused on marginal seats around Sydney. At a pub in Raymond Terrace, about two hours north of the city, she ditched her usual tailored suit for a pair of jeans and a large glass of bitter. In what Labor voters will hope is a good sign, she had a spot of luck and managed to pick her own ticket as the winner in the pub's meat raffle. The prize: a juicy tray of steak, sausages and lamb chops.
In what has become an overtly negative campaign, she warned people of a stark choice on offer. "There's a real risk that Tony Abbott could become prime minister on Saturday," she said. "That's a real risk to the future of Australian families."
Labor has painted Abbott throughout the campaign as untrustworthy and weak on economic management. Gillard has repeatedly warned voters that he would bring back unpopular industrial relations policies.
Abbott, the Liberal party leader, went on a 36-hour marathon across Sydney, trying to convert as many undecided voters as possible. It was reminiscent of David Cameron's 24-hour stint before this year's UK election.
Abbott began his last-minute campaign blitz playing tennis with a former professional player turned Liberal party candidate. He finished the day throwing a football around with professional rugby league players in his home electorate. In between he managed a shandy in a local bar, but – fitting of his action-man image – called it the "wussiest drink of all time".
In the final hours he returned to his negative message, as he has done so often during the campaign. He said voters should not give what he called a bad government a second chance. "They [Labor] have let us down, they have broken promises and they've wasted money," he said. "The new taxes that they've got planned are a real and present danger to our economy."
The Liberal party has focused heavily throughout the campaign on border protection. Its slogan has been "stop the boats", a reference to asylum seekers arriving in northern Australia. Fears about asylum seekers resonate strongly in marginal electorates, despite the fact that refugees make up less than 5% of immigrants to Australia.
• This article was amended on 23 August 2010. We mentioned the Greens may win their first seat in the lower house. We should have clarified this would be at a general election. This has been corrected.