PM   dragged away after being trapped by  protesters
The pair were forced to stay inside for 30 minutes while the protest outside continued. As many as 1000 people had gathered as part of a march to mark the 40th anniversary of the Tent Embassy. Ms Gillard was escorted in dramatic fashion from the building by her federal police Close Personal Protection team. Fairfax photographer Alex Ellinghausen, who took the pictures on this page, said that, contrary to the claims of Ms Gillard's office that she merely "stumbled", she was "dragged out" by her bodyguards. The Prime Minister is hurried away by her security detail.
"The police were pulling her out and they were clearly a bit faster than her and along the way she lost a shoe and tumbled," he said. One of the protesters, the chairman of the Northern Basin Aboriginal nations, Fred Hooper, spoke to Sky News shortly after the politicians’ dramatic exit, explaining why they caused the incident. Riot police push their way through the protesters at the Lobby restaurant. ‘‘We were peacefully celebrating the 40th anniversary of the aboriginal tent embassy. The opposition leader on national television made a comment to tear down something that have built over 40 years, which is sacred to us,’’ he said. ‘‘So what do you expect us to do when we're 200 yards away from the person that makes that comment? Do you expect us to say, ‘yeah Tony we're gonna do that now? We're gonna rip it down?’’’
The Prime Minister is bundled into her car. The police were pulling her out and they were clearly a bit faster than her and along the way she lost a shoe and tumbled Earlier today one of the tent embassy's founders, Michael Anderson, addressed a rally at the site. "To hell with the government and the courts in this country. You haven't got a high hope to take us on," he said. Tony Abbott after the drama at the Lobby.
"We will force these issues. Too many of our families have suffered for some bastard to get in the road." Mr Sean Gordon, Darkinjung Aboriginal Land Council leader from North West NSW, said the protest had been peaceful until an announcement was made in which Mr Abbott's comments were read to the crowd. "It was like waving a red rag at a bull. This is the 40th anniversary of the tent embassy and these blokes are 200 metres away. If Tony Abbott is a visionary then why did he fail to see what this would do to our people." "In answer to the Opposition Leader's comments an NSW Aboriginal Council member, Roy RC, told reporters "maybe Abbott is right and it is time for the tent embassy to go." "And then it is time to erect a black Parliament with politicians we can choose, politicians who are going to have a say in our lives," he said.
Mr Gordon said further protests were planned for the rest of the week and that "we're going to keep the fight going. We are standing up here and we are not going away." Mr Abbott's comments about the Tent Embassy were made during an event at the Sydney Opera House this morning in response to a question from the media about whether the Tent Embassy was still relevant. "Look, I can understand why the Tent Embassy was established all those years ago. I think a lot has changed for the better since then," he said, in comments which appeared on Sky. "We had the historic apology just a few years ago, one of the genuine achievements of Kevin Rudd as prime minister. We had the proposal which is currently for national consideration to recognise indigenous people in the constitution. "I think the indigenous people of Australia can be very proud of the respect in which they are held by every Australian and yes, I think a lot has changed since then and I think it probably is time to move on from that."
Correction: This article has been amended to remove the suggestion in the original version that Tony Abbott called for the tent embassy to close.