Suzanne Bonamici wins special election for Oregon's 1st Congressional District
Democrat Suzanne Bonamici swept to victory Tuesday in Oregon's 1st Congressional District as her party continued its nearly four-decade-long hold on the seat covering the northwestern corner of the state.
Partial returns showed Bonamici defeated Republican Rob Cornilles as she carried over 50 percent of the vote in a special election to fill the seat left vacant following the resignation of Democrat David Wu in August.
A former state legislator, Bonamici becomes the only woman in the seven-member Oregon congressional delegation and her campaign expects that she will be sworn in within the next week.
Besides becoming accustomed to Congress, Bonamici also has to get ready for another election in just over four months. To earn a full two-year term starting next year, she needs to run in the May primary and November general election.
Cornilles, who owns a sports marketing business in Tualatin, has not said whether he would mount another challenge later this year. The district will become slightly less Democratic in the election later this year because of the redistricting that accompanies the 2010 Census. Part of the west side of Portland will be removed from the 1st to even out the population in each district.
Still, Republicans thought their best shot was in a special election – which are often known for surprising upsets.
Bonamici, mindful of the district's Democratic registration edge of 11.5 percentage points, ran a careful campaign focusing on the same themes her party's leadership has stressed on Capitol Hill: raise taxes on the wealthy, stimulate the economy through public-works spending and protect Medicare and Social Security benefits.
The House Democratic leadership -- through the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee and the House Majority PAC -- also had Bonamici's financial back. Those committees spent at least $1.5 million on television ads that attacked Cornilles and far out-weighed the advertising buys of either candidate.
The Democrats also put major resources into making sure Bonamici supporters voted; early ballot return statistics showed that Democrats cast thousands more ballots than Republicans.
The Republican congressional leadership never tried to match the Democratic checkbook. House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, did help Cornilles raise thousands of dollars from several House Republicans and other donors, but publicly conceded last week that it was difficult to win in the "very liberal district."
Cornilles, who ran and lost against Wu in 2010, portrayed himself as an independent Republican who would not be afraid to differ with his party leadership. He slammed Bonamici as being too willing to raise taxes as a legislator and unwilling to act independently of the Democratic leadership.
Toward the end of the campaign, Cornilles sought to tie Bonamici to Wu, saying that she had supported him politically and was among the Democratic partisans who helped cover up for his problems. Wu ran into political hot water after the last campaign following revelations that his staff was concerned about his mental health. And he was forced to resign in August after The Oregonian reported that he was accused of an aggressive and unwanted sexual encounter with the teenaged daughter of an old friend.
Bonamici said Cornilles' charges reeked of desperation and that she was preparing to enter the Democratic primary against Wu when he left office.
With the Bonamici victory, the race is not likely to gain much attention nationally. Republican operatives in D.C. said they were pleased that the Democrats spent so much money to keep a seat that had long been considered safe for their party.
Nathan Gonzales, a congressional campaign analyst for the non-partisan Rothenberg Political Report, said Oregon's 1st District was not the type of swing district that will be heavily fought over by the two sides in the fall. In part, he said, those races are expected to be a referendum on President Barack Obama. Cornilles didn't focus much on Obama, although at one point he gave the president a grade of C-minus.