Harper in China: Wang Lijun mysteriously disappears amid rumours he tried to defect from China
When Stephen Harper, the Prime Minister, flies to Chongqing Saturday to wrap up a five-day tour of China, he may be walking into the middle of one of the biggest power struggles in recent Chinese history.
His host, Bo Xilai, party secretary in the southwestern megacity, is a prominent “princeling” who has been tipped to join China’s powerful Politburo Standing Committee during a generational change of leadership in October.
Only, his political fortunes may have mysteriously taken a beating. His protegé, Wang Lijun, the Vice-Mayor and a high-profile anti-corruption campaigner, suddenly disappeared from public view amid rumours he tried to defect to the U.S. consulate in nearby Chengdu Monday.
On Tuesday, when Mr. Harper arrived in Beijing, Mr. Wang was said to have been escorted back to the Chinese capital by a vice-minister responsible for anti-espionage and covert operations.
Chinese Internet sites have been a-buzz, while government censors have been working overtime, removing blog posts and Twitter feeds commenting on the case.
Some speculated the high-profile crime fighter, who waged a two-year battle against triads and organized crime, may have become the subject of a corruption investigation and tried to flee.
Still other Internet discussions speculated he had fallen out with his long-time patron and may have gone to the consulate to deliver sensitive information.
Four days before his alleged defection, Mr. Wang was moved suddenly, and without explanation, from his post as head of Chongqing’s public security bureau to head of its sanitation, education and parks departments.
Wednesday, a U.S. State Department spokeswoman said Mr. Wang had met U.S. consular officials, but he left “of his own volition.”
Nearly everyone believes the case may be a symptom of vicious elbow shoving taking place between China’s top officials before October’s leadership change.
In a bid to deflect public attention, Chongqing’s municipal public affairs department issued a statement Tuesday on the Internet: “Vice-Mayor Wang Lijun, who has suffered overwork and immense mental stress for a long time, is seriously physically indisposed. After agreement, he is currently taking holiday-style medical treatment.”
While the world hummed with rumours one of China’s most famous crime fighters had tried to defect to the United States, the Chongqing Daily, the city’s official Communist Party mouthpiece, ignored the story. Its front-page feature was headlined: “Peaceful Chongqing: A Happy Home Enjoyed By All the People of Chongqing.”
Thursday, Xinhua, the state-run news agency released a statement saying only: “Authorities are investigating the incident in which Chongqing Vice Mayor Wang Lijun entered the U.S. consulate in southwest China and remained there for one day.”
That set off another tidal wave of rumours and discussions.
“Given Wang Lijun’s status as a crime-busting big shot, his name nearly synonymous with Chongqing’s anti-vice campaign, questions that encircle Wang are questions that encircle Bo Xilai,” said David Bandurski of the University of Hong Kong’s China Media Project.
“Clearly all is not well on Chongqing’s political scene. And that is a reminder again that turbulence now reigns inside the Party as we head closer to this year’s 18th Party Congress.”
Mr. Bo, 62, is the son of Bo Yibo, one of the “old immortals of the Chinese Communist Party” and widely regarded as the ambitious pin-up boy of the communist left.
He has not disguised his desire to join the Politburo’s Standing Committee and has pushed his candidacy by pursuing an anti-corruption campaign under Mr. Wang, while supporting “red culture” through the promotion of revolutionary songs, television shows and extravaganzas to praise the achievements of the Chinese Communist Party.
Some observers talk of a “Chongqing model” of development, which extols the virtues of China’s communist past, as being in competition with a “Guangdong model,” which embodies the economic reforms advocated by officials in that southern city.
China watchers will be observing Mr. Harper’s meeting with Mr. Bo in hopes of deciphering which side is in the ascendant.
China hasn’t had a scandal of this proportion since 1971, when Marshal Lin Biao, Mao Zedong’s right-hand man in the Cultural Revolution, tried to flee to the Soviet Union, only to have his aircraft explode and crash in the Mongolian desert.