Bob Carr to take foreign affairs role
Defence minister Stephen Smith, who gave up the foreign affairs portfolio for Kevin Rudd, remains in the defence role. She would not be drawn on his specific reaction to the news that Mr Carr had taken the foreign affairs role. Former attorney-general and Rudd supporter Robert McClelland was dumped from the ministry altogether and Ms Gillard thanked him "for his many years of service in the ministry'' and said that he was a ''great Labor man''. There were concerns within Labor that Mr McClelland would quit politics after the announcement, and force a by-election. However, this afternoon he said he would continue as an MP - but not before blaming his dumping on his decision to back Kevin Rudd in Monday's leadership ballot. Earlier today Ms Gillard said she made the offer to Mr Carr because she thought he should be a member of the "strongest possible team".
It is Ms Gillard's second reshuffle since December. Former Labor senator Gareth Evans was the last politician to preside over the portfolio from the upper house. Mr Carr joins a distinguished list of federal politicans to assume the role, including former prime ministers Gough Whitlam, Billy McMahon and Robert Menzies. Ms Gillard said she was delighted that he had accepted, but she declined to go through the "many conversations" she had with people this week regarding the reshuffle. She said that she had spoken to Mr Carr late yesterday morning and had made him the offer. Mr Carr said that Ms Gillard had made him an offer he could not refuse. ''You don't choose the moment; very often the moment chooses you,'' he told reporters in Canberra today.
Mr Carr admitted that he had been "churned up" by "warring emotions" over the decision. He noted that he had been out of public life for six years - but said that Ms Gillard's voice had "roused him" from his slumber. Mr Carr said that he had been through "a few" reshuffles before - and added that they had been "pretty grim", as they always featured argument, conjecture and people "thinking out loud". In the end, Mr Carr added: "It is the leader who cuts through." Mr Carr said that there would be inevitable differences between himself and Kevin Rudd in the portfolio but he wanted to honour his predecessor's achievements, including the UN Security Council seat bid, increased overseas aid and Burma.
The former premier talked up Australia's chances for a UN Security Council seat. He said there was a "cautious optimism" around the bid. "Australia's credentials in this areas are impeccable; we have a contribution to make." He echoed Mr Rudd's previous sentiments in saying that it was about Australia's commitment to multilateralism. Mr Carr said that he could "mobilise" the things he had learnt in his career in his new role. He said the opportunity to speak about and represent Australia was a "great honour". Mr Carr talked optimistically about Labor's chances at the next election.
He said that the gap between Labor and Coalition was not as great as the gap had been on several previous occasions. He said that, when voters focused on policy-making over "sloganeering", they would turn to Labor. He said he intended to run again for the Senate when his term expired. "I am a natural senator," Mr Carr said with a laugh. Mr Carr said that he felt fit, energetic and full of ideas before going to Canberra.
Ms Gillard said she would be talking to NSW Premier Barry O'Farrell today to "expedite" Mr Carr's appointment to the NSW Senate and thus to the foreign ministry. This afternoon Mr Smith congratulated Mr Carr on his appointment and said he would be a terrific foreign minister and addition to cabinet. ''I've known Bob for very many years,'' he said. ''I'm very much looking forward to working with him, as you know defence ministers and foreign ministers work very closely.'' Mr Smith said he had no right to be disappointed about Ms Gillard's decision to give foreign affairs to Mr Carr. ''There are no entitlements in public life,'' he told reporters in Canberra.
In other movements, Craig Emerson will continue as acting Foreign Affairs Minister until Mr Carr takes up the Senate vacancy. Mr Emerson has had his portfolio expanded to include the role of Minister for Trade and Competitiveness, paying particular attention to increasing Australia's international economic competitiveness, with a focus on the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper. Brendan O'Connor has been promoted into cabinet as the Minister for Small Business and as Minister for Housing and Homelessness. Attorney-General Nicola Roxon picks up Emergency Management. Environment Minister Tony Burke will take on the additional role of vice-president of the Executive Council. Senator Kate Lundy was promoted to Minister for Sport and Minister for Multicultural Affairs, as well as Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation. Member for Lindsay David Bradbury was appointed as Assistant Treasurer, and in the newly-created position of Minister Assisting for Deregulation.
The Greens leader, Bob Brown, welcomed Mr Carr's appointment but criticised him for his comments that Australia's troops should be kept in Afghanistan. "As a new broom, Mr Carr ought to begin by extracting our troops, to bringing them home from the mire in Afghanistan this year," Senator Brown said. "I look forward to having a foreign minister in the Senate and congratulate the other new appointees of Prime Minister Gillard."