'We did it again': Santorum wins Alabama, Mississippi
"People (said), 'You're being outspent (by Romney),' and everybody's talking about all the (delegate) math, and that his race is inevitable. Well, for someone who thinks this race is inevitable, (Romney) has spent a whole lot of money against me for being inevitable," Santorum told supporters.
Santorum, a former senator from Pennsylvania, was coming off a big win in Kansas on Saturday and has given himself a bigger boost in the battle to be the conservative alternative to Romney by beating Gingrich in Alabama and Mississippi, in Gingrich's home turf in the South. The wins are somewhat of a surprise, because polls released Monday showed Santorum running 8 to 10 points behind Romney and Gingrich in the two states.
"The fact is that in both states, the conservative candidates got nearly 70% of the vote, and if you're the frontrunner and you keep coming in third, you're not much of a frontrunner," Gingrich said. "And frankly, I do not believe that a Massachusetts moderate who created Romneycare as the forerunner of Obamneycare is going to be in a position to win any debates this fall, and that is part of the reason I've insisted in staying in this race."
The former House speaker has won contests in South Carolina and Georgia, which he represented in Congress for two decades, but has finished third or worse in most contests outside the region and campaigned intensively in Alabama and Mississippi over the last week.
Romney's campaign has been holding up its large lead in delegates as a reason for Gingrich and Santorum to get out of the race. But Romney, who flew to New York on Tuesday ahead of a fundraiser and did not plan to address supporters Tuesday night, wouldn't have turned down a win in a region dominated by social conservatives, who have been hesitant to support his candidacy.
"Once the dust clears, you'll be able to look and see that there really will be no ground that our opponents have made up against Mitt Romney," Fehrnstrom said Tuesday night. "And as you look at the upcoming contests on the calendar, there are no opportunities for them to have significant wins that allow them to accumulate large numbers of delegates so that they can close that gap with Mitt Romney."
"I think the real impact ... tonight is that for Republicans who thought that maybe Mitt Romney could come South and make this race look like it was coming to an end, this race is going on and on and on," Fleischer, a CNN contributor, said.
Then the race turns north and eastward — the District of Columbia, Maryland and Wisconsin vote on April 3 and Romney is the early favorite there. But that's three weeks away and much has changed in such a span in the most volatile Republican race in generations.