U.S. Economy Added 223,000 Jobs in April; Unemployment Rate at 5.4%
Mr. Berger agreed that if monthly job gains could be sustained at this pace, the Fed would probably act at its September meeting.
If the coming months bring similarly strong numbers, “the Fed will probably feel comfortable raising rates in September,” Mr. Berger said. “Wage growth isn’t a precondition to raising rates, but they want some confidence that it is on the way.”
The prospect of steady hiring without the risk of inflation brought by rising wages, leaving the Fed in a wait-and-see mode, is welcome on Wall Street, even if it’s a cause for concern among voters and politicians. In trading on Friday, major market indexes were up nearly 1.5 percent, while 10-year bond yields eased slightly.
Underscoring the uncertain picture, the government said in a separate report on Friday that wholesale inventories rose more slowly than expected in March. With businesses restocking shelves less aggressively, experts at Barclays and Macroeconomic Advisers revised their estimate for economic activity in the first quarter downward on Friday to show a contraction of 0.6 percent, even worse than the Commerce Department’s initial estimate of a tiny 0.2 increase.
Adding to the mystery of missing wage growth is the fact that the composition of new jobs has improved markedly lately, a reversal of what was the case early in the recovery. In April, higher-wage sectors like professional and business services and construction were big winners. Relatively low-paid categories like retailing and leisure and hospitality were much less robust.
One notable loser in April was the energy industry, which has been stung by the sharp decline in oil prices since last summer. Energy prices have ticked higher recently, as have gasoline costs, but energy companies continued to shed workers, cutting more than 10,000 jobs in April.
At 5.4 percent, the headline unemployment rate is down sharply from nearly 8 percent two years ago and experts say it could fall below 5 percent by the end of the year if hiring continues to gain steam. But the broadest measure of unemployment, which includes people forced to take part-time positions because they cannot find full-time work, remains high for nonrecessionary times at 10.8 percent.
At the same time, millions of workers have given up the search for jobs entirely and dropped out of the work force. Although it ticked higher to 62.8 percent last month, the labor participation rate has been stuck for years near multi-decade lows.
For Fed policy makers, the central question is whether most of those missing workers have disappeared because of longer-term demographic forces like the retirement of the baby boomers or whether many are still waiting in the wings and will return to the job market as employers reach beyond the pool of the existing work force. Before letting interest rates rise to a level in line with historical norms, the policy makers want to see evidence that the labor market slack that built up during the recession and a long but fitful recovery is finally receding.
While it would certainly be good economic news if more of those discouraged workers returned to the labor force and landed jobs, one possible consequence would be a continuation of slow wage growth, said Tara M. Sinclair, chief economist for Indeed.com, a leading job search engine.
“There’s still slack,” she said, noting that unless employers are forced to compete for candidates to fill jobs, they face little pressure to substantially increase salaries.
In Washington, even officials who hailed the sizable jump in payrolls acknowledged that until paychecks really start to grow, it won’t feel much like a recovery.
“The difference between where we are now and where we were in the 1990s is that the prosperity then lifted more boats,” said Labor Secretary Thomas E. Perez. “The unfinished business of the recovery is wage growth. Too many people are working a 50-hour workweek and getting their food at a food pantry.”