Irish bailout terms provoke risk of revolt over next week's budget
Ireland was plunged into fresh turmoil today amid fierce recriminations over the terms and conditions of the €85bn (£72bn) bailout of the Republic's public finances and banks.
Fine Gael, the main opposition party, said it has not yet decided whether to back next week's crucial budget after reports that it was prepared to torpedo the swingeing €6bn in cuts tabled by its Fianna Fáil/Green coalition rivals.
Fine Gael's finance spokesman, Michael Noonan, denounced the conditions imposed by the International Monetary Fund and the European Central Bank on Sunday. Noonan was particularly angry over the IMF/EU insistence that Ireland pay €17bn out of its national pension fundto shore up the country's banks and drive down its national debt.
"I believe that the negotiators on the Irish side were soft," he told the Irish Times. "They have given up €17.5bn of our own resources in sacrificing all of the national pension reserve fund. The fund has been cleaned out.
"The interest rate is extremely high. If the IMF part is just over 3% as reported, it must mean that the average EU interest rate must be very high, well over 5.8%."
Economist David McWilliams, who correctly predicted the crash, also raised concerns over the negotiations on the deal amid fears that Ireland had been "victimised". "We don't need economists negotiating for Ireland, we need liquidators," he said.
The coalition must pass the budget next week but is relying on two independent deputies for its majority in the Dail. Irish Labour and Sinn Fein will both vote against the budget.
All of the Republic's opposition parties have been highly critical of the 5.8% average interest rate that will be charged by the EU and the IMF for the loan.
However, one of the frontrunners to succeed Brian Cowen as Fianna Fáil leader insisted today that the IMF-EU loan deal gave the country certainty and confidence.
Tourism minister Mary Hanafin said: "The fact that [the loan is] there … it's certainly a help. They're the people who are judging us from the outside.
"A four-year plan has been designed and accepted. It deals with competitiveness and investment. We were in a worse situation in the 1980s. We lifted ourselves out of it then and I am confident the Irish people will do it again."
Children's minister Barry Andrews also said Ireland should realise it was not headed for Armageddon. "If we do go back to revenue and expenditure of around the 2005 or 2006 mark, let's not forget we weren't a poor country four or five years ago," he said.
"If this gives us the confidence to know that where we're going isn't Armageddon, but is something that we lived with before, and if we have the humility to remember that we've come from situations like this before, I think it will give people confidence that this government has an idea of the path to recovery for the country."
The government received support from Brussels, where Europe's commissioner for economic and monetary affairs, Olli Rehn, predicted that the Republic will recover "relatively rapidly" from its current economic malaise.
"The Irish are smart, resilient and stubborn people: they will get over this challenge and the EU is supporting them in that," Rehn said.
Presenting his autumn economic forecast in Brussels, the commissioner said the measures taken by the EU and the IMF to prop up Ireland showed that "we will do whatever it takes to support financial stability in Europe. But, as always, restoring confidence takes time."
Quoting the lyrics of Irish rock star Bob Geldof, Rehn said: "As an Irish poet put it, I don't like Mondays, but this Monday is an exception – it brings better news."
Meanwhile, respected economist David McWilliams, who correctly predicted the crash, also raised concerns over the negotiations on the deal amid fears that ireland had been "victimised" because the EU did not want bondholders to take a hit. "We don't need economists negotiating for Ireland, we need liquidators," said McWilliams.