New sub Navy's 'most lethal warship' USS John Warner
NORFOLK, Virginia (CNN)It's 7,800 tons, 337 feet and $2 billion worth of steel and stealth, with war-fighting controls that look like a big arcade video game.
That new-boat smell may have worn off a bit during sea trials, but the man in charge was pumped with pride as the U.S. Navy's newest submarine joined the fleet in a commissioning ceremony at Norfolk Naval Station on Saturday.
"The shiniest and coolest thing I've ever seen in my military career," Cmdr. Daniel Caldwell, a 22-year Navy veteran and the first captain of the USS John Warner, told CNN. "It's going to make whatever I do next anti-climactic."
Remember those old war movies with a captain looking through a periscope and calling out coordinates for a torpedo attack? Well, this ain't that sub.
For one, it doesn't even have a periscope. Instead, the John Warner will go about its business using a photonic mast, a piece of electronic wizardry that includes high-definition and infrared video to enable the Warner, the 12th in the Virginia class of attack submarines, to see and to not been seen like nothing else under the seas.
In front of that is where two sailors drive the sub, like a pilot and co-pilot seated before a curved wall of video screens. Driving a sub used to take a crew of four, Caldwell said, but technology has cut that number in half.
The John Warner is armed with 12 Tomahawk cruise missiles that are launched from two huge bays at the front of the boat, sort of like the chambers in a revolver, as well as MK48 torpedoes that are fired from four tubes, two on each side of the ship.
The firepower is all arranged and configured so the Warner can do other things the mission might call for, like launching UUVs -- unmanned undersea vehicles, or the drones of the deep -- or carrying a team of Navy SEALS and setting them on their way without breaking the surface.
"We do some pretty complicated missions in some parts of the world that are pretty unforgiving environments to operate in. You gotta make sure that the crew is ready to go do the mission you are assigned" -- and be ready to change focus quickly when threats change -- Caldwell said.
One thing making that easier is the high-tech nature of the vessel itself. The electronics that make the Warner a stealthy war fighter can also be programmed to make it a one-stop classroom. Simulations can be run on the system, kind of like you'd set things up on your PlayStation.
Of course, all this comes at a price to taxpayers, about $2 billion. But that's less than half the cost of the Seawolf class, the predecessor to the Virginia class. Only three Seawolf class vessels were built.
"The Virgina-class submarines offer compelling evidence for the feasibility of building high-tech stuff under budget and ahead of schedule," military technology expert Dan Ward wrote in an excerpt from his book "F.I.R.E.," reprinted online by the U.S. Naval Institute. "The Navy's experience shows that delays and overruns are not inevitable."
But for all its high-tech, futuristic whiz-bang hardware and software, this is a Navy that doesn't forget where it came from. And that's where this sub's name comes in.
With its own nuclear power plant and systems that make its own drinking water and air (a machine separates the oxygen from the hydrogen in water to make that happen), it could stay on patrol for decades, except for one thing.
"The only reason we have to come back is because our freezer isn't big enough," Caldwell said.
For 135 or so hard-working sailors, there's only one washer and one dryer. And they don't look much bigger than your mother's Maytags.
"So you hope that doesn't break," Caldwell said. That would definitely get rid of that new sub smell.