VW Workers Approve Pact Ensuring Part of Profit
The German economic boom has been driven partly by demand in China and other emerging markets for Volkswagen, Mercedes and BMW cars. Bayerische Motoren Werke said Tuesday that sales of BMW, Mini and Rolls-Royce brand vehicles rose 28 percent in January from a year earlier, as sales in the United States and Europe also recovered.
Audi, a unit of Volkswagen that competes with BMW in the market for premium cars, said that its unit sales rose 23 percent last month, delivering the best January for the brand.
One reason for Germany’s export boom and competitiveness in world markets is that, for a decade, workers have accepted modest wage increases in return for more job security. Now, with German unemployment declining and oil prices putting pressure on consumers, economists have been alert for signs that the period of wage restraint is ending.
After a long bargaining session in Hanover that ended early Tuesday, the IG Metall union and Volkswagen agreed to give employees a 3.2 percent increase in base pay, plus a bonus equal to 1 percent of pay and no less than 500 euros, or $680.
Unlike Daimler and BMW, Volkswagen negotiates directly with IG Metall. In Germany, wage negotiations typically take place at a regional level between industry groups and unions.
A general increase in wages in Germany, which has the largest economy in the euro area, would press the European Central Bank to raise interest rates, even though countries like Spain and Ireland are still struggling with slow growth. Economists say that monetary policy is already too loose for Germany, as the bank focuses on helping the weaker members of the euro area.
Yet, the pressure from German wages has not been alarming. Mr. Krämer said that only a quarter of the unionized workers in Germany could negotiate a pay raise this year, so the overall increase in pay for workers covered by collective bargaining would be only an estimated 1.8 percent.
“The end of ultralow wage increases will be fully reflected only next year,” Mr. Krämer said.
Ralph Wiechers, chief economist of the German Engineering Federation, an industry group, said that many companies still had workers on short shifts and had not fully recovered from the recession of 2009.
The need to preserve jobs at these companies will help restrain wage demands next year. “Lots of companies are still a long way from their all-time highs,” Mr. Wiechers said.