Merrill Lynch and Credit Suisse Fined for Subprime Deals
Merrill Lynch and Credit Suisse have agreed to pay fines to settle complaints about the subprime mortgage securities that they sold in the lead-up to the financial crisis, Wall Street’s self-regulator announced on Thursday.
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority fined Credit Suisse Securities $4.5 million and Merrill Lynch $3 million, saying the firms misinformed investors about the number of bad loans they placed in dozens of securities.
After Merrill Lynch realized it had reported bogus information, the firm quickly corrected the error in 2007. Credit Suisse, however, had still not notified investors or fixed its mistake as of earlier this month, according to Finra.
During the mortgage boom, Wall Street packaged and sold billions of dollars of risky mortgage-backed securities to pension funds, local governments and other large institutional investors. When the housing market collapsed, so did many of the securities, as homeowners fell behind on their mortgages.
Within months, investors lost billions of dollars and the financial system nearly toppled.
Under securities rules, brokerage firms were supposed to disclose how many delinquent loans were included in past securitizations — an effort to warn investors about risky new deals.
But many firms, relying on data from outside mortgage servicers, played loose with the numbers.
Merrill and Credit Suisse are the latest to face scrutiny as part of Finra’s wide-ranging investigation into subprime mortgage securities. Last July, Finra fined Deutsche Bank $7.5 million for similar violations.
“Firms must provide accurate information about the products they offer so that their customers can make informed investment decisions,” Brad Bennett, Finra’s enforcement chief, said in a statement. “Credit Suisse and Merrill Lynch failed to monitor and supervise the reporting of historical delinquency rates, depriving investors of information essential to assessing the profitability of mortgage-backed investments.”
Credit Suisse declined to comment. A spokesman for Bank of America, which took over Merrill in 2009 during the financial crisis, said, “We are pleased to resolve this matter.” The spokesman, Bill Halldin, pointed out that any misconduct on mortgage-backed securities “pre-dated Bank of America’s acquisition of Merrill Lynch.”
Neither firm admitted or denied the complaints.
The firms also noted that outside mortgage servicers, not the banks themselves, provided the erroneous figures.
Using those figures, Finra said, Credit Suisse in 2006 misrepresented the number of soured loans contained in 21 subprime securitizations, six of which “may have affected an investor’s assessment of subsequent securitizations.”
The inaccurate data, which appeared on the Credit Suisse Web site, both understated and overstated the delinquency rates.
The American arm of Credit Suisse, Switzerland’s second-largest bank, also failed to disclose the methodology it used to determine delinquency figures for five of the deals.
The bank, according to Finra, has yet to rectify its mistake.
“Credit Suisse did not sufficiently investigate these delinquency errors, has not directly informed clients who invested in these securitizations of the specific reporting discrepancies and has not revised” its Web sites to “correct these errors,” Finra said.
Merrill, whose mistakes covered more than 60 subprime deals, promptly corrected its errors in 2007. Like Credit Suisse, Merrill both overstated and understated the delinquency rates.