AMC to acquire Europe's largest movie theater chain
AMC Entertainment Holdings said Tuesday that it had reached a deal to acquire Europe's largest theater chain as the company's Chinese owner continues its acquisition spree.
AMC, which is majority-owned by Dalian Wanda Group Co., said the deal for London-based Odeon & UCI Cinemas Group is valued at $1.2 billion based on stock and cash compensation and the assumption of debt.
Separately, AMC said it is still committed to its $1.1 billion acquisition bid for competitor Carmike Cinemas, a deal which it delayed recently amid dissension among Carmike shareholders over the transaction price.
The Odeon & UCI deal would add 242 theaters, 2,236 screens and $1.2 billion in annual revenue to AMC's portfolio. Odeon & UCI sells 90 million tickets annually with No. 1 market share in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Italy and Spain, according to AMC.
AMC currently operates 385 theaters with 5,380 screens, mostly in the U.S.
“This is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to acquire Europe’s leading cinema chain and create the world’s biggest and best theater operator,” AMC CEO Adam Aron said in a statement. "With this opportunistic transaction, AMC will be extending the reach of our proven guest experience strategies to transform the movie-going experience for millions of moviegoers in Europe."
AMC said it would pump up Odeon & UCI's operation with its own growth strategy focused on recliner seating, large auditoriums, improved food and drink options and "pricing expertise."
The deal comes as AMC is hoping that Carmike shareholders will vote Friday to approve its acquisition bid at $30 per share.
Aron warned that there's "considerable risk" that the Carmike deal will collapse.
"Some Carmike shareholders have an unrealistic view as to Carmike’s value to AMC, and their resulting price expectations are simply beyond what AMC believes is prudent to pay," Aron said. "We have said all along that AMC is a disciplined buyer, and that very much continues to be the case."
Dalian, AMC's China-based owner, has rapidly expanded its foothold in the global entertainment business, having also recently reached a deal to acquire U.S. movie student Legendary Entertainment.