Fuel panic - Thursday 29 March
1.10pm: And thus it appears that the government's apparent attempts to prevent a fuel-buying panic have, in fact, created just that.
Following repeated criticism of ministers' warnings that motorists should keep fuel tanks topped up ahead of a possible, but not yet called, strike by tanker drivers from the Unite union, queues at petrol stations have been reported around the country.
And now, Dorset police have issued a brief but dramatic missive, urging drivers not to panic buy and asking petrol stations to consider closing for a period to ease the queues. As the TV news stations show footage of drivers queuing for fuel it would seem that the self-perpetuating nature of events will only intensify
1.13pm: Here's that Dorset police message in full, from Chief Inspector Nick Maton:
1.20pm: So, how did we get to this point? Yes, around 2,000 drivers for seven petrol distribution companies have, in the main, voted for possible strike action over concerns about working conditions and safety. However, any stoppage requires a full seven days notice, and with talks at the conciliation service Acas apparently due it seems very unlikely that anything will happen before Easter.
Nonetheless, ministers have been consistent in their advice that motorists should avoid possible shortages by topping up part-full tanks if they get a chance. The cabinet office minister, Francis Maude, also advised drivers to have a full jerrycan in the garage, words soon rescinded when it emerged that this contravened official fire service advice.
The official position remains that advice to keep your car full of petrol is merely prudent. The energy secretary, Ed Davey, put it this why earlier today:
1.27pm: So, is "panic" over-stating it? I spoke earlier to the RMI, the organisation which represents about 5,000 petrol stations around the country. They said that while fuel sales were hugely up - a survey of some members showed an 81% rise in petrol sales yesterday from the same day a week before, with an equivalent 43% increase in diesel sales - tanker supplies are still operating and thus there is no need for worry.
However, the picture around the country seems to indicate that people are, in fact, panicking. My colleague, Shiv Malik, has been trawling through tweets and other local reports and found a number of alarming updates. One tweet from Greater London's east reports:
The South Wales Argus has this:
1.35pm: Shiv has also found this – one tweeter has sent this picture of a fuel queue in Rhyl, north Wales, adding as a note:
1.40pm: It's worth mentioning that our communities team are seeking input for an interactive map of the situation near you. They write:
Is petrol panic hitting pumps near you? We've been asking for your help to map what's happening at petrol stations where you are – have you seen evidence of panic buying, excessive queuing or closed forecourts? Thanks to the more than 200 people who have submitted a report so far.
Visit this link to see a fullscreen version of the map. If you have a report to add, use the form on this page.
1.44pm: I've just spoken - finally - to the understandably busy Dorset police press office. They tell me that the request for some petrol stations to close for a period was taken for traffic reasons – some queues were so long that they had spilled onto roads, holding up other cars. They don't know yet if any garages have agreed to the request, but promise to let me know.
1.52pm: Shiv has pulled together some more tweets and queue pics, which I've pulled together using Storify (above).
1.53pm: The president of the AA, Edmund King, has called for calm. These quotes – which do not directly criticise the government but which are nonetheless damning – come from the Press Association:
1.57pm: The ever-busy Shiv has sent me a link to the Liverpool Echo, which has on its website a brief, but illuminating video of a fuel queue. The accompanying story says:
2.03pm: Hampshire police have warned local motorists against panic, saying:
2.06pm: Police might insist that motorists have nothing to worry about, but such is the circular way of such panics that some petrol stations are running low. The West Sussex County Times has this:
2.10pm: Dorset police have called back to say that five garages were asked to close due to queues causing traffic congestion – four in Bournemouth and Christchurch and one in Weymouth. They all did, briefly, and are now open again, a spokeswoman says. No need for the people of Dorset to panic, I ask? "That's quite right," she says.
2.11pm: Our man in the west of England and Wales, Steven Morris, sends this update:
2.17pm: The Guardian's industrial editor Dan Milmo has some analysis of the situation and suggests that panic buying might not be all that bad for the government:
Whether calculated or not, the government's intervention in the fuel tanker dispute - combined with the media's ever effective panic multiplier - has helped stoke panic-buying sprees around the UK. If it was designed to make the government look like it is in charge of an impending national palaver, it hasn't worked. Instead, the Fire Brigades Union has criticised the Cabinet Office minister, Francis Maude, for suggesting that motorists should keep a petrol stash "in a jerry can in the garage" while the energy secretary, Ed Davey, urged drivers to keep their tanks at least two-thirds full. With no strike dates declared and a disruptive walkout at least seven days away anyway (due to strike laws that mandate a weeks' notice on setting dates) the government's pell-mell reaction to an industrial ballot is puzzling. Nonetheless, there could be political benefits to scenes of panic. The government is not reacting in a vaccum. It is reacting to a strike ballot by drivers affiliated to the Unite trade union, Britain's largest union and the biggest donor to the Labour Party. Anti-trade union legislation and proposals are bubbling around various political figures - from Francis Maude to Boris Johnson and Eric Pickles - and disruption caused by a strike ballot, whether the mandate is used or not, could be a further spur to clunking the unions with some heavy-duty legislation. This might not relate to Johnson's call for a minimum strike vote threshold. It could relate instead to legislation clamping down on facility time - employees working full time on union duties at work, using company 'facilities'. Even if the government has gone all Clouseau over the past few days, it might have softened the ground for a move on the unions.
2.23pm: And as if by magic, jerry can sales at Halford's have gone up by 500%:
Here's a link to ITV's story where they write:
2.27pm: Getting a report from the Guardian's Dan Milmo that despite all the panic buying around the country, talks have now been agreed between the tanker driver union and their employers. If that is correct there will be no strike in the near future.
2.30pm: Some more (lighter) tweets from the twittersphere:
2.44pm: Had this tweet sent in to us:
2.50pm: Inspector Gadget, the anonymous officer who has blogged on police work since 2006, has posted an update on his (equally anymous) force's response to the fuel situation. He's not too impressed:
2.58pm: A slight update on our earlier posts (here and here) about Acas talks involving Unite and the fuel haulage companies. According to Dan Milmo both sides are close to agreeing the terms for talks, rather than actually agreeing to have talks. We'll keep you posted. Either way, it doesn't appear that an actual strike – the supposed cause for all this fuss – is going to be called immediately.
3.03pm: An interesting snippet from the AA. Based on just the figures showing yesterday's 81% rise in petrol sales on the same day a week earlier, with a 43% rise for diesel, the government will have made an extra £32m in fuel duty, it calculates.
3.12pm: Here's a brief update, via PA – talks at Acas will not beging before Monday, the conciliation service has said.
3.23pm: Perhaps inevitably, Twitter is now seeing a rush of people reporting scuffles and fights as tempers fray at petrol stations.
3.32pm: A Press Association reporter in Yorkshire has been checking the situation at local petrol stations:
3.40pm: Further to the 3.12pm update, an Acas spokesman had the following to say:
4.32pm: My business desk colleague, Graeme Wearden, has been busy looking at the possible economic implications of this sudden rush to buy fuel:
It's possible that the rise in fuel sales in the last few days could give enough of a boost to economic activity for Britain to avoid a double-dip recession. But it's a complex question, and we may not know the full story for several months. The Office for National Statistics confirmed to us that any increased spending on fuel would, in itself, equate to an increase in economic activity. "Inevitably, this spending would feed through," an ONS spokesman said. "Any activity that is above the usual would have an effect on overall output." Importantly, £1 of retail spending will usually makes a larger contribution to total economic activity. In the case of petrol, the ONS will also track the economic activity that took place when the crude oil was extracted and refined, and then transported to the petrol station. As the ONS spokesman puts it: "All economic data feeds into the GDP number, so every transaction has a multiplying effect." Petrol sold today was extracted many weeks ago – but the multiplier effect could be significant, if suppliers try to respond to the current boost in sales by shipping more fuel to the forecourt. The ONS won't be drawn on the specific question of how today's fuel panic might affect GDP data, and pointed out that sales made this week may simply be brought forward from next week. However, the current quarter ends at midnight Saturday/Sunday, so GDP in the current quarter, and the next, could both feel an impact. So, onto the numbers. Yesterday, the ONS reported that UK GDP fell by 0.3% in the fourth quarter of 2011 to £352.42bn. This morning, the OECD estimated that GDP will fall by 0.1% in the current quarter. That would mean a technical recession (according to the definition of 'two consecutive quarters of negative growth' used in the UK). That 0.1% drop in GDP forecast by the OECD is equal to around £350m less economic activity. How much extra petrol is being bought? If the AA's estimate of an extra £32m of duty (see 3.03pm) is right, that sounds like around £45m of extra sales. If sales today are much higher (as appears likely), and that trend continues on Friday and Saturday, then we could possibly see enough extra activity to nudge the GDP by that magic 0.1%. Incidentally, because GDP changes are rounded up or down to the nearest 0.1%, it's possible that a smaller increase in output would be enough to 'tip the scales'. However..... before we get too carried away, we should remember that the extra money being spent on petrol is probably eating into other retail spending (although if people are sticking it on their credit card, that might not apply). And there's another catch. The 'first estimate' of UK GDP for the first quarter of 2012 will be released in late April, but it will only include data from January and February. We may not get a proper picture of March's economic activity until the 'final reading' of GDP in three month's time. (Unless, as happened after the bad winter of 2010, the ONS decides to factor in the likely impact of extra fuel spending as one of its (increasingly common) one-off factors....) Footnote: you can see the latest ONS GDP data here.
4.40pm: Dan Milmo notes that the chances of a tanker drivers' strike affecting the Easter getaway now appear fairly remote:
6.41pm: The Petrol Retailers Association, which represents about 5,500 garages, has blamed the government for causing panic buying.
"This is exactly what we didn't want - people panic-buying. Deliveries are still being made to garages and we are advising people to continue with their normal buying habits," a spokesman told PA.
A motorist in Ilkley, Yorkshire, was asked to leave a garage forecourt after snatching the pump out of the hand of a female driver, an eyewitness told the news agency.
One van driver in Leeds said he had been waiting 30 minutes to get fuel while in Harrogate a forecourt on the outskirts of the town had run out of fuel by 11.30am.
Retail store Halfords reported "high" sales of fuel cans. Sales of all cans have soared by 225% compared with this time last year, with motorists buying in "the thousands", while sales of jerry cans are up by more than 500%.
Firefighters were called to deal with a fuel spillage after a car was overfilled with petrol in Crawley, West Sussex.