Bank of Japan OKs more stimulus, keeps rate steady
TOKYO — The Bank of Japan announced an extra dose of monetary stimulus Friday, joining fresh efforts by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe to reboot the economy.
The central bank said it would buy ¥6 trillion worth of exchange-traded funds annually, up from ¥3.3 trillion previously, in an attempt to stoke inflation and growth by pumping money into the economy. It said it would leave its asset-purchase target at ¥80 trillion a year.
The monetary policy board voted approved the expansion of ETF purchases by a vote of 7-2.
The BOJ’s choices risk disappointing investors who expected more-aggressive action to counter faltering inflation and a stronger currency. Pressure on the BOJ to expand its stimulus had been rising for months, and speculation in recent weeks about what it might do went as far as “helicopter money,” a radical policy involving direct underwriting of government spending.
The central bank left unchanged its purchases of Japanese government bonds, which comprise the bulk of its asset buying, underscoring concerns about whether the program would be sustainable if JGB buying were expanded. It already owns more than a third of all outstanding JGBs, with its balance sheet ballooning to 85% of gross domestic product as of May.
The BOJ also left a key interest rate on bank reserves unchanged at minus 0.1%. It dropped the rate into negative territory in February to drive yields lower and spur lending and investment, but the move delivered limited results while provoking a backlash from banks and the Japanese public.
Many economists, though, had already concluded that the BOJ had reached its policy limits, and had little or no ammunition left to fire. This view is likely to gain currency after the BOJ decided not to expand its JGB purchases or drive the reserve rate lower. BOJ Gov. Haruhiko Kuroda has vowed again and again to do “whatever it takes” to reach 2% inflation. But inflation is nowhere near that level — and in recent months has been moving in the opposite direction.
An expanded version of this report appears on WSJ.com.