Volkswagen emissions cheating was not a one-time error
WOLFSBURG, Germany — Volkswagen said Thursday that its emissions cheating scandal began in 2005 with a decision to heavily promote diesel engines in the United States and a realization that those engines could not meet clean air standards.
What followed was a textbook example of what happens when ambition combines with weak internal controls and ethical standards, the company acknowledged as it presented a preliminary report of its investigation into the origins of the scandal.
Some employees, the company found, chose to cheat on emissions tests rather than to curtail Volkswagen’s U.S. campaign.
“There was a tolerance for breaking the rules,” Hans-Dieter Potsch, the chairman of Volkswagen’s supervisory board, said Thursday at his first lengthy news conference since the emissions cheating came to light in September. “That is the hardest thing to accept.”
At the news conference, which also included Matthias Müller, the Volkswagen CEO, the company gave its most detailed explanation yet of what had led to the scandal. Potsch said it was “the biggest test” in Volkswagen’s history.
The company is in talks with U.S. regulators about how to make about 500,000 cars comply with clean air rules. Müller said that he was optimistic that a technical solution would be announced soon.
The cheating began a decade ago, while Volkswagen was developing a diesel engine, and opted for a less expensive pollution control technology. Later, the German automaker phased in a newer technology that used the chemical urea to neutralize nitrogen oxide emissions, which are a harmful pollutant.
Cars with the newer chemical technology should have been able to pass emissions tests legally. But apparently, Volkswagen wanted to minimize the frequency with which customers or dealers would need to refill the tank that holds the chemical. And so Volkswagen programmed the cars to dial back emission controls — except when tests were under way — to minimize consumption of the chemical.
“It proves not to have been a one-time error, but rather a chain of errors that were allowed to happen,” Potsch said.
While Volkswagen has been able to resolve the emissions problem in Europe at relatively low cost, the United States has stricter limits on nitrogen oxide emissions, which have been linked to lung ailments.
Compounding the problem is that most of the cars sold in the United States are equipped with older technology that does not use urea to treat the emissions and will therefore be more difficult to bring up to standard. The company will probably have to install new hardware in those vehicles, which include the Jetta, Golf and Beetle models sold before the 2015 model year.
The company acknowledged that, in addition to wrongdoing by individual employees, the misconduct was the result of weak oversight and of “a mind-set in some areas of the company that tolerated breaches of the rules.”
For example, the people who developed parts were the same ones who approved them for production. At other companies, it is standard practice for one team to develop components and another to check them for quality. Volkswagen said it would correct its procedures.
“We have to understand how this came about,” Potsch said. “That is the only way we can prevent it from happening again.”
Volkswagen also said that nine people had been suspended as a result of the scandal, one more than had previously been disclosed. It said it could not disclose any names until the evidence was “watertight.”
The company’s preliminary report comes nearly three months after the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said that Volkswagen had programmed diesel cars to detect when they were undergoing emissions tests, and to crank up pollution controls. At other times, the cars emitted up to 40 times the allowed amount of nitrogen oxides.
Volkswagen subsequently admitted that 11 million cars worldwide were equipped with the illegal software.