US Economic News, Economy – RTTNews
House Passes Bill To Fight Use Of Cryptocurrencies For Sex, Drug Trafficking The U.S. House of Representatives has unanimously passed a Bill that helps the Government to analyze and report on the use of virtual currencies in the country's marketplaces facilitating sex and drug trafficking. H.R. 6069, the Fight Illicit Networks and Detect (FIND) Trafficking Act of 2018, would require the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to study how virtual currencies and online mark
Cryptocurrency Use Could More Than Double In Future: ING Survey The US, Europe, and Australia are set to witness the public interest in cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin more than double in future, a survey by ING's eZonomics think tank showed. Only 9 percent of Europeans surveyed currently own cryptocurrencies, but another 16 percent expect to possess them in the future, the "Cracking the code on cryptocurrency" part of ING's international survey found.
Bitcoin and altcoins are trying to retain the upward momentum from a day earlier, Thursday morning. The top cryptocurrency is modestly in the green. Overall cryptocurrency market capitalization was $245.29 billion as of 10.18 am ET on CoinMarketCap.
Reflecting downward revisions to private inventory investment, consumer spending, and exports, the Commerce Department released a report on Thursday showing an unexpected downward revision to the pace of U.S. economic growth in the first quarter.
U.S. Weekly Jobless Claims Rise More Than Expected To 227,000 After reporting decreases in first-time claims for U.S. unemployment benefits for four consecutive weeks, the Labor Department released a report on Thursday showing initial jobless claims rebounded by more than expected in the week ended June 23rd. The report said initial jobless claims rose to 227,000.
Reflecting downward revisions to private inventory investment, consumer spending, and exports, the Commerce Department released a report on Thursday showing an unexpected downward revision to the pace of U.S. economic growth in the first quarter.
U.S. Pending Home Sales Unexpectedly Drop 0.5% In May Reflecting a large decline in contract activity in the South, the National Association of Realtors released a report on Wednesday showing an unexpected decrease in pending home sales in the U.S. in the month of May. NAR said its pending home sales index fell by 0.5 percent to 105.9 in May.
Bitcoin and altcoins are trending lower Wednesday morning, suggesting that the decision by the social media giant, Facebook, to reverse a ban on cryptocurrency advertisements failed to prop up the market sentiment. Overall cryptocurrency market capitalization was $245.59 billion as of 10:11 am ET on CoinMarketCap.
A study to find out the social media's effect on cryptocurrency has revealed that public sentiment, expressed on the online platforms, has the power to manipulate the value of bitcoin. In the first of its kind study, Stevens Institute of Technology researchers collected and analyzed 344,000 public posts over two years on the world's most popular online bitcoin forum, Bitcointalk. They also looked
U.S. Durable Goods Orders Drop 0.6% In May, Less Than Expected A report released by the Commerce Department on Wednesday showed a smaller than expected decrease in new orders for U.S. manufactured durable goods in the month of May. The Commerce Department said durable goods orders fell by 0.6 percent in May after tumbling by a revised 1.0 percent in April.
U.S. Durable Goods Orders Drop Less Than Expected In May A report released by the Commerce Department on Wednesday showed a smaller than expected decrease in new orders for U.S. manufactured durable goods in the month of May.
S&P Global Ratings affirmed its 'AA+' sovereign credit ratings on the United States of America, with 'stable' outlook. S&P said the ratings were underpinned by the resilience and diversity of its economy, its institutional strengths, its extensive economic policy flexibility that includes a proactive...
Reflecting a deterioration in expectations, the Conference Board released a report on Tuesday showing an unexpected decline in U.S. consumer confidence in the month of June. The Conference Board said its consumer confidence index fell to 126.4 in June from a revised 128.8 in May. Economists had expected...
Bitcoin was modestly in the green Tuesday morning as it struggles to retain earlier gains, while altcoins were trending down. Overall cryptocurrency market capitalization was $251.08 billion as of 10.04 am ET on Tuesday on CoinMarketCap.