Amazon debuts in India with ‘marketplace’ model, fierce competition ahead
BANGALORE: Amazon’s India launch is expected to add to the pressure on incumbent online retailers which are cutting costs after a spending spree to win new customers. The world’s large online retailer formally set foot in India on Wednesday with a ‘marketplace model’ that it hopes will help it overcome regulatory binds on foreign e-commerce providers.
“The launch of Amazon.in is definitely good news for the e-commerce sector. The market is huge in India and there is opportunity for all players who create a huge customer proposition,” said Ashish Bhinde of Avendus Group With about 130 million internet users, India is regarded as a virtually untapped market for online retail; but those that operate in the space have been losing money in their rush to add customers. The online retail market at the end of fiscal 2013 was around $1.5 billion (Rs 8,400 crore) and is expected to grow by nearly 100% every year Among the main players in India are Flipkart, Snapdeal (in which eBay has invested), Jabong and Indiatimes Shopping, which is part of the Times Group that publishes this newspaper. In recent weeks, Flipkart and Jabong have retrenched several dozen staff as they attempt to control costs amid intensifying competition. Amazon’s India manager Amit Agarwal said the model adopted by the company is fully compliant with all Indian laws. Regulations do not allow foreign online retailers to have a fully-owned Indian arm selling directly in India. Legal experts said that by literally interpreting the definition of online retailing, Amazon has created a “very clever model” where they claim not to be buying or selling anything themselves. “Even in invoicing, they are making it very clear that the seller is not them,” said Sajai Singh, a partner at J Sagar Associates Amazon will not own any of the merchandise sold through its website, but be an aggregator to all the retailers exhibiting their products on its site. Amazon India already operates Junglee.com, a price-comparison portal. Junglee will continue alongside Amazon. To begin with, Amazon will sell some seven million book titles and nearly 13,000 movie titles. It plans to expand into other categories such as cameras and phones in the near future. Agarwal declined to share details. Amazon has been actively lobbying with the government to allow foreign direct investment in online retail, just like it has allowed 51% foreign ownership in brickand-mortar multibrand retail. But Singh of J Sagar was sceptical that Amazon would succeed any time soon. “I don’t see FDI opening up in online retail very soon as this is not high on the government agenda. E-commerce does not have similar leverage as brick-and-mortar retailers.”