Airlines, banks pitch in as Air Australia goes bust
HUNDREDS of passengers have vented their fury at Air Australia after the airline went bust this morning and grounded flights, leaving them stranded.
There are reports the airline sold approximately 100,000 tickets for future flights that are unlikely to ever take off.
Virgin Australia, Hawaiian Airlines, AirAsia X, Qantas and Jetstar have stepped in to help passengers get home.
Click here to see the reaction on Facebook and Twitter.
Stuck overseas? Call DFAT on 1300 555 135 within Australia or +61 2 6261 3305 overseas.
Have you been affected by the Air Australia grounding? If so email us at news@news.com.au.
That's it for our rolling coverage but keep checking in with us for major updates.
4pm Jetstar said passengers who have already commenced their journey with Air Australia will be able to buy a ticket with Jetstar for the same price, until February 29, 2012, regardless of the return date. Meanwhile passengers who haven't yet started their trip can access special fares for travel until March 31, 2012.
3.25pm AirAsia X has announced it will waive the base seat fare on the Kuala Lumpur to Australia route to rescue the stranded. Passengers flying to the Gold Coast, Melbourne and Perth will only pay taxes and charges starting from $56, the airline said. Baggage will also be free for each passenger up to 20kg per person.
3.07pm Qantas has announced a range of measures to assist stranded Air Australia passengers.
For international flights it will match the applicable sector fare of the customer's ticket, regardless of return date. For domestic fares, passengers who have already commenced their journey Qantas will match the applicable sector fare of the customer's ticket, for travel between now and February 29, 2012.
Qantas international economy fares Brisbane – Jakarta via Sydney, one-way: $450 return: $900 Melbourne – Jakarta via Sydney, one-way: $450 return: $900 Brisbane – Bangkok via Sydney, one-way: $550 return: $1100 Melbourne – Bangkok via Sydney, one-way: $550 return: $1100 Brisbane – Honolulu via Sydney, one-way: $650 return: $1300 Melbourne – Honolulu via Sydney, one-way: $650 return: $1300 Qantas domestic one-way fares Melbourne – Brisbane $159 Brisbane – Port Headland $492 Broome – Perth $245
Click here for more information.
3pm Enraged passenger Karen Burns, who had to fork out an extra $4000 to fly to Thailand, has created a Facebook page for those impacted by the Air Australia grounding. She hopes that by joining together passengers will be able to push for action.
2.45pm Passengers seeking refunds and who paid for their tickets via the Commonwealth Bank need to come in to a branch and lodge a notice of dispute, a spokeswoman said. The Commonwealth Bank will then lodge it with Air Australia's bank on behalf of the passengers and await refunds from them.
Passenger Pete from Brisbane said he is happy the bank is assisting customers:
2.31pm Prime Minister Julia Gillard said the airline needs to do all it can to help stranded passengers and its workers:
2.18pm Qantas is pleading for patience as it works on a plan to help stranded Air Australia passengers.
2pm Passenger Nicole told news.com.au she is outraged the $2000 she paid for flights will likely not be refunded due to technicalities.
She also said the cost of flying to Phuket has increased from $1800 to more than $2500 today.
1.50pm Australia's aviation industry should be properly investigated after the demise of Air Australia, Tony Sheldon from the Transport Workers Union said.
Mr Sheldon said Air Australia has previously held contracts with successive federal governments and was supposed to be open about its performance:
1.37pm A Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) spokesman told ABC News the Australian embassy in Bangkok is in touch with local authorities to help any Australians stranded in Thailand.DFAT's 24-hour Consular Emergency Centre number is 1300 555 135 within Australia or +61 2 6261 3305 overseas.
1.33pm Virgin Australia Airlines has announced it will assist Air Australia passengers stranded in Denpasar.
Virgin Australia Group Executive of Corporate Communications Danielle Keighery said the airline would provide passengers with special fares to allow them to travel home from Denpasar to Brisbane, Sydney or Melbourne for US$199 ($185), excluding baggage one way for sale until midnight Monday 20 February for departures until Friday 2 March 2012.
1.18pmA passenger claims he lost over $5000 worth of flights despite having insurance via an online travel website as it failed to inform him it was withdrawing insurance cover for Air Australia.
12.50pm The Government says it is ready to assist employees of Air Australia.Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations Bill Shorten said even if the company enters liquidation and is unable to pay employees the entitlements they are owed, they may be able to receive financial support:
12.27pm The airline sold about 100,000 tickets for future flights that are unlikely to ever take off, Fairfax reported.
12.22pmBrisbane Airport is urging any Air Australia passengers to stay at home, with a spokeswoman saying:
12.13pm The pilots' union said the airline had failed to consult with it or the pilots before going into administration. Australian Federation of Air Pilots President Captain Bryan Murray said he was "saddened and disappointed" at the announcement.
11.52am Passenger Krystel Hayes from Brisbane said she has been unable to obtain a refund from her bank, despite being advised to do so by the airline.
11.35am Ironically Strategic Airlines (which was rebranded as Air Australia last November) put on extra flights to assist passengers stranded by the Qantas grounding last October. Now Qantas is planning to come to the rescue of Air Australia's passengers.
11.22amNyomie Horton is devastated that her young daughter won't be able to be with her loved ones on her birthday.
11.15am Passengers have taken to Twitter and Facebook to vent their anger. Click here to see the responses.
11.09am There are claims Air Australia was paying foreign flight attendants as little as $90 a day.
11am Pensioner Allan Marshall told news.com.au he saved for a year to fly to his dream destination of Hawaii on March 3 and is furious about the news.
10.55am Hawaiian Airlines is offering a special one-way "rescue fare" of $300 between Honolulu and Sydney for travellers stranded by today's shutdown of of Air Australia.
Mark Dunkerley, Hawaiian’s president and CEO, said the airline will offer flights through to March 1.
10.50am Stranded in Phuket, Air Australia passenger Michael Ilyine told ABCNews he and his wife were told to make their own way home.
10.40amQantas says its developing a plan to assist stranded customers and will announce the details soon. In the meantime it has advised Air Australia passengers to go to the Qantas Sales Desk at the airport for assistance.
10.17am The head of Queensland’s Tourism Industry Council Daniel Gschwind says the collapse of Air Australia won’t hurt tourism in his state.
Mr Gschwind says highly competitive industries sometimes produce victims, and Air Australia is one of those.
10am Most of the airline's 300 staff have been stood down, Fairfax reported.
9.40am Air Australia's Twitter and Facebook pages are no longer working.
9.28am Air Australia denied as late as yesterday that it was going bust and continued to sell tickets on Wednesday,The Australian reports.
This is what the airline allegedly told Crikey.com on Wednesday:
9.08am Voluntary administrator Mark Korda of Korda Mentha told Fairfax Radio they had been contacted early this morning and appointed after Air Australia was unable to pay for fuel.
He said administrators would work through the weekend to try to find a "white knight'' to save the airline.
8.50amPassengers have taken to Twitter and Facebook to voice their anger.
Aaron O'Brien: "Dear Air Australia. Thanks for going into administration on the day I'm flying with you to Melbourne. That's just fantastic."
Seona Colussi: "Air Australia how can you do this? This is going to be the most expensive trip to Phuket - ever!"
Pat Brunet: "Oh great, we had over 10 people booked and paid for a wedding."
8.35am Stranded Air Australia passenger Sarah McGavin told Channel 9 that passengers at Phuket were originally told very little about what was going on.
She said that she had managed to get another flight back to Melbourne, but others were not so lucky.
8.23amAir Australia has released a FAQ document for stranded passengers advising what to do next.
8.10am Qantas CEO Alan Joyce has offered to try to help put those passengers on flights.
8am Shadow Treasurer Joe Hockey accused the government of making it harder for airlines, Channel 7 reported.
6.19amA press release given to passengers at the airport said the airline’s fleet would be grounded indefinitely and told travellers to make alternate travel arrangements.
"In the short term, the fleet will be grounded. It currently appears that there are no funds available to meet operational expenses so flights will be suspended immediately," it said.
"For clarity, it also appears highly unlikely there will be any flights in the short to medium term."
The press release also listed details for other airlines flying to Australia.
It said passengers who booked using credit cards may be able to receive a refund by asking for a charge back from their bank.
Those who paid cash were unlikely to receive a refund.
"Unfortunately if you paid by cash, it is likely you will not be entitled to a refund unless you took out insurance AND that insurance covers an event of insolvency," it said.
Honeymooners Michael and Tiffany Ilyine are among those stranded in Phuket after their flight was cancelled overnight.
Mr Ilyine, from Geelong, said the couple had been due to fly out at 7.30pm Phuket time after their 10-day honeymoon in Koh Samui.
The couple had checked in to their flight and their bags were loaded onto the plane but they were never able to board.
Mr Ilyine said the plane's departure was delayed a number of times before passengers were handed a press release from receivers KordaMentha after midnight.
There were no Air Australia staff in the terminal to speak to passengers.
"The information from the airline is that there would be no assistance," Mr Ilyine said.
"There was no communication from them at all, there were no ground staff and air staff said that they refused to answer the phones and weren’t able to be contacted.
"There's a plane-load of mainly Australians who have been dispersed from the airport with nothing really apart from a press release."
The couple managed to book accommodation five minutes from the airport and was trying desperately to find flights home on other airlines.
Mr Ilyine said most of the flights were booking out fast as passengers scrambled to get home.
The company posted a statement on its website this morning.
"On February 17 2012, the Director of the Air Australia group of companies appointed John Park and Mark Korda of KordaMentha as voluntary administrators," it said.
The Brisbane-based carrier flew domestic routes and to Bali, Honolulu and Phuket.
It was previously known as Strategic Airlines but relaunched in November 2011 as Air Australia with a view to cash in on under-serviced routes.
Chief executive Michael James said during the relaunch that he would not be attempting to compete with Qantas or Jetstar.
"I think it is re-educating Australia that you don't have to go via Sydney anymore," he told reporters at the time.
The announcement comes a day after Qantas announced it was shedding 500 jobs due to tough business conditions.