Arrium administration puts cloud over 6,700 jobs nationwide: SA Treasurer
More than 1,000 jobs face the axe at Whyalla but more than 6,700 positions across the country are under a cloud as a result of Arrium's voluntary administration announcement.
Arrium is in debt by more than $4 billion and owes about $2.8 billion to lenders, $1 billion to suppliers and about $500 million to staff.
Administrators Grant Thornton were on Thursday appointed to run the troubled iron ore and steelmaking business.
Arrium employs about 1,600 people in South Australia plus another 1,400 contractors.
Elsewhere it employs 2,800 in New South Wales, 930 in Victoria and 900 in Queensland.
SA Treasurer Tom Koutsantonis said employees and contractors were being contacted by the administrator.
"What will happen next is that the administrator will attempt to stabilise this issue," he said.
Mr Koutsantonis said the administrator had enough funds to maintain operations and "nothing was going to shut down" but called for a national approach to the company's long-term prospects.
He said there would be a further meeting of creditors in eight days and he had met and received support from Federal Industry Minister Christopher Pyne.
"Australian banks have gotten what they wanted," Mr Koutsantonis said.
"I was attempting to let them know the company's best chance of success was not to go into administration, but the banks have forced the situation."
Federal Member for Grey Rowan Ramsey said taxpayers should not have to foot the bill for Arrium's debt.
"We've got a private company here that has willingly borrowed over $2 billion from four privately-owned banks who have willingly loaned them that $2 billion," he said.
"Now if that $2 billion debt wasn't around the neck of Arrium at the moment, the steelworks and the mining operations would be basically breaking even and we wouldn't be dealing with this situation that we are at the moment.
"That issue of who absorbs the losses ... has to be resolved before anyone can really step into the space and work out what goes forward."
Mr Pyne said he would call on the governments of Qld, NSW, Victoria and Western Australian, where there are a further 500 Arrium employees, to take a proactive interest in Arrium.
He said the company's best prospects would be to trade itself out its $2.8 billion debt to creditors.
Despite acknowledging the strategic importance of the country's only producer of industrial steel, he did not offer federal money to Arrium because it "had not asked" and instead referred to other "levers" that governnments could pull to assist the company.
"We brought forward the purchase of 72,000 tonnes of steel for the Tarcoola-Adelaide railway line [upgrade], which has been brought forward to start this year.
"It's likely that Arrium would win that contract because it's very close geographically to where the line might be or will be."
Australian Workers Union national secretary Scott McDine said the company had "over-invested" but it was time to look to the future.
"We need to work with administrators, we need to keep the steelworks as a viable operation, we need the Federal and State governments to actually inject themselves into the process," Mr McDine said.
"They cannot abrogate responsibility and they need to act."
Whyalla City Council Deputy Mayor Tom Antonio said a closure of the Whyalla steelworks would have a flow-on effect to 6,000 jobs in the town.
"Can we afford to have people losing their homes? The social and mental health issues that can be caused by this are indescribable," he said.
"This is going to have catastrophic effects socially and economically if we don't make this work."
One Whyalla resident suggested they might have to leave if the a closure goes ahead.
Christina Faulk said her husband had been a mechanical engineer at the steelworks for more than two decades and both hers and another family might need to move elsewhere to find work.
"It's just bad because he's over the age of 50 and finding another job will be difficult," she said.
Independent Senator for SA Nick Xenophon said Whyalla would become Australia's biggest ghost town unless the country acted with urgency.
He said there were only 9,000 jobs in Whyalla.
"You do the maths," he said. "It would be absolutely devastating and it would have a ripple effect."
"The ball's in the Federal Government's court.