E.U. Parliament Passes Measure to Break Up Google in Symbolic Vote
He noted that United States antitrust officials had never found reason to censure Google, despite its market power on both sides of the Atlantic. He said it was “hard to see how Europe could do this alone, and what would be the basis for doing something so fundamentally different from the U.S. authorities.”
Ricardo Cardoso, spokesman for Ms. Vestager, said after the parliamentary vote that she would not be swayed by the result. Antitrust should be “independent from politics” so that Europe’s “procedures are not put into question,” he said.
The vote was taken on a broader resolution on the digital economy that passed with 384 votes in favor, 174 against and 56 abstentions.
The lengthy resolution broadly called on the European authorities to break down barriers in digital commerce and was backed by significant numbers of lawmakers in the main conservative and socialist political blocs in the Parliament, the only directly elected body in the European Union.
Ms. Vestager, a free-market Dane who took office on Nov. 1, succeeded Joaquín Almunia, who started the antitrust investigation of Google. Mr. Almunia tried three times to settle with the company but abandoned those efforts after its competitors and other groups said the proposed settlement terms would not be enough to allow for fair competition. Google’s search engine, with about 90 percent of the market in some European Union countries, is even more dominant in Europe than it is in the United States.
Ms. Vestager has said she would take the necessary time before deciding on the next steps in that antitrust case. She must also decide whether to open a formal investigation into Android, Google’s mobile operating system. A preliminary inquiry, also begun under Mr. Almunia, has been considering whether Google uses Android to discriminate against non-Google applications.
The power of the commission to break up companies was made explicit in 2003. In a landmark case in 2008, the German energy utility E.ON agreed to sell its extra-high-voltage network as part of a settlement, not something unilaterally imposed on the company.