News of the World phone-hacking scandal - Saturday 9 July 2011
9.25am: Good morning and welcome to the Guardian's live blog on the phone hacking scandal on the day when Rupert Murdoch is expected to arrive in London amid pressure from News Corp investors for him to get a grip on the crisis that now threatens to engulf his media empire.
To start, here's a round up of the latest developments:
• Murdoch is expected to arrive in London today on the eve of the final edition of the News of the World, which is to be closed following a mounting toll of damaging allegations about phone hacking.
• Police are investigating evidence that a News International executive may have deleted millions of emails from an internal archive in an apparent attempt to obstruct Scotland Yard's phone-hacking inquiry. The company last night denied the claims.
• A third man was arrested last night in connection with the scandal. The 63-year-old was arrested at an address in Surrey over alleged corrupt payments made to police officers.
• Former News of the World editor Andy Coulson, who resigned as David Cameron's director of communications in January, has been released on police bail after being quizzed for nine hours over allegations of corruption. The Sunday tabloid's ex-royal editor Clive Goodman was also questioned yesterday over claims officers were bribed.
• News International's embattled chief executive Rebekah Brooks has hinted to staff of more damaging revelations to come, warning News of the World staff of "another very difficult moment in this company's history".
If you want to comment on this issue please go to our open thread on the phone-hacking scandal on Comment is Free.
You can follow me on Twitter @David_Batty
You can find yesterday's live blog here.
10.03am: A 63-year-old man who was arrested yesterday over the phone hacking scandal in connection with alleged corrupt payments made to police officers has been bailed, New Scotland Yard said.
(We're being evacuated from the building but the live coverage should resume shortly.)
10.09am: Here's a round-up of coverage of the phone-hacking scandal in today's papers.
The Guardian leads with the story that police are investigating allegations of a cover-up by a News International executive. It reports that a senior executive may have deleted millions of emails from an internal archive in an apparent attempt to obstruct Scotland Yard's inquiry into the phone-hacking scandal.
The Telegraph leads on David Cameron's growing struggle to contain the fallout from the hacking scandal on his premiership. Under the headline Hacking scandal hits No10, the paper reports that he faces renewed criticism over his decision to hire Andy Coulson as his chief spin doctor:
The Times (paywall) leads on Coulson's arrest. The report's headline highlights the former spin doctor's words to reporters after he left Lewisham police station in south London last night: "There's an awful lot I would like to say but I can't at this time."
The paper notes that Coulson was fingerprinted and DNA-tested before being questioned by detectives investigating the scandal for eight hours.
The Independent raises the prospect that the hacking scandal could become Britain's Watergate - a reference to the US political scandal that led to the resignation of President Nixon. The paper's lead article states:
Bob Woodward, one of the journalists who broke the Watergate scandal, told the BBC that the closure of the News of the World was a "lightning bolt" shot across the Murdoch media empire.
The Financial Times (paywall) focuses on Rupert Murdoch's arrival in London today to tackle the crisis, which threatens to derail his bid to take full control of British Sky Broadcasting.
The lead story notes hedge funds that had previously seen BSkyB's sale to News Corp "as all but a done deal have begun to dump their positions". Perhaps equally worrying for Murdoch, some are now raising questions over his family's fitness to lead the media corporation out of the crisis.
10.54am: The Labour Party has demanded that the government appoint a judge to head the inquiry into the hacking scandal at the News of the World by the end of today.
In a letter to the David Cameron, shadow culture secretary Ivan Lewis said urgent action to initiate the inquiry was required given the Guardian's report of emails being destroyed.
He added that there should be immediate discussions between the government and the opposition to put someone in place:
Terms of reference for the inquiry should then be agreed with the judge, on the basis of cross-party discussions, "as soon as practicably possible", Lewis added.
Downing Street has said it expects talks with Labour leader Ed Miliband to take place on Wednesday.
11.01am: Deputy Labour leader Harriet Harman has added her voice to calls for the prime minister to appoint a judge to lead the hacking scandal without delay.
Time was "running out" and that Cameron should "stop dragging his feet", she told Sky News:
Number 10 said that it was acting "as rapidly as possible and legally permissible and that the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Judge, had been asked to propose a candidate to lead the inquiry.
News International has denied that police are investigating suspected deletion of emails by an executive at the company.
11.07am: News of the World editor Colin Myler has spoken to reporters on his way to work to edit the final edition of the Sunday tabloid.
He said: "It's a very sad day. I'm thinking about my team of talented journalists."
11.14am: The UK's largest arts university is facing demands from academics and students to withdraw an honorary award it bestowed upon Rebekah Brooks for her "considerable contribution" to journalism.
Brooks received an honorary fellowship from the University of the Arts London (UAL) last year. The institution posted photos on its Flickr account of Brooks at the ceremony. But these were taken down on Friday after enquiries were made by the the Guardian.
A letter, signed by academics and the head of the university's student union, has been sent to the university's registrar, Steve Marshall, insisting that the fellowship is revoked.
They include Gary Horne, a governor of the university and director of the journalism masters course at the London College of Communication, where Brooks was once a student.
The letter describes giving Brooks the fellowship as "offensive and indefensible". Horne said staff, and the general public, felt the actions of some News of the World journalists had been "reprehensible" and "repugnant":
The issue is to be raised at a meeting of the university's governors on Monday.
A separate Facebook campaign to lobby the university to withdraw the award has been set up by students, which has attracted more than 340 people in less than 24 hours. An online petition has also been set up.
A university spokeswoman said it awarded honorary degrees to those it judged to have "made considerable contributions to the creative and cultural industries". She said Brooks had been presented the honorary fellowship in recognition of her achievements, which included being appointed the Sun's first female editor.
The university is not the only educational establishment to stand by Brooks. The school where she serves as a governor, Fulwood Academy, has pledged her its support.
David Goldie, chairman of governors at the academy, told the Lancashire Evening Post that she had done a "fantastic" job.
(Disclosure: I graduated from a postgrad at the University of the Arts this summer.)
11.40am: News International has hired a research consultancy to explore how the company can re-introduce a Sunday tabloid.
The move comes after confirmation that the company was behind the registration of the domain sunonsunday.co.uk.
11.49am: News International has denied reports that the News of the World's offices will become a designated crime scene when journalists leave tonight.
A spokesman said: "Following discussions with the police, all necessary steps have been taken to secure the information necessary for their investigations."
12.01pm: Former New Labour spin doctor Alastair Campbell says the Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre could soon be under the same pressure as Rupert Murdoch.
On his blog today Campbell praises Steve Coogan for stressing on Newsnight last night that the phone-hacking scandal is not just restricted to the News of the World, in particular for the comedian's comments about Dacre.
Campbell makes no mention, however, of the close relationship between Murdoch and his former boss Tony Blair.
If you missed Coogan's appearance on Newsnight, you can watch an extract here in which he expresses delight that the News of the World is closing, describing the move as a "victory for decency and humanity". You can watch the full programme here, including Coogan's heated exchange with the paper's former features executive Paul McMullan.
12.22pm: Sky News reports that Rupert Murdoch will arrive in Britain tomorrow. This contradicts earlier reports that he is due to fly in today.
Media analyst Douglas McCabe also tells the channel he thinks that Murdoch has prevented the phone hacking scandal from damaging his US interests by removing the toxic brand of the News of the World. This runs counter to most other assessments of the impact of the crisis on the Murdoch media empire.
More than £1bn was wiped from BSkyB's market value yesterday.
12.36pm: The Church of England has written to Rupert Murdoch to condemn the phone hacking scandal and to demand that News Corp executives clean up journalistic practices in the company.
The Church of England Commissioners for England owns £3.7m ($6m) of News Corp shares. In a letter to Murdoch, the chairman of the church's Ethical Investment Advisory Group, investment banker John Reynolds, insisted that the board of News Corp "takes all necessary measures to instil investor confidence in the ethical and governance standards" of the company.
The letter, which described the News of the World's behaviour as "utterly reprehensible and unethical", also warned:
12.54pm: Robbie Collin, film critic at the News of the World, has laid into the paper's former features executive Paul McMullan for his dubious defence of phone hacking on last night's Newsnight.
Collins also said: "The worst thing is, he's nothing to do with us. hasn't worked here for 11 years, apparently was a walking joke when he did.
"How is a crumpled idiot who makes a tit of himself on Newsnight "as much of a journalist" as I am?"
1.01pm: Andy Coulson has just told reporters outside his south London home that it is "a very sad day for the News of the World".
"More importantly to the staff who, in my mind, are brilliant, professional people and I really feel for them," he added.
1.03pm: The News of the World is upping its circulation to five million copies for its final edition tomorrow, according to showbiz editor Dan Wootton.
Wootton told Sky News the increase was due to anticipated increased demand. His comments followed remarks from newspaper industry insiders that the Sunday tabloid's sales could be as much as 30% higher than the usual 2.6 million copies.
BBC News reported that the National Federation of Retail Newsagents (NFRN) expects the final edition to sell "extremely well". Spokeswoman Anne Bingham said: "Many people will be buying it as a collectors' item."
1.10pm: More on the Church of England's condemnation of the phone hacking scandal and its threat to disinvest in News Corp due to the company's failure to uphold ethical and governance standards.
Professor Richard Burridge, deputy chairman of the church's Ethical Investment Advisory Group, said the threat of disinvestment could have an impact in spite of the relatively small amount of shares - £3.7m - it holds in News Corp.
The Rev Canon Jonathan Alderton-Ford, a vicar in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, and a General Synod member, added that senior figures in the church were embarrassed by its holdings in News Corp.
1.30pm: The New York Times reports on how the phone hacking crisis has become a make or break test of James Murdoch's role in his father's media empire.
The paper says he could emerge from the scandal "as the company's decisive new leader, or as the tainted son who mismanaged one of the greatest crises the family business has faced".
The report also suggests the decision to close the paper was not as sudden as it appears:
If you haven't already, it's also worth reading Michael Wolf's account of how family feuds at the heart of the Murdoch empire do not bode well for News Corp.
1.48pm: The Press Association also has the doubled print run line (see 1.03pm). It says News International believes the last-ever NoW will become a collector's item.
Meanwhile, NoW deputy political editor Jamie Lyons has said on Twitter: "Let's go out with a bang". The former PA staffer told the agency his colleagues were "appalled and disgusted" by the hacking allegations. "We do feel like we have paid the price for a small group of people who are no longer at the paper," he said.
2.28pm: News of the World editor Colin Myler has spoken of his pride for his staff on a "very difficult day for us all".
The memo was sent to staff via email as they put together the final edition, PA reports:
2.47pm: The Shropshire Star has an interesting rebuttal of the claim by News of the World political editor, David Wooding, that the paper's current regime had cleaned up the dodgy practices of their predecessors.
PR consultant Jools Payne shares her experience of dealing with what Wooding's refers to as his "decent, hard-working" colleagues when her son's girlfriend, Frankie McFall, was murdered by her father, along with her mother, Susan.
She describes how she was rung on her mobile phone by someone claiming to be a PR consultant on the morning after the murders to arrange an interbiew with her son, Max, for the News of the World.
Following repeated calls from different journalists at the News of the World, and at least two further calls from the original PR consultant, she issued a photograph of Max to a news agency with a warning that further inquiries would prompt a complaint to the PCC.
Her son was then targeted by a daily torrent of "friend" requests on Facebook, which she has no doubt were from News of the World and other tabloid journalists. Payne writes:
3.22pm: My colleagues Peter Beaumont and Lucy Rock were down at Wapping earlier today and managed to speak to some of the journalists working on the final edition of the News of the World.
Inside the building one journalist working their last day said:
Another journalist expressed the bitterness felt by many staff over the perception that they had been sacrificed to save Rebekah Brook's skin:
3.31pm: The News of the World's consumer editor Dan Jones has posted the group photo of the paper's staff taken this morning on Twitter.
4.01pm: My colleague Henry McDonald reports that the son of Northern Ireland's former First Minister Ian Paisley has asked the Metropolitan Police to extend phone hacking inquiries into papers in Northern Ireland.
John Burns, associate editor of the Irish edition of the Sunday Times, earlier posted a tribute to his colleagues on the Irish edition of the News of the World on Twitter.
4.12pm: Watergate journalist Carl Bernstein says the phone hacking scandal should only come as a surprise to those who have turned a blind eye to Murdoch's "pernicious influence on journalism".
Writing for Newsweek, the veteran journalist says the events of the past week mark "a watershed for Britain, for the United States, and for Rupert Murdoch".
4.20pm: Rupert Murdoch says the decision to close the News of the World was "a collective decision".
Murdoch made the terse statement as he entered the last day of the annual Allen & Co. media conference in Sun Valley, Idaho, Reuters reports. Accompanied by his wife, Wendi, and his son, Lachlan, the media barron said he had no further comment on the situation.
4.23pm: Someone is making a fast buck on the back of the News of the World's closure by selling the final edition on eBay.
The seller has already sold two of the ten copies on offer on the online auction site - priced at £5.50 each. It's normal cover price is £1.
4.43pm: Rebekah Brooks has denied any knowledge of phone hacking at the News of the World or any other News International titles in her response to a request for fresh evidence on the scandal from MP Keith Vaz, chairman of the home affairs select committee.
Her response, along with that from Andy Coulson's lawyers, was posted on Twitter by Channel 4 News home affairs producer Marcus Edwards.
In her reply, Brooks also specifically denies any knowledge of the hacking of Milly Dowler's voicemail.
Meanwhile Coulson's lawyers say they've advised him not to reply to the committee's questions while police investigation continues.
The committee also says that Met Police acting commissioner John Yates has yet to respond to a question about his review of the original phone hacking investigation.
5.01pm: I'm signing off now but here's a late afternoon summary of today's developments in the phone hacking crisis:
• Rupert Murdoch has said it was a "collective decision" to close the News of the World. The News Group chairman and CEO, who was at a conference in Idaho, is expected to arrive in Britain tomorrow amid the phone hacking crisis.
• The News of the World staff are putting the finishing touches to the paper's last-ever edition. News International has doubled the print run to five million copies, expecting it to be eagerly sought after as a collectors' item
• Labour has called on David Cameron to hurry up naming a judge to lead the promised inquiry into phone hacking.
• A reply from Rebekah Brooks to the Commons home affairs select committee chairman, Keith Vaz, describes the "hurt and suffering caused to Milly Dowler's family, and the many other alleged crime victims of phone hacking" as "horrendous and inexcusable".
• A 63-year-old man arrested yesterday evening in Surrey over alleged corrupt payments made to police officers has been bailed.