Bank of America bans WikiLeaks payments
Bank of America today halted all transactions for WikiLeaks, joining other institutions that refuse to process payments for the website that has exposed a trove of US government cables.
WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange immediately denounced a “new type of business McCarthyism” in the United States after the BOA decision, saying the move was aimed at trying to “deprive this organization of the funds that it needs to survive, to deprive me personally of the funds that my lawyers need to protect me against extradition to the US or to Sweden.”
The term McCarthyism, referring to allegations of treason or subversion without proof, has its roots in the United States and was coined to describe the anti-communist pursuits of former US Senator Joseph McCarthy from the late 1940s to the 1950s.
Assange was speaking in the Suffolk town of Beccles, eastern England, close to the mansion of journalist friend Vaughan Smith, where he must live while on bail as he fights extradition to Sweden, where he has been accused of rape.
The BOA action is the latest blow against the website, which has been exposing classified US diplomatic cables that reveal assessments of world leaders and provide a rare glimpse into the work of scores of US embassies.
“Bank of America joins in the actions previously announced by MasterCard, PayPal, Visa Europe and others and will not process transactions of any type that we have reason to believe are intended for WikiLeaks,” the largest US bank said in a statement.
“This decision is based upon our reasonable belief that WikiLeaks may be engaged in activities that are, among other things, inconsistent with our internal policies for processing payments.”
The action comes weeks after Assange claimed in an interview with Forbes magazine that a “megaleak” by the website will target a major US bank “early next year.”
He has previously said that he has a treasure trove of documents on Bank of America, whose shares tumbled more than three percent on November 30 shortly after the Forbes interview was released.
The United States has angrily criticized the release of the documents, saying it endangers national security, and the US Attorney General has launched a criminal investigation into the site.
But Assange has won the support of a collection of anonymous “hacktivists” — computer hackers who in the name of free speech have targeted institutions that refuse to deal with the website.
On Saturday they released a statement calling for a boycott of BOA. “We ask that all people who love freedom close out their accounts at Bank of America,” the group known as “Anonymous” said on its blog AnonOps Communications.