Stocks Climb With Bonds as BOJ Ends Grim January on High Note
U.S. stocks joined an advance in global equities, while bonds rallied as the Bank of Japan’s unexpected monetary stimulus boosted confidence that central banks remain vigilant of slowing economic growth. The yen tumbled, while oil gained.
The Standard & Poor’s 500 Index extended gains throughout the day to post the biggest advance since Sept. 8, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose almost 400 points as Microsoft Corp. rallied on earnings. Yields on 10-year Treasury notes retreated, while Japanese yields fell to records after the BOJ adopted a negative interest rate. The yen weakened versus the U.S. dollar by the most in more than a year. Oil climbed for a fourth day.
The stock market’s gains took the sting out of the worst January for equities since 2009 in a selloff that erased as much as $7.8 trillion from the market value worldwide. The turbulence prompted the Federal Reserve to say on Wednesday that it was closely monitoring the global environment and the European Central Bank to signal last week it could boost stimulus as soon as March. Talk of oil producers taking action to reduce a glut has helped pare crude’s drop in 2016 after it plunged to a 12-year low.
“Certainly it’s been a tough start to the year for stocks but a lot of the environment that existed for awhile remains modestly in tact,” Michael Arone, the Boston-based chief investment strategist at State Street Global Advisors’ U.S. intermediary business, said by phone. “With today’s GDP there’s modest economic growth and Japan overnight pursuing lower interest rates means the Fed is not likely to raise four times this year.”
The S&P 500 rallied 2.5 percent at 4 p.m. in New York, trimming its drop this month to 5.1 percent. The gauge and the Dow average both had the best weeks of the year.
Microsoft Corp. rose after quarterly results beat forecasts. Amazon Inc. tumbled as earnings for the holiday quarter missed estimates. Chevron Corp. slipped after posting its first quarterly loss since 2002. Electronic Arts Inc. dropped after the video-game publisher’s forecasts for the fourth quarter fell short of expectations.
The MSCI All-Country World Index gained 2 percent, trimming this month’s slide. The Stoxx Europe 600 Index rose 2.2 percent, while Japan’s Topix Index closed 2.9 percent higher.
The MSCI Emerging Markets Index advanced 2.8 percent, extending this week’s rally to 4.5 percent, the most since October. The gauge is still down about 6.5 percent in January. About $2.7 trillion was erased from the value of developing-nation equities in January, with China accounting for more than 75 percent of the losses, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.
The Shanghai Composite Index jumped 3.1 percent, its first advance in four days. That trimmed January’s decline to 23 percent, the biggest monthly drop since October 2008 and the worst performance among 93 equity indexes tracked by Bloomberg worldwide.
The yen fell 1.8 percent versus the dollar, its biggest loss since December 2014. Against the euro, it dropped 0.9 percent.
“They previously rejected taking rates to negative, so that was the surprise element in the announcement,” said Imre Speizer, a markets strategist at Westpac Banking Corp. in Auckland.
A gauge of 20 developing-nation currencies rose 0.5 percent in its fourth day of gains. The 1.3 percent advance the measure posted this week has help trim January’s loss. South Africa’s rand, Malaysia’s ringgit and Brazil’s real strengthened the most among emerging-market currencies, advancing at least 1.3 percent.
Yields on Japanese bonds fell to record lows, along with those on German. U.S. Treasuries advanced, extending their best month in a year.
Ten-year Japanese yields plunged to an all-time low of 0.09 percent. Germany’s five-year note yields fell five basis points to a record-low minus 0.314 percent. The 10-year bund yield slid eight basis points to 0.32 percent, the lowest since April.
German securities headed for their best month since January 2015 as of the market close Friday, according to Bloomberg World Bond Indexes. The euro area’s benchmark sovereign debt returned 2 percent this month through Thursday, the indexes show. That compares with a 2.3 percent gain on Treasuries and 2.8 percent for U.K. gilts. Before the BOJ’s decision, Japanese government bonds were trailing behind their peers, earning 0.5 percent.
Oil prices gained after fluctuating. West Texas Intermediate for March delivery rose 40 cents to settle at $33.62 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Futures advanced 4.4 percent this week. Brent for March settlement, which expires Friday, rose 85 cents, or 2.5 percent, to $34.74 a barrel on the London-based ICE Futures Europe exchange.
Russian Energy Minister Alexander Novak said that while OPEC member Venezuela has proposed a meeting next month, nothing is scheduled. Four OPEC delegates also said yesterday that no gathering has been arranged. Iraq said earlier in the week that Saudi Arabia and Russia had become more flexible about cooperating to reduce output.
Gold added 0.2 percent to $1,117.04 an ounce. The precious metal is up 5.2 percent for January, set for its biggest monthly gain in a year, after a flight to safer assets during the global stocks rout spurred demand.
Industrial metals were mostly higher on the London Metal Exchange, with tin gaining 4.2 percent. Copper and zinc also rose.
— With assistance by Oliver Renick, Andrew Reierson, Neil Denslow, Emma O'Brien, Inyoung Hwang, David Goodman, and Sofia Horta e Costa