Danaher Ditches Industrial Roots as Pall Seals Health-Care March
Danaher Corp.’s purchase of Pall Corp. for $13.8 billion will complete a march toward becoming a provider of health-care instruments and services and away from its roots as a manufacturer started by the billionaire Rales brothers.
Danaher will absorb Pall, a maker of biopharma and medical products, and split off its industrial businesses into a company with $6 billion of annual sales. Danaher, which will retain its current top management, will be a “science and technology growth company” with revenue of $16.5 billion.
The new company, dubbed NewCo, and Danaher both will trade publicly and founders Steven and Mitchell Rales will sit on each board. The split is expected to be tax free and completed by the end of 2016, Danaher said in a statement.
The purchase and breakup extend a legacy of dealmaking that includes nine transactions announced since June 2014, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. Danaher’s products include dental equipment and medical-testing devices, while Pall is a maker of water-filtration and purification systems.
Carving Danaher into two creates “stronger and better companies” with the promise of greater returns to investors, Chief Executive Officer Thomas P. Joyce said in the statement. “Each company will be more focused with access to the capital necessary to pursue organic and inorganic growth opportunities.”
Danaher rose 1.6 percent to $87.35 at the close in New York and Pall climbed 4.4 percent to $123.89 -- short of the $127.20-a-share cash offer. Pall jumped 19 percent on Tuesday after the Wall Street Journal reported that Danaher was among suitors for the Port Washington, New York-based company.
The Pall deal will add 40 cents to per-share earnings in 2016, rising to $1 in five years, as Danaher seeks $300 million in cost savings. The valuation of the purchase includes assumed debt and was net of acquired cash, according to Danaher.
Joyce and Chief Financial Officer Daniel L. Comas will continue in their roles after the split, while the CEO of NewCo will be James A. Lico, current executive vice president with responsibility for Danaher’s test & measurement and Gilbarco Veeder-Root operations. Joyce, 54, became CEO in September after serving as an executive vice president since 2006.
Pall Chairman and CEO Lawrence Kingsley would get about $70.6 million if he is let go after the deal, according to company filings. That includes $63.8 million in equity awards that would vest and $6.75 million in cash.
Danaher plans to finance the Pall acquisition with about $3 billion in cash, $5 billion in commercial paper and long-term loan of an equal amount, Comas said on a conference call.
The acquisition is among Danaher’s most-expensive large deals ever, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.
The acquisition price is almost 21 times estimated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization for 2015, Steve Winoker, a New York-based analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Co., wrote in a note. That compares with Danaher’s purchase of Nobel Biocare Holding AG that was completed in December for 16 times the same earnings measure.
“The deal is not cheap,” Winoker said.
Danaher is deploying some of the acquisition firepower that Citigroup Inc. estimated last year had reached about $12 billion. Completing the Pall deal would be Danaher’s largest purchase, based on data compiled by Bloomberg, topping the 2011 purchase of Beckman Coulter Inc. for about $7 billion.
After the breakup, Danaher will include Pall and the existing Life Sciences & Diagnostics and Dental segments, Water Quality and Product Identification segments.
The businesses going to NewCo will be Danaher’s Test & Measurement Instruments platform including Matco, Gilbarco Veeder-Root, Automation and Sensors, as well as its other Specialty Industrial businesses.