Phone hacking scandal/News of the World closure – Thursday 7 July 2011
5.16pm: This live blog will now continue here. Click on this link to view continuing coverage of the closure of the News of the World.
5.14pm: Kirsty Scott sends more from Tom Watson MP, who has campaigned against phone-hacking at the paper:
Watson was speaking in Glasgow where he had travelled to help Aamer Anwar, the solicitor of Tommy Sheridan, call for an investigation into evidence given by News of the World's executives at Sheridan's perjury trial.
5.011pm: The James Murdoch statement is hard-hitting. If the allegations are true, Murdoch says, behaviour at the paper was "inhuman". The News of the World at News International "failed to get to the bottom of repeated wrongdoing that occurred without conscience or legitimate purpose". The fact that a good newsroom had turned "bad" was "not fully understood or adequately pursued ... As a result the News of the World and News International wrongly maintained that these issues were confined to one reporter." In addition, "the paper made statements to parliament without being in the full possession of the facts. This was wrong."
The company paid out-of-court settlements approved by me. "I now know that I did not have a complete picture when I did so. This was wrong and is a matter of serious regret."
Sunday's issue will be the last ever. All revenue from the paper will go to "good causes". There will be no commercial adverts, with all advertising space going to good causes too.
He acknowledged that staff, particularly those who were not employed at the time of the hacking, "may see these changes as a price loyal staff at the News of the World are paying for the transgressions of others". He called their work "a credit to journalism".
5.01pm: On the police payments case, a source says the evidence the police currently have relates to three junior officers taking cash from the News of the World.
• News of the World axed by News International
4.59pm: Here's the full statement as put out by News International.
News International today announces that this Sunday, 10 July 2011, will be the last issue of the News of the World. Making the announcement to staff, James Murdoch, Deputy Chief Operating Officer, News Corporation, and Chairman, News International said: "I have important things to say about the News of the World and the steps we are taking to address the very serious problems that have occurred. It is only right that you as colleagues at News International are first to hear what I have to say and that you hear it directly from me. So thank you very much for coming here and listening. You do not need to be told that The News of the World is 168 years old. That it is read by more people than any other English language newspaper. That it has enjoyed support from Britain's largest advertisers. And that it has a proud history of fighting crime, exposing wrong-doing and regularly setting the news agenda for the nation. When I tell people why I am proud to be part of News Corporation, I say that our commitment to journalism and a free press is one of the things that sets us apart. Your work is a credit to this. The good things the News of the World does, however, have been sullied by behaviour that was wrong. Indeed, if recent allegations are true, it was inhuman and has no place in our Company. The News of the World is in the business of holding others to account. But it failed when it came to itself. In 2006, the police focused their investigations on two men. Both went to jail. But the News of the World and News International failed to get to the bottom of repeated wrongdoing that occurred without conscience or legitimate purpose. Wrongdoers turned a good newsroom bad and this was not fully understood or adequately pursued. As a result, the News of the World and News International wrongly maintained that these issues were confined to one reporter. We now have voluntarily given evidence to the police that I believe will prove that this was untrue and those who acted wrongly will have to face the consequences. This was not the only fault. The paper made statements to Parliament without being in the full possession of the facts. This was wrong. The Company paid out-of-court settlements approved by me. I now know that I did not have a complete picture when I did so. This was wrong and is a matter of serious regret. Currently, there are two major and ongoing police investigations. We are cooperating fully and actively with both. You know that it was News International who voluntarily brought evidence that led to opening Operation Weeting and Operation Elveden. This full cooperation will continue until the Police's work is done. We have also admitted liability in civil cases. Already, we have settled a number of prominent cases and set up a Compensation Scheme, with cases to be adjudicated by former High Court judge Sir Charles Gray. Apologising and making amends is the right thing to do. Inside the Company, we set up a Management and Standards Committee that is working on these issues and that has hired Olswang to examine past failings and recommend systems and practices that over time should become standards for the industry. We have committed to publishing Olswang's terms of reference and eventual recommendations in a way that is open and transparent. We have welcomed broad public inquiries into press standards and police practices and will cooperate with them fully. So, just as I acknowledge we have made mistakes, I hope you and everyone inside and outside the Company will acknowledge that we are doing our utmost to fix them, atone for them, and make sure they never happen again. Having consulted senior colleagues, I have decided that we must take further decisive action with respect to the paper. This Sunday will be the last issue of the News of the World. Colin Myler will edit the final edition of the paper. In addition, I have decided that all of the News of the World's revenue this weekend will go to good causes. While we may never be able to make up for distress that has been caused, the right thing to do is for every penny of the circulation revenue we receive this weekend to go to organisations – many of whom are long-term friends and partners – that improve life in Britain and are devoted to treating others with dignity. We will run no commercial advertisements this weekend. Any advertising space in this last edition will be donated to causes and charities that wish to expose their good works to our millions of readers. These are strong measures. They are made humbly and out of respect. I am convinced they are the right thing to do. Many of you, if not the vast majority of you, are either new to the Company or have had no connection to the News of the World during the years when egregious behaviour occurred. I can understand how unfair these decisions may feel. Particularly, for colleagues who will leave the Company. Of course, we will communicate next steps in detail and begin appropriate consultations. You may see these changes as a price loyal staff at the News of the World are paying for the transgressions of others. So please hear me when I say that your good work is a credit to journalism. I do not want the legitimacy of what you do to be compromised by acts of others. I want all journalism at News International to be beyond reproach. I insist that this organisation lives up to the standard of behaviour we expect of others. And, finally, I want you all to know that it is critical that the integrity of every journalist who has played fairly is restored.
4.46pm: Just starting to get some of James Murdoch's statement:
4.39pm: Colin Myler will edit final edition and all the News of the World revenue will go to good causes, James Murdoch says in his statement.
4.38pm: James Murdoch is saying this Sunday's News of the World will be the final issue.
4.38pm: Sunday will be the last issue of the News of the World.
4.36pm: On the BSkyB deal, the prime minister's spokesman has just said: "It will take as long as it takes to look at the issues and take the decision."
4.31pm: Patrick Wintour, the Guardian's political editor, tells me the media inquiry will probably be able to start before the current phone-hacking investigations are over.
4.30pm: I just spoke to Tesco and they said they would not be expanding on their earlier statements confirming they would keep advertising with the News of the World, but if the NoW is dropping all advertising this Sunday that may get the supermarket chain off the hook.
4.28pm: The prime minister and Ed Miliband will meet next Wednesday to discuss the setting up of inquiries into the hacking scandal.
The terms of reference and other details will be up for discussion, but the PM's official spokesman would not be drawn on whether they would be finalised before parliament breaks for the summer.
"All these things are going to take as long as they take," he said.
4.26pm: News of the World will not be running any advertising this Sunday, reports claim.
4.17pm: Corrupt police officers face unprecedented jail terms if the extent of their alleged payment by the News of the World is proven, one of Britain's top lawyers has told the Press Association news agency.
Following claims that officers received up to £30,000 for information, Michael Mansfield QC said sentences would dwarf terms served by other officers convicted of similar offences.
4.08pm: This is turning into a terrible day for the News of the World. So many advertisers are pulling out that the situation is switching to one of naming and shaming those who are staying put – as campaigns like the Political Scrapbook one show. The comments under this Facebook statement by Tesco, which is holding on to its advertising, must be worrying for the supermarket chain – typical commenters suggest they will now shop elsewhere and advise Tesco they have created "a complete PR disaster".
4.06pm: Here's the latest from my colleague Dan Sabbagh, the Guardian's head of media, on the BSkyB bid.
4.02pm: Julia Finch, our business editor, says that Next, the high street and catalogue chain, has removed a link from its website to Fabulous, the News of the World magazine.
Next says it didn't have any advertising lined up for the NoW - it usually only advertises twice a year, in the run-up to Christmas. But that was enough to put it in the top 30 advertisers.
Next, incidentally, is run by Lord Simon Wolfson, who was elevated to the House of Lords last year. Wolfson is a significant donor to the Conservative Party, and supported David Cameron's leadership challenge.
3.50pm: According to comedy website Chortle, comedian Dave Gorman has quit his News of the World column.
Dan Wooton, the showbiz editor of the NoW, has put out this "personal statement on News of the World phone hacking":
The second comment underneath Wooton's statement suggests readers have taken this in the spirit it was meant.
Yesterday TV presenter Martin Lewis explained why he would not quit the paper in similar terms to Wooton, but he added this this an hour ago:
3.41pm: Here is a summary of today's key events so far.
• The government has said a final announcement on whether News Corporation will be allowed to take full control over BSkyB will take "several weeks". The culture secretary, Jeremy Hunt, has received over 100,000 submissions from the public over the deal – almost all opposed to the takeover. Hunt has insisted the decision has not been delayed due to further hacking revelations, but instead due to the weight of correspondence. The Guardian's Dan Sabbagh said that "in practice this mean an announcement is likely in September".
• The News of the World paid bribes worth over £100,000 to Metropolitan police officers, it has emerged. Investigators at Scotland Yard are now trying to identify up to five officers who received the cash payments between them. Documents relating to the bribes were sent to police by News International. The documents did not name those involved, but did contain pseudonyms.
• The list of companies which have withdrawn advertising from the News of the World or related companies is continuing to grow – and includes Sainsbury's, Ford, DFS, Boots and Specsavers. The website Political Scrapbook says 33 companies have now pulled out, although the list includes some that may not have advertised anyway. A further eight are said to be "considering their position". The government will also "urgently" review its own advertising contracts with the News of the World, according to leader of the Commons Sir George Young. Young told the Commons he would "raise the matter urgently" with the Cabinet Office.
• Ed Miliband has questioned David Cameron's "close relationships" with News International. The Labour leader accused the prime minister of being "two steps" behind public opinion following a deluge of damning revelations over intrusive practices conducted by News of the World, quipping that Cameron and Rupert Murdoch appeared to be the only two individuals in the entire country who believed that Rebekah Brooks should stay in post.
• Sue Akers, the Metropolitan police deputy assistant commissioner who is in charge of Operation Weeting, the police investigation into the phone hacking allegations, has said investigators are going through approximately 11,000 pages of material containing almost 4,000 names and have been contacted by hundreds of people who think they may have been affected.
3.39pm: Virgin Media has tweeted that it tried to pull advertising from the News of the World magazine this Sunday but were told they could not. "We can confirm we won't be placing more ads in NOTW for now."
3.36pm: Over on Alan Rusbridger's Q&A, many readers have asked whether the Guardian or Observer have ever done anything similar to what the News of the World is accused of. The editor-in-chief replies:
3.28pm: My colleague Lewis Williamson sends this neat tweet from Primly Stable:
3.20pm: Here's Boris Johnson stumbling over his words when he is asked about his comments last year that the phone hacking accusations were "codswallop" (thanks to my colleague Haroon Siddique).
He finds his stride when the conversation returns to the present day:
3.15pm: Campaign group Avaaz is aiming to get 200,000 messages sent to David Cameron and Jeremy Hunt attacking the BSkyB deal. They are up to 135,000. Alex Wilks of Avaaz said: "People cannot imagine giving this man [the deal] ... He's become toxic ... Politicians want to stay away from Rupert Murdoch, not give him presents at times like this."
3.12pm: Specsavers has also pulled its advertising.
3.11pm: What's Rupert Murdoch been up to so far today? Evelyn Rusli tweets this, plus this picture.
3.06pm: More from Alan Rusbridger's live Q&A, where the Guardian editor-in-chief has said the Press Complaints Commission "can't go on as it is. Its credibility is hanging by a thread."
3.03pm: The charity BeatBullying has suspended its partnership with the News of the World, Sylvia Rowley tells me on Twitter.
3.03pm: My colleague Caroline Davies sends me a statement just put out by Deputy Assistant Commissioner Sue Akers, who is in charge of Operation Weeting, the police investigation into the phone hacking allegations. Akers says she has "huge sympathy" for the phone hacking victims, and will stand by her commitment to contact everyone who has personal contact details found in documents seized in 2006 as soon as possible. She explains why this is taking so long:
We are going through approximately 11,000 pages of material containing almost 4,000 names. In addition we have been contacted by hundreds of people who believe that they may have been affected.
She adds that to protect victims' privacy she is not going to comment on individual cases or details in the media, and says she will expand on these points when she appears before the Commons home affairs committee on Tuesday.
2.57pm: Over on Alan Rusbridger's live Q&A my colleague Roy Greenslade has pitched in with a couple of informative replies.
2.52pm: Over on Wall Street they've rung the bell to start the trading day. My colleague Graeme Wearden is poised at the Reuters terminal, and tells me that shares in News Corporation are gaining a little ground: up 7c at pixel time at $17.54. On Wednesday there was a hefty sell-off, as investors balked at the phone hacking reports from the UK. That pushed News Corp shares down by 3.6%. We'll keep watching events in New York. In London, BSkyB shares are trading at 811p, down nearly 2% today.
2.48pm: Here's a video of Lady Rawling's replies to questions about Jeremy Hunt's forthcoming decision on approving News Corp's BSkyB takeover bid.
2.46pm: Channel 4 News says it is going to broadcast information tonight that provides "new insight into how News of the World journalists obtained confidential information from corrupt police".
2.44pm: Alan Rusbridger, the Guardian's editor-in-chief, has started his live Q&A on phone hacking here.
His first answer relates to Peter Oborne's statement in the Daily Telegraph that he warned David Cameron and Nick Clegg about Andy Coulson before the election. What were Cameron and Clegg told that is now in the public domain?" reader Bochi asks. "What have they known all along?" Alan replies:
2.42pm: Political Scrapbook and Liberal Conspiracy are organising a Twitter campaign against remaining large advertisers with the News of the World.
2.29pm: Hi, Paul Owen back again. Patrick Wintour has sent this report on how the prime minister and the government have been caught on the hop by the latest phone hacking revelations.
2.26pm: A final announcement on whether News Corp's proposed takeover of Sky will be permitted will take "several weeks" after Jeremy Hunt received 100,000-plus submissions from the public, sources close to the minister said this lunchtime, my colleague Dan Sabbagh reports.
Hunt's aides insist his decision has not been delayed in the light of further hacking revelations (which the minister insists are irrelevant to the "media plurality" review he is undertaking). Instead the wait reflects the sheer weight of correspondence he has received, almost all of which is opposed to the deal going through. In practice this mean an announcement is likely in September - although Hunt has said he won't necessarily wait for parliament to be in session to make his announcement.
2.23pm: Here's Kirsty Scott's story on the effect of the phone hacking allegations on Tommy Sheridan's perjury conviction.
2.22pm: The Guardian's Nick Hopkins understands that about half a dozen forces' families have been told that their phones might have been hacked.
"It's a handful so far. The police are contacting the families concerned and then the Ministry of Defence is providing any appropriate support," said a Whitehall source.
2.10pm: FairPensions, a charity that promotes responsible investment by pension funds, says pension investors "should seriously consider whether the takeover of BSkyB by NewsCorp is in the long-term interests of their beneficiaries".
Snippet from a statement by the charity:
Louise Rouse, director of engagement at FairPensions said the allegations "demonstrate to pension investors that corporate reputational risk presents meaningful financial risk for their beneficiaries".
2.09pm: Two interesting events coming up at 2.30pm: firstly, Wall Street opens – we'll have the latest on News Corp's share prices – and secondly, Guardian editor Alan Rusbridger will be hosting a live chat on phone hacking.
Comments will open on the Q&A at half two, so fire away from then. Alan will be answering your question for two hours.
2.03pm: Michael Willoughby emails telling me not to forget the 38 Degrees petition to David Cameron and Jeremy Hunt, which also demands a stop to the BSkyB takeover.
"Nearly another 100,000. And a day to go," Willoughby says.
1.59pm: Dixons has pulled its advertising with the News of the World. Graeme Wearden emails:
1.52pm: The Financial Times is reporting that the decision on BSkyB has been delayed "until September".
More as we get it.
1.48pm: Over 130,000 people have signed a petition calling for the government to reject News Corp's bid to gain full control of BSkyB "until there's a full Competition Commission review and a full public inquiry into phone hacking".
Check the petition out here.
@achrisafis Le Monde front-page editorial on #hackgate: "There's a terrible contradiction between what #NotW practises and what Newscorp preaches"
1.36pm: The New York Times has an interesting piece on how Rupert Murdoch has reacted to potentially damaging situations at his other newspapers in the past – although the paper notes that the NOTW hacking "threatens to stain the company's image in a way that other embarrassing incidents at News Corporation's far-flung media properties ... have not".
1.33pm: Simon Bowers reports that a newsagent near Soham is among those refusing to stock the News of the World.
1.30pm: The Evening Standard reports that Met police "received more than £100,000 in unlawful payments from senior journalists and executives at the News of the World", and that arrests will be made within days:
The Evening Standard says the emails are "believed to relate to the period after Andy Coulson became editor in January 2003 and not to the preceding years when the current News International chief executive Rebekah Brooks ran the paper".
1.27pm: Re Tesco, James Robinson has noticed that Andrew Higginson, Chief Executive of Retailing Services and Group Strategy Director at Tesco, also sits as a non-executive director on the BSkyB board.
James does note, however that Jacques Nasser – former CEO of Ford – is also a non-executive director at BSkyB. Ford pulled its advertising with the News of the World on Tuesday.
1.20pm: Tesco has said it will not pull advertising in the NOTW.
My eagle eyed colleague Laura Oliver has spotted this tweet from Chris Bryant MP – of course an alleged victim of NOTW hacking:
@ChrisBryantMP Just decided I'm not doing my weekly shop in tesco this evening following their decision to continue advertising with #NOTW
1.12pm: Statement from the Metropolitan police on their decision to refer the hacking investigation to the Independent Police Complaints Commission.
The decision was taken "in view of the significant public and political concern" – full statement below, with thanks to reporter Caroline Davies:
"In light of the evolving situation, we have put on hold further advertising with the News of the World. An advertisement, which was printed some time ago, however, will appear in this Sunday's Fabulous magazine."
1.05pm: My colleague Hannah Waldram has been looking at how US news websites are covering the hacking, with help from Guardian commenters PoorButNotAChav and snowflake:
@TimGatt The Independent Police Complaints Commission has been asked to supervise the Metropolitan police's internal investigation into phone hacking.
12.56pm: The Independent Police Complaints Commission has been asked to supervise the Metropolitan police's internal investigation into phone hacking.
More as we get it.
12.53pm: Bit more on the Diana news – Dodi Fayed's solicitor, Michael Mansfield, said he received a letter telling him his phone may have been targeted about six months ago. Mansfield has also said police should not lead the investigation into the NOTW hacking.
12.48pm: Asda has become the latest company to suspend its advertising in the News of the World, according to Sky News.
12.42pm: Hello there, this is Adam Gabbatt taking over from Paul.
The list of people allegedly targeted by the News of the World continues to grow – Princess Diana has now been dragged into the row, according to PA.
Michael Mansfield QC, who represented the family of Dodi Fayed at the inquest into her death, has received a letter from Scotland Yard saying he was on a list of possible targets, according to the agency.
"Journalists would have been trying to get stories about Diana. It is particularly disturbing," Mansfield said.
12.35pm: Reader kaleeyed points out that the NoW now has statements from Colin Myler, Rebekah Brooks and Rupert Murdoch on its website
12.35pm: O2 spends an estimated £1.2m a year with the NOTW, according to my colleague Rupert Neate.
12.32pm: Here's the full story on Sainsbury's decision to pull advertising from the News of the World, which Jason Deans calls "potentially [the] most commercially damaging" news News International will have been given today.
12.30pm: Hélène Mulholland has more details on Ed Miliband's comments on phone hacking this morning. The Labour leader suggested David Cameron's leadership on the scandal suffers because of his "close relationships" with individuals embroiled in the affair at News International.
12.27pm: Scotland Yard has warned Diana inquest lawyer Michael Mansfield QC that he may have been targeted by News of the World phone hackers, the barrister has told the Press Association.
12.26pm: The head of Europe's human rights watchdog has called for editorial responsibility in the midst of "cut-throat" media competition. Responding to the latest phone-hacking allegations engulfing the News of the World, Thorbjorn Jagland, secretary general of the Council of Europe, said:
12.24pm: Over on the Politics blog, Andrew Sparrow lists the three main points from Lady Rawlings's replies to Lady Royall in the Lords.
• She said that the inquiry being set up by the government would probably be led by a judge.
• She said that Jeremy Hunt, the culture secretary, was satisfied by the safeguards offered by News Corporation to protect the impartiality of Sky News. In other words, she said that Hunt is not going to block the News Corporation takeover of BSkyB.
• But she also said Hunt was "not going to rush into" a decision to approve the bid. Hunt wanted to go through the responses to the consultation, she said. That would "take time". This backs up Robert Peston's claim that the Hunt will not approve the bid until September at the earliest.
12.23pm: Mobile phone company O2 has also pulled its advertising from the News of the World. A spokeswoman said:
12.22pm: Sir George Young, the leader of the Commons, has just said that the government is to "urgently" review its own advertising contracts with the News of the World. Young told the Commons he would "raise the matter urgently" with the Cabinet Office following the decision by a number of private companies to cut their advertising with the newspaper.
12.20pm: Military officials said today that they first learned that families of the bereaved might have been hacked when journalists began asking questions about the matter yesterday, reports Nick Hopkins.
12.16pm: My colleague Adam Gabbatt has just been looking again at the opening exchanges in the Lords betwen Lady Royall, leader of the opposition in the upper house, and Lady Rawlings, a government whip.
Rawlings said the debate was in the hands of "the usual channels".
She added: "Regarding the secretary of state's discretion, he has quasi-judicial discretion after the decisions of Ofcom and the OFT. Regarding the delay that the noble baroness asked about, the consultation hasn't closed, it closes tomorrow on Friday 8th. The secretary of state will need to consider all the answers and all the presentations. There is no date at present for his decision. The secretary of state will not be rushed, he will be fair. He has to make it strictly on media plurality, within the law. He, like everyone else, and like the press, all have to work within the law."
11.54am: Shares in BSkyB have fallen again this morning as the phone hacking scandal threatens to derail Rupert Murdoch's takeover bid. My colleague Graeme Wearden has more details.
11.53am: Robert Lee, the head of media at the British Legion, has told the Guardian's Nick Hopkins that he called the News of the World this morning to explain the decision to cut ties with the paper. Nick writes:
11.50am: Newsflash: Strathclyde Police have been asked to look at evidence given by witnesses during the Tommy Sheridan perjury trial in light of recent allegations about phone hacking at the News of the World, the Crown Office said today. Some of you had been asking about this case in the comments.
11.48am: Lady Scotland says the government could have chosen to examine the BSkyB deal on grounds of broadcasting standards as well as media plurality, but didn't.
Rawlings does not answer the question but repeats that "there will be no decision right now". She adds:
With that the debate is over.
11.45am: Andrew Sparrow has the top lines from Ed Miliband's interview on phone hacking this morning.
• Miliband said that all politicians had "lessons to learn" about their relationships with Rupert Murdoch. Now it was important for them to "come out and speak the truth without fear and favour".
• He renewed his call for Rebekah Brooks to resign. "The only people in the world who seem to think that Rebekah Brooks should carry on in her position are Rupert Murdoch and David Cameron," he said.
• He accused Cameron of not showing leadership on this issue. Cameron was "two steps behind public opinion", he said.
• He said the government should suspend its decision about allowing News Corporation to take over BSkyB.
• He said there should be just one inquiry, not two. But it should be led by a judge, he said. And it should have the power to compel witnesses to appear.
• He said that the first police investigation into phone hacking was "wholly inadequate".
11.44am: Rawlings says she has sympathy for Lord Prescott, who has been a victim of phone hacking. Personal freedom and privacy is of great importance, but so is the freedom of the press. Hacking is illegal and wrong, and these cases are disgraceful and shocking, she says. It is a "foul deed" - the press have to abide by the law like all of us.
11.43am: Does Rawlings agree the inquiry should be chaired by a judge and have the power to subpoena evidence?
It would seem that would be necessary but there are several inquiries going on, she says. It will probably have a judge, she says, but at this stage I cannot give details.
11.40am: On Twitter the BBC's Robert Peston says the volume of submissions on BSkyB means Jeremy Hunt won't be able to make his decision until September at the earliest.
11.39am: Royall asks Rawlings to say why the government will not suspend the decision. The consultation has not closed; it closes tomorrow, says Rawlings. The secretary of state will need to consider all the submissions; there is no date set for his decision; he will not be rushed.
He has to make the decision strictly on grounds of media plurality, she says.
11.38am: Lady Rawlings replies that there are sufficient safeguards in place. Royall says that is the wrong answer and the secretary of state has discretion to suspend the process.
11.37am: Over to the House of Lords for Lady Royall's urgent question:
11.31am: The BBC is reporting that the culture secretary has received 100,000 submissions on this takeover bid, which will delay Jeremy Hunt's decision. Hunt will probably appreciate this since it would be so politically toxic to approve the bid in the current climate.
11.30am: Steve Richards in the Independent says the willingness of politicians to attack the Murdoch empire in the Commons yesterday marks a major turning point (thanks Andrew Sparrow to on the Politics blog).
11.22am: The Belfast Telegraph is reporting that Gary Lineker is consider his position as a News of the World columnist. (Thanks to commenter Ramones1234 on the Politics blog.)
11.21am: The owner of a Budgens supermarket in north London has tweeted that he will not be selling the News of the World "for now" and is encouraging other retailers to do the same, my colleague Haroon Siddique points out. It's a franchise so he only speaks for his own branch.
11.19am: Andrew Sparrow has a bit more on the urgent Lords question on BSkyB coming up in 10 minutes.
11.17am: My colleague Hélène Mulholland has the full story on Boris Johnson's comments on phone hacking this morning. He said allegations that journalists had hacked into phones of young girls who had gone missing or the relatives of people killed in Iraq or lost their lives in 7/7 were "unbelievable" and needed to be investigated forthwith. But the mayor of London also defended Rupert Murdoch, the head of News Corporation, who he said had achieved a "very considerable" amount for British journalism over the past four decades. He also refused to call for Rebekah Brooks to stand down. Here is what Johnson said about the inquiry into phone hacking:
Asked to comment on whether David Cameron's perceived relationship with the Murdoch empire had damaged the Tory leader, Johnson said:
On whether Brooks should quit, Johnson said:
11.14am: More on the House of Lords urgent question coming up at 11.30am. Lady Royall, the shadow leader of the Lords, has tabled the question, which urges the government to suspend consideration of News Corporation's takeover bid for BSkyB.
Liam Fox, the defence secretary, has also spoken out about the allegations regarding servicepeople's families' phones:
11.08am: The full story on the Royal British Legion dropping the News of the World as a campaign partner is here.
At Comment is free, Jacqui Putnam, a 7/7 survivor writes that she "can hardly find the words to say how outraged and appalled I am to learn that a respected newspaper such as the News of the World appears to have stooped so low as to intrude on the private grief of those who've lost their loved ones".
11.07am: Breaking news: urgent question on BSkyB deal to be asked in House of Lords at 11.30am … More details soon ...
11.01am: Last night's Newsnight on BBC2 included an interview with a "former News of the World insider", whose identity was disguised. The News of the World confirmed yesterday that payments were made to police officers for access to confidential information. In order to cover their tracks when taking money from journalists, corrupt officers were signed up as "confidential police informants" under pseudonyms, according to Newsnight's source. Adam Gabbatt has more:
10.59am: Dave Hill has written a piece about Boris Johnson's attitude to News of the World and the phone hacking allegations, which has undergone what he calls a "handbrake turn".
Here's a gallery of today's front pages. The Daily Express goes with a picture of Madeleine McCann and the headline: "Hacking scandal: was Maddie's family targted?" (The case of Madeleine McCann is expected to be one of the first to be re-examined by detectives.) It is the Daily Mail's main front-page story, looking at the "war widows" angle. The Daily Mirror also makes it the front-page splash – "Sky falls in on Murdoch" – claiming News Corp's BSkyB deal was now in "turmoil". The Daily Star fits it into a small, above-the-fold slot alonside Coronation Street lesbians, Rio Ferdinand's sex life and Wills and Kate canoeing. The Financial Times looks at the effect of News Corp's business: "Murdoch investors take fright," while the Independent writes more broadly: "Murdoch empire in crisis." Its little brother the i takes a similar tack. The Times is not included (News International will not let us show you the Sun or the Times), but its front page headline concentrates on yesterday's parliamentary debate – and the paper also claims five journalists and newspaper executives suspected of involvement in phone hacking are expected to be arrested within days. The Sun has a paragraph on the story under the masthead – quite prominent coverage for that paper.
Over at the Daily Telegraph, whose front-page headline is about the families of war dead, columnist Peter Oborne says the "disgusting" phone hacking allegations and revelations "concerning [David Cameron's] friends and associates from Rupert Murdoch's News International" have "permanently and irrevocably damaged" the prime minister's reputation. "He has made not one, but a long succession of chronic personal misjudgments." He criticises Cameron's friendship with Rebekah Brooks and his decision to appoint Andy Coulson, the former editor of the News of the World, his director of communications.
10.52am: Sainsbury's has announced it will not advertise with the News of the World until the phone hacking investigation has concluded – "due to the rising concerns of our customers".
10.38am: The chief of the defence staff, Sir David Richards, has said that if allegations about hacking the phones of military families were proved, he would be "appalled".
10.22am: Here's my colleague Hélène Mulholland's full story on the comments by Lady Buscombe, the chair of the Press Complaints Commission. As well as attacking the "extraordinary decision" by Rupert Murdoch to allow Rebekah Brooks, chief executive of News International, to oversee the investigation into phone hacking at the News of the World, Buscombe said it was now clear that the PCC was not given the "full facts" by News International and that its corporate culture was "clearly there to mislead us". The PCC conducted its own inquiry into phone hacking and insisted in 2009 it was not misled by NI, before conceding this week that the watchdog had been "lied to".
10.02am: James Robinson, the Guardian's media correspondent, has just been in touch to say there are rumours that James Mellor, the News of the World's deputy news editor, is off to take the equivalent job at the Sunday Times. He is a newish recruit from the Mirror. He will serve his notice, James says, but the NoW is now short of experienced news executives as news editor Ian Edmondson was sacked at the start of the year and James Weatherup, who was arrested in April on suspicion of conspiring to intercept mobile phone messages, is on gardening leave. James says: "Despite Mellor's move there is no sign of a staff exodus at the paper, but it is obviously not a great atmosphere in which to work."
9.57am: Over on his Politics blog, Andrew Sparrow notes that Npower is also suspending its advertising with the News of the World.
He also points out that Brian Paddick, the former Metropolitan police deputy assistant commissioner and London mayoral candidate, has said that some officers received up to £30,000 from journalists for information.
Chris Huhne, the climate change secretary, as mentioned earlier, has called for the inquiry into relations between police and media to be judge-led. He also suggested Rebekah Brooks, the News International chief executive, should resign.
And Chris Bryant, the Labour MP who set up yesterday's parliamentary inquiry, has suggested the News of the World is shredding information.
9.44am: The Royal British Legion has dropped the News of the World as its campaigning partner, it announced this morning, and is reviewing its advertising budget with parent company News International.
The charity said it had been "shocked to the core" by the reports that Glenn Mulcaire, the private investigator working for the tabloid, illegally intercepted the voicemails of relatives of dead servicepeople.
9.23am: Hello and welcome to today's phone hacking live blog, as the fallout continues from the Guardian's revelations that the News of the World intercepted voicemails left on a phone belonging to murdered schoolgirl Milly Dowler and the news that the paper targeted the phones of families of victims of the 7/7 attacks.
Here are this morning's key developments:
• Scotland Yard is investigating claims families of members of the armed forces killed in Afghanistan and Iraq may have been targeted by Glenn Mulcaire, a private investigator who worked for the News of the World.
Ed Miliband said he was disgusted by the allegations and warned that if they were true the hacking would be a "gross and shocking betrayal" of British servicemen and women. The Labour leader said:
Miliband has called for the resignation of News International's chief executive, Rebekah Brooks, and demanded the government's decision on the proposed takeover of BSkyB by News Corporation, parent company of the News of the World, be referred to the Competition Commission (see next item).
Rose Gentle, whose son Fusilier Gordon Gentle was killed in Iraq in 2004, has instructed her lawyer to contact police to find out if her phones and those of other families were targeted. Gentle called for an inquiry to begin immediately and said the hacking of dead soldiers' relatives' phones would be "pretty disgusting" if true. She told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme:
Jim Gill, the stepfather of Second Lieutenant Richard Shearer, who was killed in Iraq in 2005, said his family had suspicions that their phone was being hacked but they had not yet been contacted by police:
• David Cameron and Nick Clegg are wrangling over the membership and status of the inquiries that will be held into the phone hacking and wider questions about the future of media regulation.
The prime minister bowed to pressure to hold at least one inquiry but is resisting calls from Clegg for a judge to take charge.
On the Today programme this morning, Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, called for the inquiry to be judge-led and to start immediately. Chris Huhne, the climate change minister, also called for a judge to lead the inquiry.
Asked whether she was happy with the inquiry announced by David Cameron, Gentle said: "Happy with the inquiry, but it has to start now, and if it's true that they've done it, it has to go further."
• The differences between Clegg and Cameron came as the government faced calls from across the Commons as well as from City shareholders to delay its final decision on the proposed takeover of BSkyB by News Corporation, parent company of the News of the World.
The scandal hit shares yesterday in BSkyB, which fell 18p to 827p on the London market, as concerns grew over the possible impact it could have on News Corporation's bid for the satellite broadcaster. And in the US last night, News Corporation was among the biggest losers on Wall Street's Dow Jones index, falling 3.6%.
Simon Hughes, the Liberal Democrat deputy leader, has said he will ask Ofcom to exercise its right to assess whether the directors of News Corp were "fit and proper" to take full control of BSkyB.
• Lady Buscombe, the chair of the Press Complaints Commission, said it was "extraordinary" that Brooks was leading the internal inquiry at News International and said all executives at the company needed to examine their consciences. Buscombe told BBC Radio 4's Today programme:
The corporate culture was clearly there to mislead us. We were misled by commission or omission.
She refused to say who at News International had misled the PCC in the past, but said:
Chris Bryant, the Labour MP who set up yesterday's parliamentary debate on hacking, told BBC Breakfast that if Brooks had a "shred of decency" she would resign. He called for the police inquiry to be handled by a police force other than the Met.
• Nick Davies explains how police warned Rebekah Brooks her paper was aiding two murder suspects by spying on the office investigating them.
• Here are News International, the police and the Press Complaints Commission's statements and denials regarding phone hacking since 2007.
• Andrew Sparrow will be covering events at Westminster today here.
• You can read all the Guardian's phone hacking coverage from today and from the archives here.