'I did not break the law'

Former Democratic presidential candidate John Edwards said he takes "full responsibility for having done wrong" but insisted he "did not break the law" to cover up his extramarital affair with Rielle Hunter.
Edwards was indicted earlier today by a federal grand jury. He pleaded not guilty to charges of conspiracy, making false statements and four counts of illegal campaign contributions.
In a brief statement to reporters outside the courthouse in Winston-Salem, N.C., Edwards declared his innocence on the criminal allegations.
"There's no question I've done wrong," Edwards said, adding he'll "regret the pain and the harm" that he caused for the rest of his life. But he was adamant: "I did not break the law and I never, ever thought I was breaking the law."
The charges center on more than $900,000 given to Hunter and former Edwards aide Andrew Young by Edwards' supporters Rachel "Bunny" Mellon and Fred Baron to keep the pair in hiding. Prosecutors argue that the money amounted to illegal campaign contributions because they allowed Edwards to continue with his 2008 presidential bid.
Edwards' lawyer, Gregory Craig, today criticized "an unprecedented prosecution" and vowed his client will "defend this case vigorously." Craig said there is no way anyone, including Edwards, would have known that the payments to Hunter and Young should be treated as campaign contributions.
"We will not permit candidates for high office to abuse their special ability to access the coffers of their political supporters to circumvent our election laws," he said in a statement. "Our campaign finance system is designed to preserve the integrity of democratic elections – for the presidency and all other elected offices – and we will vigorously pursue abuses of the kind alleged today."
If convicted, Edwards could face five years in prison and a fine of $250,000 on each of the six counts.
The indictment reads as a slap at Edwards' character. "The centerpiece of Edwards' candidacy was his public image as a family man," the document begins, before giving excruciating detail about money and a coverup.
USA TODAY's Fredreka Schouten and Kevin Johnson look at the legal issues surrounding the Edwards case in this story and have more on the charges.
The indictment alleges that Edwards conspired with individuals, who are not named specifically, to accept and receive campaign contributions above what campaign finance law allowed at the time. The indictment alleges that between 2007 and 2008, Edwards accepted and received more than $900,000.
Much of the case has centered on testimony from Young, who claimed in 2007 that he was the father of Hunter's daughter in order to help his boss.
Edwards initially denied the affair but admitted the relationship with Hunter, a campaign videographer, in 2008. At the time, he denied he was the father of Hunter's daughter, Frances Quinn. Edwards did not admit paternity until 2010, the day before Young's memoir was released.
The saga over Edwards' affair has been a sordid chapter in the life of a one-time Democratic star. After years of winning million-dollar verdicts as a trial lawyer, Edwards appealed to voters and defeated incumbent Republican Lauch Faircloth in 1998 for a U.S. Senate seat.
Edwards ran for president in 2004, emphasizing "two Americas" for the rich and the poor, and eventually became John Kerry's running mate. In 2008, staking his campaign on opposition to the Iraq war and in support of universal health care, Edwards was eclipsed in the Democratic primaries by Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Elizabeth Edwards died in December after a six-year battle with cancer. At the time, she and John Edwards were legally separated.