The Donald ducks
Reality TV star Donald Trump fired himself Monday from the 2012 presidential sweepstakes, announcing that as much as he’d like to run, he’s not ready to part with his private sector money-making pursuits.
“I've decided that we are going to continue onward with ‘Celebrity Apprentice,’” Trump told advertisers at an NBC lineup presentation, just a day after network officials said they would keep the show on next season, and replace the brash New York developer in the boardroom if need be.
“We're going to continue making lots and lots of money for charity,” he said, to applause. “I will not be running for president as much as I'd like to.”
Trump rode national polls to surprising heights on his widely-known name and on the “birther” issue questioning President Obama’s birthplace, a topic that had rested on the GOP fringes since 2008 but which he thrust into the mainstream.
But the issue faded when Obama released the his long-form birth certificate. That, along with a string of damaging news stories about lawsuits against his brand – and a sign that his “birther” crusade was hurting his TV show ratings– all contributed to drive his poll numbers downward, making him barely a factor by the time he pulled out.
Yet The Donald, known for sometimes relying on his own unique sets of facts, said in a statement that he was leading in polls.
“I have spent the past several months unofficially campaigning and recognize that running for public office cannot be done half-heartedly,” he said. “Ultimately, however, business is my greatest passion and I am not ready to leave the private sector.”
His decision largely confirmed what many believed – that the developer, who has sued people in the past for making what he called low-ball estimates of his net worth over the years—would never submit to the detailed financial filings required of presidential candidates.
Trump’s announcement comes two days after Mike Huckabee, the 2008 Iowa caucus winner and a consistent national poll-topper, also departed from the 2012 race.
But that may be the only noticeable impact of his departure – his poll numbers, boosted mostly by his celebrity name ID, had cratered and he had no discernable constituency. His appeal was largely based on giving voice to concerns that GOP primary voters had about America’s place in the world, and taking the fight straight to Obama.
Despite his high-profile flirt with a run, Trump registered little support among the 1,000 registered voters surveyed nationwide for the latest POLITICO-George Washington University Battleground Poll.