Eurozone crisis live: Ireland votes on EU fiscal treaty
8.31pm: The polls in Ireland will close at 10pm, and we should get the result tomorrow afternoon. But I'm going to stop the blog now. We'll be back early tomorrow. Until then, goodnight all and thank you.
8.27pm: The report that the International Monetary Fund is preparing to help Spain (see 5.48pm) has been dismissed as 'complete nonsense' by the country's economy minister tonight.
Luis de Guindos also warned that the future of the eurozone would be at stake over the next few weeks. As he put it:
7.58pm: So, our small sample of views from Henry McDonald's class this evening (see 6.45pm onwards for the full package) is complete. Despite the small sample, the class provided a valuable range of views - a Yes supporter, one (or potentially two) No votes, as well as those who didn't take part in the referendum.
7.48pm: Our final view from the Irish Writers Centre on the Irish fiscal treaty referendum comes from Sarah Jane Brennan.
She's a researcher, activist, and blogger, who recently graduated from an MA in International Relations at Warwick University. Here are Sarah Jane's thoughts on the referendum, in which she cast a No vote.
7.34pm: Niamh Ní Shúilleabháin, aged 27, hasn't made it to the polling booth yet today to cast her vote on the Irish referendum. This is why:
7.26pm: Maryline, a French woman who lives in Ireland, provides our fourth view from Dublin this evening (see 6.45pm onwards for the full collection of contributions from the Irish Writers Centre):
7.20pm: Our third view on the Irish referendum comes from Lisa Rose Jones. She, like Laurence O'Bryan (see 7.01pm) chose not to take part in the vote today.
Here are her reasons:
7.13pm: Our second "citizens' view" from Ireland tonight is written by Niamh Ní Mhaoileoin, 23, from Dublin, who blogs at leighanoisgocuramach.wordpress.com
Niamh voted yes in today's referendum. Here's why:
7.01pm: The first contribution from Dublin's Irish Writers Centre comes from Laurence O'Bryan, a Dubliner and crime author, published in the UK by Harper Collins.
6.45pm: Heads-up: in a few minutes, we'll be publishing more views from Dublin citizens on today's referendum.
They'll be explaining why they voted the way they did, or why they didn't vote at all, and giving an insight into the situation in Ireland today.
The group, ranging from young people in their 20s to retirees, represent a good cross-section of the population. They are available to help us, because they all attend a class in creative non-fiction at the Irish Writers Centre, taught by our own Henry McDonald.
6.43pm: If the No campain do pull off an unlikely victory in today's referendum, this poster could be one reason.
Portraying the EU as the money-grasping Mr Burns from The Simpsons, the poster has captured the imagination of many who are unhappy about the way Ireland has been treated since the financial crisis began.
6.32pm: Here's a cheery picture from Ireland today - triplets voting in the referendum; the first time they have taken part in an ballot.
Siobhan, Michael and Emma Crawley cast their votes at Sean O'Mahonys GAA Club in Dundalk, Co Louth
6.08pm: To help explain the feeling in Ireland today, we've collected the contrasting views of two people on Dublin's Botanic Road.
Arthur McGuinness, who owns one of the oldest and most famous barbers shops, voted in favour of Ireland approving the Fiscal Compact Treaty today. But his neighbour Ed O'Loughlin, author of Booker long-listed novel "Not Unkind, Not Untrue" and "Toploader", voted no.
5.48pm: A report that the International Monetary Fund is preparing 'contingency plans' for Spain have caused some excitement in the financial markets, erasing almost all the losses on the Dow Jones index.
The story is running on Dow Jones, with an unnamed source suggesting that the IMF is getting ready to step in if Spain fails to find a way of recapitalising Bankia (which needs €19bn in fresh funding). A full-scale bailout isn't being planned (Spain's borrowing needs being huge), but smaller short-term loans could be considered.
Full story here on the Wall Street Journal.
I mentioned at 3.29pm that Spain's deputy prime minister will be meeting with the IMF's Christine Lagarde later today.
5.25pm: All the indications are pointing to an historic low turn out in Ireland's referendum on the fiscal treaty, and that could make the vote closer than initially thought.
Advance polling has suggested a 60%-40% victory to the Yes count, a very healthy margin. And most bookmakers had made a Yes victory a very, very strong favourite (priced at 20-1 on at one firm).
4.53pm: It's been another day of record low bond yields in safe haven government debt, with UK gilts, German bunds and US treasuries hitting new records.
More dramatically, the yield on German 2-year bonds actually turned negative a few minute ago. [which means investors were prepared to pay more than the face value of the bond, insuring a loss if they held it to maturity, even discounting inflation].
Brenda Kelly of CMC Markets said these low yields suggested that the financial crisis is "finally coming to a head".
4.09pm: Unless the Irish collectively dash to the polling booths this evening, the turnout is going to be pretty low.
According to the Irish Times, returning officers across the country were reporting turnout of between 15% and 20% at 2.30pm this afternoon.
4.03pm: More from Henry McDonald in Dublin, as the referendum continues:
3.50pm: The word from Ireland is that the turnout for today's referendum is pretty light, with reports of turnout below 20% (so far) in many areas.
Our correspondent Henry McDonald points out that turnout for the last Nice treaty vote was 59%, so it will take a huge late surge in voting to get close to that figure.
Incidentally, this is the 33rd time Irish people have voted to amend the country's 1937 Constitution although many of these previous referenda were unconnected to EU membership.
The count will take place at Dublin Castle tomorrow, and Henry says it will be interesting to see if Sinn Fein's presidential candidate and Northern Ireland Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness turns up, because:
3.35pm: Speaking of Angela Merkel, the German chancellor spoke about the eurozone crisis today during a summit of Baltic Sea leaders.
Merkel told reporters that she agreed that changes need to be made across Europe and the eurozone, as Olli Rehn and José Manuel Barroso argued yesterday in their report on the EU economy.
Merkel, the main roadblock to the introduction of eurobonds, argued that there should be 'no taboos' when the EU considers treaty changes to deliver closer fiscal union, arguing:
3.29pm: Christine Lagarde is to hold talks with Spain's deputy finance minister in Washington this afternoon, but the country has NOT sought official funding.
That's the word from an International Monetary Fund spokesman in America in the last couple of minutes, who insisted that the IMF was not drawing up any plans to help Spain.
The spokesman added that the IMF will begin an annual review of the Spanish economy on June 4.
3.11pm: The US stock market is not impressed by the ongoing euro woes, today's downward revision to American GDP, and the worrying jobs news.
While the futures contracts were pointing to a positive opening, the major US markets all lost ground in early trading. The Dow was off 0.41% in the first half hour of trading.
European shares are also in the red, with the German DAX and French CAC both down around 0.8% right now.
3.08pm: Heads-up: our web news editor Jonathan Haynes just opened a caption competition, for a photo of German chancellor Angela Merkel giving an amusing one-fingered gesture to a retreating penguin (and the prime minister of Poland), while wearing a yellow rubber glove. Enjoy yourselves (and come back afterwards).
2.30pm: You might remember the row that blew up after the IMF's Christine Lagarde told The Guardian that the Greek people need to stop avoiding paying taxes.
Well, Nick Malkoutzis, the deputy editor of Greece's daily English language newspaper Kathimerini, has written this article on the issue, partly based on the views of his readers.
• yes, Greece has a large shadow economy, but so do many other countries both in Europe and the developing world. The country isn't uniquely sinful. • Greeks may rely on the inefficiency of state bureaucracy to evade taxes, but in other countries large companies and rich individuals use legal tax loopholes to avoid paying tax on their earnings.
Malkoutzis also suggests that officials and critics may not want to confront the scale of public suffering in Greece (on this point, Lagarde said she had more sympathy for children in Africa than in Athens). He concludes:
The full piece is here.
2.24pm: Sticking with the US briefly -- it's not looking good for Friday's hotly watched "nonfarm payroll" figures.
The number of US workers filing for unemployment benefits jumped last week, a sign that the recovery in the job market continues to slow. Initial jobless claims rose by 10,000 to seasonally adjusted 383,000 in the week ended May 26, the Labour Department said Thursday.
But US stock markets so far seem to be taking the news in their stride. The Dow Futures - an indication of the direction markets are likely to take - are up slightly ahead of the opening bell.
2.06pm: Here's our Wall Street correspondent, Dominic Rushe, on the latest US GDP data (see 1.41pm)
Dom's also now written a full story on the news that US GDP grew by 1.9% (annualised) in Q1 2012, not 2.2% as first estimated, here.
1.41pm: US economic growth for the first three months of 2012 has been revised downwards. America now grew by 1.9% in the quarter on an annualised basis (or around 0.475% on the quarter-on-quarter basis used in Europe).
The downgrade was expected by economists, and is another indication that the global economy didn't enjoy a great start to 2012 (the eurozone stagnated, while the UK shrank by 0.3%).
The data also showed an unexpected drop in US corporate profitability, which fell by 4.1% in the quarter. That's the biggest drop since the last three months of 2008, when panic after the collapse of Lehman Brothers sent corporate profits falling by more than a quarter.
Economics professor Nouriel Roubini fears this is the start of a trend, as economic problems eat into the corporate bottom line:
1.01pm: Spain is having a relatively calm day, with bond yields falling back from danger levels. The Spanish 10-year bond yield has dropped back to 6.47%, reversing yesterday's alarming rise as concern over its banks escalated.
Good. But there is also worrying news from the Bank of Spain about the amount of capital leaving the country.
El Pais has a great graph showing monthly capital levels here (I've taken a small screengrab above as a teaser).
12.36pm: Although the main referendum is taking place in Ireland today, voting has already taken place in some islands off the coast of Ireland.
Voters on five islands in the Donegal area voted on Monday. On Arranmore, just 43 voters out of an electorate of 173 cast their vote.
A record low turnout, according to presiding officer Nora Gallagher who told journalists:
On another island, Inishfree, the only man to actually live there cast his vote. Although Barry Edgar Pilcher was able to exercise his democratic right (the ballot box was actually placed on his livingroom table) a 63-year German named Hans Schleweck who resides on the mainland was disappointed to discover he could not join in the referendum.
According to The Irish Times, Mr Pilcher then treated the returning officer, a Garda officer, and the disappointed Mr Schleweck to a tune or two on his saxophone.
12.28pm: Turnout may have been low in Ireland in the first few hours of the referendum (see 11.38am), but the main party leaders voted early.
The Taoiseach, Enda Kenny, cast his ballot at St Patrick's National School in Castlebar, County Mayo, while deputy prime minister Eamon Gilmore voted in Shankill, south Dublin this morning.
For the No side, Sinn Féin president Gerry Adams cast his ballot in the constituency of Louth.
And here's a photo of a Catholic nun casting her vote at the Drumcondra polling station in Dublin.
12.22pm: Irish army bomb disposal officers have made safe a suspicious object outside the constituency office of Sinn Féin Dublin TD Mary Lou McDonald.
The suspect object was found at her office on Dublin's North Strand this morning. The military technical officers have taken the object away to determine if it was a viable explosive device.
2PM UPDATE: Sinn Féin later said the suspect device left at Mrs McDonald's office was a hoax pipebomb.
11.54am: Fitch, the rating agency, warns that "the risk of a Greek exit [from the eurozone] is material and rising".
It does not expect the euro to break up completely, though.
The warning comes in a new report, in which Fitch outlines how it would respond to a hypothetical exit from the eurozone. It explained that it would rule that the exiting country had defaulted, and would also slash ratings on companies who are based within the country, to junk status or worse....
11.38am: Here's some more info on turnout in the Irish referendum (see also 11.17am). RTE is reporting that by 10am turnout across Dublin polling stations was around only 4.6% of the electorate.
The Yes camp will be hoping for a lunchtime and later tea time surge, Henry McDonald reckons.
On that topic...opposition party Fianna Fail has issued a statement in the last few minutes urging people to exercise their democratic franchise. Fianna Fail stands alone on the opposition benches in the Irish parliament as the party calling for a Yes vote alongside the ruling.
11.17am: Irish public broadcaster RTE has tweeted that by 9.30am there was only a 3.8% turn out of voters in Dublin South while the turn out in neighbouring Dun Laoghaire was a mere 3%.
Polls opened at 7am, allowing people to vote before work. They'll also be open until 10pm tonight.
11.12am: An update from Brussels – Mario Monti is telling the Germans that they need to think again on the euro.
The comments come after the other Mario, Sig. Draghi, added his weight to calls for closer banking union across Europe.
11.03am: As flagged up earlier (see 8.57am), public anger over Ireland's debt ridden and generally loathed banks is one factor in today's referendum.
The news in the last 24 hours that the Irish banking sector needs another €4bn cash injection could influence voters, one way or the other. (details here)
10.45am: A new opinion poll was published in Greece today, putting New Democracy ahead of Syriza in the run-up to the June 17 parliamentary election.
Conducted by DATA RC between 28 and 30 May, it showed that 24.5% of people would vote for New Democracy, versus 22.1% for Syriza. The percentages rise to 28.4% and 25.6% when 'don't knows' and those who will decline to vote are excluded.
Previous polling has put Syriza (which has pledged to renegotiate Greece's austerity programme) in the lead, or neck-and-neck with New Democracy.
10.22am: Mario Draghi has made an important intervention on the eurozone crisis this morning, telling the European Parliament that national governments must show proper leadership now to stem the crisis.
The head of the European Central Bank told the Parliament's economic affairs committee that there was no time to waste in fixing Spain and moving more radically towards a proper eurozone fiscal union.
As Ian Traynor explains from Brussels, after yesterday's rather impotent calls from the European Commission, Draghi is a formidable voice:
As Ian puts it, Draghi appears to be "cautiously enlisting in the cause of a eurozone banking union", which would open up a new front in the euro wars. He explains:
10.14am: New Greek retail sales have just been released, and they're dire.
Retail sales in March were 16.2% lower than a year ago on a volume basis, accelerating the decline in consumer spending (February's data showed a 12.9% tumble).
The bad data is hardly a surprise - and simply reinforces the point that the Greek economy, now in its 5th year of recession, is spiralling downwards.
This graph by Reuters' Scott Barber shows how Greek retail sales and consumer confidence began to slide as soon as the financial crisis began, and have worsened again in recent months.
10.03am: Just in - inflation across the eurozone has fallen to an annual rate to 2.4% in May, from 2.6% in April. Economists had expected a smaller fall, to 2.5%.
This easing in the rising cost of living may give the European Central Bank more leeway on monetary policy, perhaps to lower interest rates again soon (the ECB's governing council meets next week)
Update: Here's Howard Archer of IHS Global Insight on the fall in eurozone inflation:
9.52am: Polling is well underway in Ireland now on the EU fiscal treaty referendum, as the Republic's 3.3 million voters play their part today in shaping the EU's future.
9.23am: Germany's unemployment rate has dropped again -- dipping to 6.7% in May, from 6.8% the previous month.
But on a sesasonally adjusted basis, the number of people out of work was unchanged at 2.872m, while economists had expected a drop of around 5,000. That suggests that the German employment market may be slowing down, after a decent run in recent months.
Carsten Brzeski of ING warned that "signs are increasing that the German labour market is slowly cracking up".
At 6.7%, the German unemployment rate is comfortably below the eurozone average of 10.9% (a 15-year high).
9.10am: In the bond markets, the yields* on French and Austrian 10-year bonds have both fallen to their lowest level since the euro was created.
In the latest sign that investors are stashing their funds in safe European debt, the price of debt issued by France and Austra rallied this morning. This pushed the yield on France's 10-year bond down to just 2.379%, and the Austrian equivalent to 2.13%.
In the European stock markets, shares have gained a little this morning. The FTSE 100 is up 45 points (+0.86%), and the Spanish IBEX has gained 1.2%.
* - yields measure the rate of return on a bond, falling when the price rises and vice versa. So if a trader is prepared to pay more to hold a certain bond, s/he accepts a lower return.
8.57am: There have been signs of a certain degree of anti-German sentiment in Ireland in the run-up to today's referendum:
This photo was taken outside Leinster House, where the Irish Parliament is based, on Wednesday.
It's now 18 months since Ireland signed up for its highly unpopular €85bn bailout plan, which forces hefty cuts to government spending and a raft of tax rises. The most unpopular issue, though, is that Ireland took the debts of its failing banks on to the public books. That decision helped prevent the contagion hitting other financial institutions across Europe, but in return Ireland is left paying off €31bn of promissory notes at high interest rates.
8.40am: We've just launched this Q&A explaining how the Irish referendum works.
8.32am: Polling data in the run-up to today's vote suggested that the Yes camp will win. But there are no guarantees.
Four opinion polls released over the weekend indicated that around 60% of voters would back the treaty. But a significant number of people have been classed as 'don't knows' in the run-up to today's vote.
The BBC also says that some 'yes' campaigners reckon the gap could be as close as 53-47. A sign of nerves, or an attempt to encourage Yes voters to the polls?
8.28am: Last night, Irish prime minister Enda Kenny urged the Irish people to vote Yes in today's referendum on the fiscal compact. He claimed that the country's borrowing costs would leap to dangerous levels if it did not have the protection of the European Stability Mechanism.
Ireland's 10-year bond are trading at a yield of 7.4% this morning. That's a higher rate than a country can reasonably borrow at, but not so high that investors have given up on the country (whose borrowing needs are covered until the end of 2013 by its current bailout)
The No campaign, though, takes a very different view. It argues that rejecting the Treaty will give Ireland the authority to go back to the rest of Europe and demand a better bailout plan.
Sinn Féin president Gerry Adams argued that voting No was the "patriotic thing to do":
8.08am: Irish voters face an unenviable choice today. The EU fiscal compact will force member states to hit tough budget targets, which could mean further pain for a country that is already deep into its austerity programme.
But the fiscal compact will also guarantee access to the European Stability Mechanism, Europe's new bailout fund – a financial lifeline to countries who cannot borrow in the debt markets.
Our leader article argues today that the pact is "an unroadworthy vehicle going the wrong way":
But with no guarantee that Ireland can return to the financial markets as soon as planned, refusing a lift could be a gamble. Ultimately, it's a choice between fear and anger:
7.55am: Here's a quick agenda of some of the main events happening today:
• Irish referendum: all day, polls close at 10pm • German unemployment data: 8.55am • Eurozone inflation for May: 10am • US Q1 GDP, second revision: 1.30pm • Brussels Economic Forum: all day (including Olli Rehn and Mario Monti).
India, Switzerland, the Philippines and Denmark are all releasing (or have already released) GDP data, so we'll keep an eye on the reaction to that data, for a more global economic perspective.
7.45am: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the eurozone financial crisis.
Ireland is the centre of attention today, as it holds its referendum on whether to ratify the fiscal compact. Polls have just opened across the country, and our Dublin correspondent Henry McDonald will be following all the action throughout the day. The results itself will be released on Friday.
Elsewhere, Spain is still a major concern. The crisis over its banking sector continues, there is still no clear plan for recapitalising Bankia, and its bond yields are still dangerousy high.
We'll also be tracking the reaction to yesterday's EU report cards on the European economy, which included a call for closer banking union, and warnings that France and Spain need to do more to bring their deficits down (although Spain may be given more time).
There's also a lot of economic data being released today, including German unemployment, eurozone inflation, French and German retail figures, and another estimate of US GDP. Busy busy