ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Remembrance ceremonies, marred by global tensions over a Florida pastor's threat to burn the Koran, will take place in New York and at the Pentagon on the ninth anniversary of the 9/11 attacks.
The rituals honouring the nearly 3,000 people killed on September 11, 2001, when Islamist terrorists flew hijacked planes into the defence headquarters and New York's World Trade Centre towers, unfold almost unchanged each year.
In New York at Ground Zero the names of the 2,752 victims who died there are read out against a background of sombre music, with moments of silence marking the times when the two airliners slammed into the Twin Towers - and again when the towers collapsed.
President Barack Obama will attend the memorial service at the Pentagon, while vice-president Joseph Biden will be in New York. A third service will be taking place in Shanksville, Pennsylvania where the fourth hijacked airliner crashed into a field.
This year the dignified and simple events are overshadowed by a row over a renegade Florida pastor's threat to publicly burn hundreds of Korans on Saturday if plans are not dropped for a proposed mosque near Ground Zero.
The pastor, Terry Jones, seemed to have abandoned his Koran-burning plan by Friday after pleas from Mr Obama, the Vatican and several other world leaders warning of a catastrophe for Western-Muslim relations.
However, tensions remained high and Pastor Jones's stunt ensured that the related controversy over the proposed Ground Zero mosque took centre stage.
Rival rallies by groups supporting and opposing the disputed mosque project were to take place nearby soon after the official ceremonies at Ground Zero, breaking an unwritten taboo on open politicisation of the anniversary.
Police said they would ensure the two groups were kept apart.
The still unbuilt mosque and Islamic community centre was originally proposed by New York's Imam Feisal Abdul Rauf as a chance to heal post-9/11 wounds just two blocks from Ground Zero.
However opponents - led by right-wing radio DJs and politicians campaigning on patriotic tickets ahead of November 2 congressional midterm elections - accuse the imam of seeking to honour the Islamist terrorists responsible for the attacks.
The mosque standoff and Pastor Jones's Koran burning plans have created such a toxic atmosphere for US Muslims that Mr Obama pleaded for Americans "to make sure that we don't start turning on each other."
Amnesty International, the human rights watchdog, warned of "persecution" against US Muslims and called on the government to protect their rights.
Pastor Jones's plans still remain unclear. The obscure pastor, who leads a tiny evangelical congregation of about 50, insisted his truce depended on being at least able to meet with Rauf.
Whatever happens, damage to the US image in the Muslim world may have already occurred.
Anger spilled in Afghanistan on Friday where thousands of people threw stones and demonstrated outside a small NATO military base.
Mr Obama's defence secretary Robert Gates earlier had made a personal call to Pastor Jones, saying US troops in Afghanistan would face revenge attacks if the Koran burning went ahead.
There were also protests in Pakistan and Indonesia.
Najib Razak, prime minister of Muslim-majority Malaysia, warned that a "single act of abhorrence" could "ignite the feelings of Muslims throughout the world, the consequences of which I fear would be very, very costly."