Irish Presidential Election Offers Signs of Reconciliation
The winner will succeed Mary P. McAleese, the first Irish president from Northern Ireland, who is stepping down after 14 years. One of the Irish Republic’s most popular figures, she is a major peacemaking figure in her own right. In May, Mrs. McAleese, 60, a former Belfast law professor who proclaimed the theme of her presidency as “building bridges,” achieved a long-held ambition when Queen Elizabeth II visited Ireland, the first such visit by a British monarch.
In the latest polls, Mr. McGuinness trailed a distant third to the front-runner, Sean Gallagher, a 49-year-old Dublin businessman and TV personality who made his fortune selling homebuilding equipment during the property boom that preceded Ireland’s economic collapse and its acceptance of a $90 billion international bailout last year. Mr. Gallagher’s closest challenger, according to the polls, is Michael D. Higgins, 70, a former culture minister who is president of the Irish Labour Party.
Like Mr. McGuinness, both men have pledged to promote investment in Ireland to help speed up the country’s economic recovery. But neither has anything like the public profile of Mr. McGuinness, especially in the United States, where the former I.R.A. commander has been an energetic envoy for the Belfast peace pact, particularly among the 37 million Americans with Irish ancestry.
Mr. McGuinness has pulled off improbable outcomes before, notably in helping to bring Sinn Fein, the I.R.A. and Northern Ireland’s mostly Roman Catholic Republicans into the 1998 Good Friday peace agreement. That pact ended the 30 years of “Troubles,” which killed more than 3,500 people in Northern Ireland, 60 percent of them in I.R.A. shootings and bombings. Building on that record in the election campaign, he has vowed, as he said in an interview in Galway, to use the presidency as a platform to “further stabilize the peace process.”
Mr. McGuinness has said he left the I.R.A. in 1974, shifting to Sinn Fein’s electoral politics. But British intelligence officials have said he remained the I.R.A.’s northern area commander — in effect, chief of staff of the I.R.A. in the six counties of Northern Ireland — into the 1990s. A British report last year into the events on Bloody Sunday said he had probably been armed with a Thompson submachine gun during the confrontations in the Bogside district of Derry, but found no evidence to support assertions by some witnesses that he had fired shots that led to the fatal fusillade.
In recent years, he has won wide acclaim in Ireland — and reactions ranging from a grudging respect to affection from many of his old foes among Northern Ireland’s Protestant loyalists — for his role in making the power-sharing government in Belfast work. It has defied fears that it would collapse under the weight of recriminations about the past and the unresolved dispute about Northern Ireland’s long-term future as a permanent part of Britain or, eventually, as a territory to be absorbed into a united Ireland.
As he campaigned, Mr. McGuinness made no bones about Sinn Fein’s reunification ambitions. “I have no doubt that we can bring about the reunification of Ireland by purely peaceful and democratic means if we’re smart about it, and if we work in ways that makes the partition of Ireland irrelevant,” he said in the Galway interview. “Allegiances to different states should not be a barrier. There should be no threat.”
It is not the first time that an Irish presidential election has featured a candidate with a personal history of the violent struggle against the British. Eamon De Valera, who was host to President John F. Kennedy on his visit to Ireland in 1963 and served as president for another decade until he retired at the age of 90 as the world’s oldest head of state, took part in the bloody Easter Uprising against the British in 1916.
With his own history of violence before he gained power in Dublin, Mr. De Valera would have recognized the recurrent challenges Mr. McGuinness has faced from relatives of people killed by I.R.A. gunmen and bombers on both sides of the north-south border. Several times during the campaign, he has confronted demands that he admit his responsibility for the killings, or at least that he name the I.R.A. militants involved.
Ireland’s evening newscasts led with a shopping center encounter early in the campaign in the town of Athlone in which David Kelly, the son of an Irish soldier shot dead with an Irish policeman in an I.R.A. attack in 1983, demanded the names of his father’s killers. “I want justice for my father,” Mr. Kelly said.
Mr. McGuinness said he did not know who was responsible, but added, “I fully and absolutely sympathize with you.” Mr. Kelly shot back, “You’re a liar!”
An all-candidates debate on television was jarred when the moderator asked him how he could “square” his candidacy “with the fact that you were involved in the murder of so many people.” Mr. McGuinness called the question “disgraceful,” and said he believed Irish voters would focus on his peacemaking, not his I.R.A. past.
“I think they understand their history,” he said.