Santa Claus a Canadian, immigration minister reaffirms
The answer to the age-old question of why Santa Claus wears only red and white now seems blazingly obvious, thanks to Citizenship and Immigration Minister Jason Kenney: Santa is Canadian, of course.
During a citizenship ceremony in Calgary Wednesday, Mr. Kenney cleared up years of speculation over Mr. Claus’s choice of wardrobe when he reaffirmed the jolly, bearded saint’s stature as a Canadian citizen. (No, this story is not a hoax.)
“We wish Mr. Claus all the best in his Christmas Eve duties again this year,” Mr. Kenney said. “And rest assured, as a Canadian citizen living in Canada’s North, he can re-enter Canada freely once his trip around the world is complete.”
Mr. Kenney’s comments echo those he made two years ago when he officially declared Santa a Canadian citizen.
The remarks came during a special citizenship ceremony in which 100 new citizens from 32 countries were sworn in. And yes, Santa made the trip all the way from the North Pole to give his blessing.
While the event was marked by a note of Christmas cheer, the serious implication contained in Mr. Kenney’s remarks is that the North Pole is part of Canadian territory, something the minister touched on.
“The Government continues to invest in measures that exercise Canada’s sovereignty and create more economic opportunities in the North,” he said.
“We want to ensure that Santa and all Northern peoples benefit from the considerable progress that has been made.”
It’s unclear if Mr. Kenney consulted with his foreign counterparts to smooth over any diplomatic flaps the Santa declaration might cause.
The Dutch, for example, are under the impression that “Sinterklaas” lives in a castle in Spain and travels by steamboat every year to the Netherlands to deliver presents.
When asked who decided that Santa was in fact Canadian, the minister responded: “We are just stating the facts. You know, Santa lives in the Arctic North and that is Canadian territory. So when he comes to visit Canadian boys and girls, he doesn’t have to go through the CBSA border clearance.”
He added that Santa’s workshop is GST exempt, but admitted he didn’t get clearance from the minister of finance to say that.
The minister also took the opportunity to plug the government’s new citizenship guide as a “valuable learning resource for newcomers and all Canadians.”
“This is such an important day for Canada’s newest citizens,” said Mr. Kenney. “Today, our history also becomes their history, and their future becomes our future. The Canadian story is depicted in the new citizenship guide Discover Canada: The Rights and Responsibilities of Citizenship.”
As an official part of Canada’s story, Santa has surely read it.