Trump team ultimatum: No more talks, time to vote
Washington (CNN)Top White House officials descended on Capitol Hill Thursday night to personally deliver President Donald Trump's ultimatum to House Republicans: Negotiations on their health care bill are over, and the House will vote Friday.
Then, there was this: If the bill doesn't pass Friday, Trump is ready to move on and Republicans will be "stuck with Obamacare."
That message, conveyed by Office of Management and Budget Director Mick Mulvaney to tired lawmakers over Chick-fil-A and Corner Bakery snacks, finally put an end to the looming question of whether the GOP health care legislation would end up on the House floor. It also dared Republican critics and skeptics of the bill like the conservative House Freedom Caucus to own the political consequences of reneging on the party's years-long pledge to gut President Barack Obama's landmark health care law.
The outcome of Friday's vote is unclear. If the bulk of the Freedom Caucus remains opposed to the bill, leadership does not believe it has the votes to clear the bill in the House.
According to CNN's ongoing whip count, 27 House Republicans have said they will vote against the bill and four more have indicated they are likely to oppose it. Republicans can't lose more than 21 members of their caucus and still pass the bill, since no Democrats are expected to support it.
The decision to end negotiations came from the White House, a person with direct knowledge said. Leadership and top White House aides spent the late afternoon "trying to grind them down," the source said, referring to the Freedom Caucus. But there was no clear progress, so in private conversations, even as meetings were ongoing with the Freedom Caucus, Trump made the decision to go ahead with the vote.
Both men have been furiously lobbying lawmakers and especially the Freedom Caucus to get behind the legislation, as the group has tried to push the bill to the right but whose proposals have alienated moderate Republicans.
Congressional Budget Office came out with more bad news Meanwhile, the Congressional Budget Office came out with more bad news on Thursday. Changes Republicans made earlier this week to the bill will actually only decrease federal deficits by $150 billion over 10 years, while the original measure would have lowered deficits by $337 billion.
The challenge for leaders as they've counted their votes has been daunting: Give conservatives too much of what they want and risk losing the moderates, but keep the moderates on board and conservatives could walk.
On Wednesday and Thursday, non-Freedom Caucus Republicans began to turn their backs on the bill, saying it was not a plan they could back on behalf of their constituents.
The moderate Tuesday Group trekked to the White House Thursday afternoon after intense deliberations of their own and a meeting with Ryan. The group had seven boxes of pizza as well as Doritos and Baked Lays delivered to a room in the Capitol earlier in the day.
Even after Trump delivered his ultimatum Thursday night, some of the moderate Republicans previously opposed to the bill -- such as New Jersey Rep. Leonard Lance -- said they would still vote "no."
In trying to win votes for the health care bill, Trump has also experienced firsthand the reality of what it can be like to work with the Freedom Caucus, a top GOP source said -- that they can be deeply frustrating because they don't really want to get to yes and keep changing their demands.
Alabama GOP Rep. Bradley Byrne, emerging from a meeting with top House leaders on Thursday, blasted the House GOP leadership's move to continue talks with the hard right in the Freedom Caucus while leaving the bulk of other members in the dark.
On the flip side, the measure has also driven up premiums and restricted consumers' choice to buy more limited coverage. Republicans have long wanted to get rid of the essential health benefits provision, which is key to their pledge to reduce premiums and offer choice to consumers.