Stars react to Manny Pacquiao's comments on same-sex unions
(UPDATED) Vice Ganda, Perez Hilton, Aiza Seguerra, and more express their thoughts on Manny's recent comments about same-sex unions
MANILA, Philippines (2nd UPDATE) – Boxing superstar and Sarangani Representative Manny Pacquiao's recent video interview, where he talks about his stand against same-sex unions, is drawing reactions from many citizens, especially from members of the LGBT community.
In the interview, he says that same-sex couples are worse that animals, because when animals mate, their instinct is to be with the opposite sex. (READ:Pacquiao: Couples in same-sex unions ‘worse than animals’)
On February 16, a day after the interview was posted on Facebook, Manny apologized through a video on Facebook, saying, “I'm sorry for hurting people by comparing homosexuals to animals. Please forgive me for those I've hurt.” (WATCH: Pacquiao apologizes for calling gay couples more disgusting than animals)
To Rappler, Manny said, "I am not condemning them (gays), just the act. I do not agree with them having to marry."
On Twitter, Vice Ganda reacted to Manny's apology, saying he accepts the apology, but is not voting for the senator.
Ai-Ai delas Alas reacted on Instagram, saying, "Pwede mo naman sabihin na hindi ka sang ayon sa SAME SEX MARRIAGE pero para sabihin mo na ang mga gays and lesbians are mas masahol pa sa hayup eh hindi din naman tama!"
(You can say that you don't agree with same-sex marriage, but to say that gays and lesbians are worse than animals, that's not right!)
She added, "Bilang tao na hinahangan sa buong mundo, hindi ka dapat nanghuhusga ng kapwa mo." (As a person that people around the world look up to, you shouldn't judge your fellowmen.)
"Read before you click, think before you speak," Ai-Ai advised.
Liza Diño also reacted on Instagram, a follow-up to her post from yesterday.
Aminado ako nagalit ako nung una. But sabi ko nga diba nagmature na ang pananaw ko dito after going through this every single day from random people. Kaso, champion ka. Hero ka namin. Hindi ka random. Kaya siguro mas personal talaga to....I tried to undertand and analyze where you might be coming from and after trying to process things, mas nangibabaw ang AWA ko sayo. At sa Pilipinas. Bakit? 1) kung ang basis sa definition mo ng "common sense" ay ang analogy mo tungkol sa mga hayop at tao naku eh, bumalik ka muna ng elementary para magrefresher tungkol sa zoology. Nakakaloka! Daig ka pa ng anak ko! There are a lot of animals who display homosexual behavior so dun palang waley ka na. Tsk tsk. 2) Mas masahol pa kaming LGBT sa hayop. Ummm, alam mo yung Darwinian theory? Naku mukhang hindi nooh? Bilis! Balik ka ulit sa elementary. Human evolution naman ang aralin mo. Para pag naghanap ka ng mga supporting comments sa Anti-LGBT campaign mo eh, mas may basis. We all came from primates. May theory na ganyan. So yes, we are all ANIMALS. 3) Samahan mo na rin ng GMRC. alam mo yun? Good Manners and Right Conduct. Mainam yan para matuto ka kung pano rumespeto sa mga tao bilang tao. Hirap sayo puro christian education ka, mali naman ang mga turo sayo. Mas nagiging mapanghusga ka at walang modo dahil sa tinuturo ng relihiyon mo. 4) After realizing all this, bigla akong naawa sa Pilipinas. We have you in congress to make rules for this country.! Nakakaloka! After your display of complete disregard for humanity, nakakadismayang isinasaalang alang namin sayo ang kapakanan ng bansa namin. Hala...ayaw! Afraid! Please, magboxing ka na lang. Mas may pakinabang pa... 5) There is a slight possibility that you are blinded by the scripture. At kung ito man ang dahilan kung bakit nagawa mong magcomment ng mga ganyan, then yun, I really pity you. Mahirap gamutin ang self inflicted na kamangmamangan... Love CANNOT be conditional. Kung makatao ka at marunong magmahal, then it should be encompassing and unconditonal. I'm not giving up on you MANNY.baka nabubulagan ka lang ng mga paniniwala mo. Too much bible study w/o a critical mind is dangerous to ur humanity and spirituality. A photo posted by Liza Diño-Seguerra (@lizadino) on
BB Gandanghari also posted a long message on Twitter to express her thoughts about Manny's video.
Arnell Ignacio posted this statement on his Facebook page.
Transgender model Geena Rocero also posted her thoughts about the issue.
In an interview with ABS-CBN, Thursday, February 18, superstar Nora Aunor criticized the boxer for his controversial statement.
(For me, he’s in government right? Whatever is his personal opinion, he should keep it to himself. He should just shut up. He’s acting like a girl.)
(You are a gambler, a womanizer – which is worse, right? He should not even call them animals because they are human.)
When asked if she has tips for Manny, Nora said, "Tumigil na muna siya nang kadadaldal at humingi siya ng tawad doon sa mga pinaringan niya."
(He should stop blabbering and ask for forgiveness from those he has offended.)
A number of celebrities have taken to social media to express their disappointment over the comments made by Manny in an interview via Bilang Pilipino. (READ: Gab Valenciano on Manny Pacquiao, same-sex unions)
Pointing to the mating habit of animals, the boxing champ said it was “common sense” for animals to pair with the opposite sex. Based on this, he concluded that those in same-sex unions are worse than animals.
On Tonight With Boy Abunda, the talk show host aired out his thoughts on the issue:
(Last point: We are talking about common sense. You're running for senator? this is my question, this is just my personal question: do you think I – or our countrymen in this studio or those at home – would I vote for a person who doesn't see me as a person? Would I vote for someone who thinks I am worse than an animal? Manny, the answer, in your own words, is common sense.)
Vice Ganda had this to say on Twitter:
Aiza Seguerra did not hide his dismay, posting this on Instagram:
“I am so f-ck-n' mad I don't know what to say.
“You might've done our country proud but with your statement, you just showed the whole country why we shouldn't vote for you.
“And yes, I think you are an ignorant, bigoted hypocrite.
“You made me lose all respect that I had for you, Mr Pacquiao,” Aiza said.
In the caption, Aiza added: "Ang kailangan ng bansang ito ay mga taong nag-iisip. Utang na loob, kilalanin ninyo ang iboboto ninyo (The Philippines needs thinking people. I ask you all, please know the candidates you are voting for.)
Aiza's wife Liza Diño also posted the video on her Facebook page.
John "Sweet" Lapus posted this on Instagram and Twitter:
Blogger Perez Hilton also did not hide his dismay over Manny's stand.
He also wrote this on his blog.
"What?! Why do people have to compare homosexuality to animals?! WHY??"
"Look, if your religious beliefs prevent you from accepting same-sex marriage, that's on you. That's YOUR idea of propriety.
"But there's absolutely no call to demonize and denigrate gay people by comparing them to animals just because their love is something YOU'RE unable to accept," Perez said.
Former Pinoy Big Brother winner Slater Young also shared his opinion on Twitter.
Mo Twister also has this to say.
Manny, who is running for a Senate seat under Vice President Jejomar Binay's UNA party in the upcoming elections, is currently training for his match with Timothy Bradley scheduled this April in Las Vegas. – Rappler.com