Turkmenistan president wins re-election with 97% of vote
Gurbanguli Berdymukhamedov improves on his performance in 2007 election, but London-based expert says vote was a sham
Turkmenistan's president, Gurbanguli Berdymukhamedov, has won a new five-year term by capturing 97% of the vote, election officials said. A western expert called the vote a democratic sham.
All of Berdymukhamedov's seven opponents praised his leadership in their campaigns, making the authoritarian leader's victory in Sunday's election a formality. Berdymukhamedov improved on his performance in the 2007 election, in which he secured his first term with 89% of the vote.
The head of the central election commission, Orazmyrat Niyazliyev, said the vote was democratic and had contributed to national unity.
Annette Bohr, an expert on Turkmenistan at the London-based Chatham House institute, said the election presented only the facade of a democratic process. "It is the typical faux democracy that you see in so many countries," Bohr said.
Turkmenistan, a former Soviet republic that borders the Caspian Sea, is the subject of avid interest from the west, Russia and China because of its natural gas reserves, which are estimated to be the fourth largest in the world.
Berdymukhamedov, 54, came to power after the death of predecessor, Saparmurat Niyazov, in 2006 and promised to open up the tightly controlled political system.
The only international observation mission overseeing the election was a delegation from the post-Soviet Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), which frequently offers positive assessments of votes criticised by more established monitoring bodies.
The CIS executive secretary, Sergei Lebedev, said the election complied with democratic norms. Monitors had noted some minor irregularities but they were unlikely to have any impact on the final result, he said.
The Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe had said earlier that conditions were not suitable for a vote-monitoring mission and Turkmenistan did not invite its observers.