China issues white paper on fighting corruption
BEIJING - China expressed its resolve to strengthen the fight against corruption Wednesday as it released its first ever white paper on anti-graft efforts. (Click for full text)
The document, titled China's Efforts to Combat Corruption and Build a Clean Government, was issued by the Information Office of the State Council, or Cabinet.
China's efforts to combat corruption and build a clean government, which is managed systematically and promoted comprehensively, has "achieved results," the report said.
From 2003 to 2009, prosecutors at all levels investigated more than 240,000 cases of embezzlement, bribery, dereliction of duty and rights' infringements, according to the report.
Over 69,200 cases of commercial bribery, involving 16.59 billion yuan in total, were investigated from 2005 to 2009, it said.
In 2009, some 7,036 officials were held responsible for acts like making serious mistakes in decision making, breaching of duty, and failing to manage and supervise subordinates, the report said.
The report quoted a National Bureau of Statistics survey as saying that 83.8 percent of Chinese thought corruption was reduced to some extent in 2010, up from 68.1 percent in 2003.
The document warned that the task of curbing corruption remains tough.
China has undergone dramatic economic and social changes. The ideas and concepts of the people have evolved, leading to increased social conflicts, the report said.
"Since the relevant mechanisms and systems are still incomplete, corruption persists, some cases even involving huge sums of money, " the report said. "Breaches of law and discipline tend to be more covert, intelligent and complicated."
The Communist Party of China (CPC) and the government understand the "long-haul, complicated and arduous" nature of anti-graft missions, the report said.
"They will resolutely punish and effectively prevent corruption with more resolutions and powerful measures," the report said.
The report introduces principles, working mechanisms and legal framework for China's anti-graft system. It also sets out the progress made in combating corruption and international anti-graft cooperation.