John Bryson resigns as Commerce secretary
John Bryson’s resignation as Commerce secretary ends the medical leave of absence he’d been on since a seizure caused his involvement in two car accidents in early June.
“I have come to the conclusion that I need to step down to prevent distractions from this critical mission,” Bryson wrote in a letter to Commerce Department staff.
The 68-year-old former energy executive gave his resignation letter to President Barack Obama on Wednesday night and informed department employees of his action Thursday morning.
( Also on POLITICO: Commerce static before Bryson leave)
“I feel privileged to have been part of the progress we have made together for our businesses and workers as they ‘build it here and sell it everywhere,’” Bryson said in his letter. “In my personal capacity, I will continue to do everything I can to support the president and America’s businesses as they continue to advance innovation, U.S. competitiveness, and prosperity for our people in the months and years ahead.”
Bryson “fought tirelessly for our nation’s businesses and workers, helping to bolster our exports and promote American manufacturing and products at home and abroad,” Obama said in a statement Thursday. “John has proven himself an effective and distinguished leader throughout his career in both the public and private sectors, from his success in the business world to his work leading on issues in the renewable energy industry.”
The two met Thursday afternoon in the Oval Office for what White House press secretary Jay Carney said would be a chance for the president to “thank [Bryson] for his service.”
Rebecca Blank, Bryson’s deputy, will continue to serve as acting Commerce secretary. Obama said he is “confident” that Blank continue to serve the American people well in a role she took on after Bryson went on leave on June 11.
Blank has a reputation for having her fingers on the pulse of the department, after previously serving as acting secretary for about three months last year while Bryson awaited Senate confirmation. A poverty expert and formerly the dean of the University of Michigan’s Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy, she is not the kind of retired corporate executive or political insider who typically runs the department.
Because of his business experience, Bryson had been seen as a member of the president’s cabinet well-equipped to reach out to CEOs. Blank’s background, by contrast, could make her a useful voice for outreach to ordinary voters during the president’s reelection campaign, argued a former Obama Commerce aide.
“Unlike some economists, she knows how to explain complicated economic decisions in a language people can understand — without talking down to them — and she’s disciplined and adept at thinking on her feet,” the former aide said.
At Commerce, Blank has dealt with the pragmatic questions of how to implement policies, and emerged as the point person for the department’s program to develop advanced manufacturing.
Blank was also reportedly a candidate to chair the White House Council of Economic Advisers, a post that eventually went last year to Princeton University labor economist Alan Krueger. An MIT PhD, she previously served in Bill Clinton’s Council of Economic Advisers.