Mayoral challenger calls for federal investigation into Flint water
FLINT, MI -- Mayoral challenger Karen Weaver is calling for a federal investigation into Flint's water problems, including recent reports of high levels of lead in drinking water.
Weaver, speaking at a news conference Tuesday, Sept. 8, said she has written to state and federal officials, including President Obama, asking for help in determining "Why the city of Flint has been allowed to circumvent federal Environmental Protection Agency rules regarding the treatment of lead in its water supply."
Flint and state officials have said they are in compliance with all state and federal drinking water standards. But last week, Mayor Dayne Walling said the city will put accelerated measures in place to reduce lead in drinking water by 2016.
Walling's announcement came one day after a water expert from Virginia Tech warned of the potential for a "huge public health problem" due to lead in Flint tap water.
Weaver is running against Walling in the November General Election and blamed the incumbent mayor for dealing with the city's water problems in a "casual, callous and irresponsible" manner.
Walling said his opponent "is just now learning about the serious challenges Flint faces," and said he's already contacted the U.S. EPA, including Regional Administrator Susan Hedman, asking for federal assistance.
Representatives of EPA have agreed to join a technical advisory committee that's dealing with Flint water issues, according to city officials.
Walling has supported use of the Flint River as a temporary source of drinking water, while Weaver has suggested the city return to purchasing treated Lake Huron water from Detroit until the Karegnondi Water Authority pipeline to Lake Huron is completed, something that's expected to happen in 2016.
Flint and Genesee County are partners in the KWA project.
Flint began using the river as a water source in April 2014.
"We need federal help," Weaver said. "Something has to be done, and something has to be done now ... We have pregnant mothers ... infants, toddlers and children ingesting lead."
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University Professor Marc Edwards is supervising a study of Flint water based on samples collected around the city this summer.
Edwards and his researchers said last week that Flint drinking water is "very corrosive" and "causing lead contamination in homes" as it interacts with lead in home plumbing and service lines to homes.
Citing a June 24 letter from an EPA manager as evidence, Weaver said Flint's testing for lead may not be producing accurate results.
The same letter says the city is "no longer providing corrosion-control treatment for lead and copper," a "serious concern for residents that live in homes with lead service lines or partial-lead service lines, which are common throughout the city of Flint."
Walling said Weaver is making a mistake by citing a letter from "one individual staff person" who does not speak for U.S. EPA.
"It's dangerous for a candidate to make allegations that are not based on fact," Walling said.
In addition to new questions related to lead in water, Flint officials have struggled to meet the requirements of the Safe Drinking Water Act for total trihalomethanes since they began using the Flint River as a water source.
Just last week, the state Department of Environmental Quality told the city that its violation of the federal act had been lifted after recent testing showed all city water sampling sites were within allowable levels for TTHM.
The Flint Journal-MLive could not reach Peter Cassell, an EPA spokesman, for comment Tuesday.