Ireland's Greens mull leaving government of PM Cowen
The Green Party in the Republic of Ireland is to decide today whether to stay in the coalition government.
If the party pulls out, it will force an election next month - earlier than a planned poll on 11 March.
The Greens are meeting after PM Brian Cowen quit as leader of his Fianna Fail party.
He said he would remain as prime minister until the March poll, despite pressure from opposition parties to hold snap elections.
Opposition politicians have described the situation as "farcical", intending to try and vote Mr Cowen out of office by tabling emergency motions in parliament.
Mr Cowen resigned under pressure from colleagues over his handling of an economic crisis and party disputes.
But he says he will not go without a fight, and is determined to stay in power until mid-March, the BBC's Mark Simpson in Dublin reports.
It has been an extraordinary week and next week promises to be just as interesting. The main opposition has signalled its intention to put down a motion of no confidence on Tuesday in Brian Cowen as Taoiseach. The Labour party has already put down a similar motion of no confidence, but in the government. The Greens would have no problem voting confidence in the government - after all they are members of the coalition - but confidence in the Taoiseach may be different. In the Fianna Fail leadership contest, expected next week, Micheal Martin is favourite to succeed Mr Cowen. Already backbenchers have been rallying to his colours. Finance Minister Brian Lenihan, who has been treated for pancreatic cancer, is also expected to be a leadership candidate but his star has waned because of the bail-out and because of his lukewarm endorsement of Mr Cowen last week. The PM who lost his powers
A Green Party spokesman said late on Saturday: "Green Party TDs and Senators have discussed Brian Cowen's decision to resign as leader of Fianna Fail and remain as Taoiseach. They will meet tomorrow to consider the situation".
The Greens hold six seats in the Irish Parliament and their withdrawal of support for the government would be fatal for the coalition. It currently only has a two-seat majority.
Fianna Fail is urging the party to stay in government to ensure that new financial legislation - which is key to Ireland's international bailout - is passed before the March election, our correspondent says.
He adds that - in spite of recent rows within the coalition - the Greens have so far been reluctant to pull out.
Announcing his decision to quit as party leader, Mr Cowen said the focus of the election should be policy and not personality.
In a week of political crises, Mr Cowen first survived a party leadership vote but was forced to call the election after a bungled cabinet reshuffle.
Mr Cowen faced immediate criticism for his plan to stay on as PM - the first time since 1994 a politician has been prime minister, or Taoiseach, while not leading the main party of government.
Labour leader Eamon Gilmore said it was "simply not tenable" for Mr Cowen to remain in the post.
Fine Gael leader Enda Kenny said that he would back the no-confidence motion in Mr Cowen as PM on Tuesday unless there was a dissolution of parliament.
However, Fine Gael's Michael Noonan also said it would stave off the vote, and help pass a crucial finance bill, if Mr Cowen was prepared to dissolve parliament on Friday and bring the election forward.
Sinn Fein president Gerry Adams said: "The government and Fianna Fail are in chaos. Their focus is not on the problems facing the country."
One of Mr Cowen's own Fianna Fail MPs, Charlie O'Connor, also opposed his move.
"I say this with the greatest of respect for Brian Cowen, but what he's just done is pointless and counterproductive."
Criticism of Mr Cowen has intensified this month following revelations he played golf with the former chairman of Anglo Irish Bank, Sean FitzPatrick, months before the bank was nationalised to prevent it from collapse. Mr Cowen has denied any wrongdoing.
Mr Cowen has seen his ratings plummet amid Ireland's economic crisis. The country was given a bail-out package by the European Union and International Monetary Fund last year.
After the tumultuous week, Mr Cowen said: "Taking everything into account, after discussing the matter with my family, I have taken, on my own counsel, the decision to step down."
He added: "I have been in touch with no senior party figures in relation to this decision."
Mr Cowen said he had "deep affection" for the men and women who worked for Fianna Fail and wanted it to be in the best possible position to fight the election campaign.
"The focus should be on what policies the political parties are offering, rather than on the narrow focus of personality politics.
"I am concerned that renewed internal criticism of my leadership of Fianna Fail is deflecting attention from these important debates," Mr Cowen said.
The PM said: "My intention now is to concentrate fully on government business and on continuing to implement the recovery plan.
"The government will continue to govern the country."
He also vowed that the government would win the no-confidence vote on Tuesday. The coalition has a two-seat majority in parliament.
Fianna Fail has confirmed it will choose its new leader on Wednesday. Brian Lenihan, Micheal Martin and Mary Hanafin are among the leading contenders.
Mr Cowen pledged his "full support" for whoever was selected.
On Tuesday, Mr Cowen won a vote of confidence in his leadership of Fianna Fail. Minister for Foreign Affairs, Micheal Martin, who had opposed Mr Cowen, resigned.
However on Thursday, Mr Cowen bungled a planned government reshuffle. His coalition partners, the Greens, were angered by the reshuffle and blocked it. Mr Cowen then called the general election.