ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
There have been large protests in Cairo over Egypt's parliamentary election, which human rights groups say was rigged.
The ruling National Democratic Party is expected to take 97 per cent of seats in parliament after minor parties decided to boycott the second round of voting.
In front of the Supreme Court, protesters railed against an election that they say was rigged from the start.
Riot police outnumbered the protesters by 10 to one - the usual ratio in Egypt where protests are tightly controlled.
A week after the second round of voting closed in the parliamentary election, the anger in the country still has not gone away.
Human rights groups there and abroad have alleged widespread fraud, from ballot box stuffing to removing candidates' names from the list, intimidation and outright violence by party thugs and security forces.
After the first round of voting, the main opposition party, Muslim Brotherhood, saw its share of seats drop from 20 per cent to zero.
Other opposition parties fared almost as badly and a second round of voting was announced, with most opposition groups announcing they would boycott it.
As a result, president Hosni Mubarak's ruling National Democratic Party now appears set to take more than 95 per cent of seats in Egypt's parliament.
Mustafa Al Gendi from opposition party Al Wafd says in the last election he won his seat by a record margin.
But this time around the numbers mysteriously reversed and he is out.
"We know, and everybody knows, there was fraud," he said.
No-one ever thought Egyptian elections were totally free and fair, but Mr Gendi says the ruling party has badly overreached this time.
"I think the people who were responsible [for] these elections wanted to give a beautiful wrapped present to the president as an election that we won," he said.
"Actually it was not a present, it was a bomb, because instead of giving him 75 per cent of the parliament they give him almost 100 per cent."
But Mr Mubarak, who himself faces re-election next year, says this was a fair vote.
"This election was largely lawful, despite a few irregularities, and it was conducted in the majority of polling stations with accordance to the law," he said.
The United States has publicly expressed its concern over the fairness of this election, but Australia has not, even though Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd met with the Egyptian president on Saturday.