"I know there are still many pre-polls still to be counted, I know there are still many postal votes still to be counted but the figures clearly indicate that there has been a swing to the Labor Party and they will have a majority in the legislative assembly, therefore, it is appropriate for myself as leader of the government, leader of the Liberal Party to do the right thing by the people of Victoria, to contact Mr Andrews and inform him that I have conceded and that he has won this election and I congratulate Mr Andrews on this victory," he said. Dr Napthine said it had been an "honour and a privilege" to serve as Premier of the "greatest state in the best country in the world". Dr Napthine meets supporters after his concession speech with son Tom following. He announced he would call a meeting of the Liberal Party to "move forward" and would step down as leader.
Dr Napthine smiled throughout his speech, which was greeted with warm applause and cheers from the Liberal faithful at the Sofitel. He said he was proud of his government's record, pointing to their economic performance and tough law-and-order agenda. "And I am particularly proud that today in 2014, Victoria is a better, stronger, more financially secure state than when we came to government four years ago," he said. Outgoing Victorian Premier Denis Napthine concedes defeat with wife Peggy at his side. "In the great tradition of Liberal/National parties, we leave the state in better condition than what we inherited only four years ago."
He said while there were still many early and postal votes to count, there had been too great a swing to Labor. "They will have a majority in the legislative assembly." The former premier, who led Victoria's first one-term government in over half a century, listed the Coalition's tough on crime agenda, infrastructure program and signing up to the former federal Labor government's national disability insurance scheme as some of his biggest achievements. He said Victoria was a better and stronger state than it was four years ago. "I am extremely proud to have the honour and privilege to be the Premier of this great state of Victoria."
Dr Napthine thanked his colleagues, making special mention of former premier Ted Baillieu who won the election for the Coalition in 2010. He was joined on stage by his wife Peggy and sons Tom and Edward. He thanked his family, including his son Jack, supporters, colleagues and He also urged the new Labor government to reconsider its stance on the controversial East West Link road project, which Mr Andrews has vowed to abandon. It was a gracious concession that was received well by the crowd. Many were expecting a loss, and emotions ran high at the grand ballroom. There were tears, drinks and hugs.
"My family has been absolutely outstanding in their loyalty and their support," he said. Earlier, Health Minister David Davis told The Age the party would conduct a review to determine what had gone wrong. Some Liberals blamed the loss on successful union campaigns. "They poured a lot of money into the campaign, with firefighters and paramedics confronting voters at the booths and telling them to put [the Liberals] last." Many anticipate the swing towards Labor will increase once the pre-poll and postal votes are counted early next week. Others said the "Abbott factor" had crippled the party's chance of success.