UP agitation: Farmers protest continue on Day 2; four dead
LUCKNOW: For the second consecutive day violent protests by farmers against forcible acquisition of their land continued in Greater Noida and spread to other parts of western-Uttar Pradesh including Agra and Aligarh . Farmers clashed with the police which saw four people dead even as protestors set on fire the offices of JP Infratech which is constructing the Yamuna Expressway from Noida to Agra. On Sunday the violence spread to Agra and Aligarh even as the situation in villages on the periphery of Greater Noida continued to be tense, with reports of large number of men folk in the villages reported missing. The fresh protests by farmers clearly indicates that the new land acquisition policy brought by the Mayawati government last year after similar agitation’s has failed to click with farmers still reluctant to hand over their land for building of townships and expressways by business houses. Trouble started in Bhatta Parsaul village of Greater Noida on Saturday when agitating farmers held three UP State Road Transport Corporation employees captive to protest against acquisition of their agricultural land. The situation turned violent when the police reached the spot to get the three government employees released. Mishandling of the situation led to firing between the farmers group and the police which saw the District Magistrate of Gautambudh Nagar Deepak Agarwal being shot in the leg. Two police men and a farmer were also killed as both fought a pitched battle for several hours. The police raided the houses of several villagers misbehaving with women and children and later allegedly torched several homes, which were seen burning through the night. There were reports of womenfolk in the villages claiming that hundreds of men have been missing since Sunday night with no trace of their being in police custody. Rashtriya Lok Dal Chief Ajit Singh while going to the village was arrested and later released after a few hours. He said that the Mayawati government was forcibly acquiring land at lower rates to help corporate houses. BJP general secretary Arun Jaitley said that there was no reason for the police to open fire on farmers. He said that the Mayawati government was unwilling to listen to the people and forcibly acquiring land. On Sunday even as one more farmer succumbed to injury taking the total death toll to four, farmers anger spread to Agra and Aligarh through which the Yamuna Expressway of the JP group passes. Villagers clashed with the police in Chaugan Garhi village and at a few other places in Agra in which three policemen were injured. The villagers torched the JCB machine, generator, vehicles and the camp office of JP Infratech set up at the construction site. In Aligarh farmers near the Tappal village blocked the highway and protested against the state government. The Special DGP, Brij Lal who rushed to Greater Noida on Sunday said that the protestors are not farmers and are instead armed anti social elements. The state government has declared a reward of Rs 50,000 for nabbing farmer leader Manveer Singh Tewatiya, who has been inciting the violent protests, according to Brij Lal. Section 144 have been promulgated in Noida, Agra and other places of the state where farmers have started their agitation.