Queensland election 2015: Annastacia Palaszczuk invited to form government, interim ministry to be sworn in Saturday
Queensland Labor leader Annastacia Palaszczuk is confirmed as the state's next Premier, with an interim ministry to be sworn in today.
With a broad smile, Ms Palaszczuk emerged from meeting Queensland's Governor Paul de Jersey on Friday to declare she had been invited to form Government.
"It's an extremely humbling experience," she said outside Government House in Brisbane.
The Electoral Commission of Queensland (ECQ) finished declaring the 89 seats which make up Queensland Parliament at 2:15pm (AEST) on Friday.
Labor won 44 electorates and will have the crucial 45 to form a minority government with the support of independent Peter Wellington.
Ms Palaszczuk arrived at Government House for her meeting with the Governor just as Liberal National Party (LNP) leader Lawrence Springborg left.
In a statement outside Old Parliament House, Mr Springborg congratulated Ms Palaszczuk and her team.
"I wish the new Government all the very best in their deliberations over the next few months," he said.
Meanwhile, the ECQ announced it would not lodge a petition with the Court of Disputed Returns for the seat of Ferny Grove following additional legal advice.
ALP candidate Mark Furner was declared the successful candidate by the ECQ on Thursday by more than 400 votes after preferences.
Palmer United Party candidate Marc Taverner stood for the seat but was revealed to be an undischarged bankrupt, invalidating his candidacy and putting the seat into contention.
He received 993 votes, with 353 of those "exhausted" with no further preferences for Labor, the LNP or Greens candidates.
"Based on preliminary legal advice received last week, the commission intended to refer the Ferny Grove election to the Court of Disputed Returns," an ECQ media release said.
"However having regard to the final count in Ferny Grove, the winning margin, the number of votes for the PUP candidate and the distribution of preferences, the commission will not be making an application to the Court of Disputed Returns."
LNP state director Brad Henderson said the party would consider its own advice on the matter.
"Following the ECQ's change of mind, the party will now consider its position and seek its own legal advice on whether the matter should be referred to court," Mr Henderson said in a statement.
The LNP finished with 42 seats and Katter's Australian Party with two seats - although they have yet to announce which party they will back.
Meanwhile, ECQ has rejected One Nation founder Pauline Hanson's request for a recount in the seat of Lockyer, after she lost by 184 votes after preferences.
"The Electoral Act 1992 (Qld) provides that recounts are conducted entirely at the discretion of the Electoral Commission and on this occasion the Commissioner did not find sufficient grounds on which to exercise his discretion and order a recount of votes at Lockyer," an ECQ media release stated.
Earlier Curtis Pitt, who served as shadow treasurer for Labor for the past three years, would not confirm if he would be treasurer under a Labor government.
Nevertheless, he has had a confidential briefing with Treasury in the past week.
Mr Pitt said a recent assessment showed economic growth was contracting, due in part to a deteriorating global environment.
"We will be facing an ongoing economy that is sluggish and continued concerns about unemployment," Mr Pitt told 612 ABC Brisbane.