Blow to Abe as ministers resign
Two of the five women in Shinzo Abe's Japanese cabinet have resigned beset by allegations of misusing political funds, dealing a blow to the prime minister's efforts to boost the profile of women.
Justice Minister Midori Matsushima handed in her notice on Monday just hours after Industry Minister Yuko Obuchi tendered her resignation, Abe said.
"Economy Trade and Industry Minister Obuchi and Justice Minister Matsushima submitted resignations," he said.
"I'm the person who appointed the two. As prime minister, I take responsibility for this and deeply apologise for this situation," he said, adding he would replace them both within the day.
The two were elevated to the cabinet in September, as part of a reshuffle that saw five women appointed to key roles, tying the record for the most ever in Japan.
Obuchi, the daughter of a former prime minister, was the highest profile of the five. As a mother of two, her family-friendly image was seen as being key to persuading a sceptical public that Japan should restart its mothballed nuclear plants.
Earlier, Obuchi told a press conference that parliamentary business had been stalled because of questions over her use of money.
"It is not permissible for me as Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry to have economy and energy policies stalled because of my own problems," she said.
"I will resign and focus on probing what has been called into question," she told reporters after a 30-minute meeting with Abe.
Monday's resignations are the first ministerial casualties of Abe's tenure, which began in December 2012 and has been remarkable for its stability. Most recent governments have been beset by scandals and ineptness.
Obuchi's elevation to the cabinet was seen as part of Abe's bid to boost the role of women in society, a move seen as vital to help plug the holes in Japan's workforce and make better use of a pool of latent talent.
Her promotion was big news when Abe reshuffled his ministerial cards in September, giving a politician with little cabinet experience a powerful portfolio that includes oversight of the energy sector.