Iraqi parliament delays session as ISIS threat looms
"We are going to postpone because of an urgent matter," the speaker of the parliament said. He did not say what the urgent matter was, and it was not immediately clear what happened.
The newly elected parliament convened with 255 out of 328 elected officials attending, which was enough for a legal quorum, the speaker said. But when many failed to return after the break, there were not enough members to continue.
Al-Maliki and his Shiite-dominated government have been under pressure by Western and Arab diplomats to be more inclusive of Iraq's Sunni minority, who say they have been marginalized and cut out of the political process by the government.
The 300 troops are in addition to 300 U.S. advisers who will help train Iraq's security forces. They will bring the total of American forces in Iraq to about 800 troops.
The magnitude of the Iraq crisis can be illustrated in the sharp rise in deaths over the past two months.
The military has said it has been battling to retake Tikrit, the birthplace of former Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein, and Iraqi state TV also said a pro-government tribal council has been established in the oil-rich and hotly contested city of Kirkuk.
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria Emboldened by a weakened Iraqi government that is struggling to stop their murderous advance, extremists from the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria declared over the weekend that they have set up a caliphate -- or Islamic state -- spanning large areas of the two countries.
In an audio message and written statement purportedly from the ISIS spokesman, the group called on Muslims to swear allegiance to the caliphate. Both Shia and Sunni Muslims have been deeply offended by the claim.
The message claims that the group's territory now spans from Aleppo province in northwestern Syria to Diyala province in eastern Iraq. It announced that ISIS was changing its name to just the "Islamic State."
On Tuesday, ISIS issued an audio recording claiming to be from its leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. CNN cannot confirm that the voice belongs to al-Baghdadi.
In the recording, the speaker urged Muslims worldwide to come to the caliphate's aid, especially scholars, judges, doctors, engineers and soldiers to "answer the dire need of the Muslims for them."
Human Rights Watch, citing displaced residents and local activists and journalists, said Saturday that ISIS fighters kidnapped at least 40 Shiite Turkmen, dynamited four Shiite places of worship and ransacked homes and farms in two villages just outside Mosul.
Earlier in the week, in the predominantly Shiite Turkmen city of Tal Afar, about 50 kilometers (31 miles) west of Mosul, ISIS destroyed seven Shiite places of worship, Human Rights Watch said, citing local sources.
But allegations of atrocities are not just limited to ISIS. Amnesty International has said it has gathered evidence pointing to a pattern of "extrajudicial executions" of Sunni detainees by government forces and Shiite militias in Tal Afar, Mosul and Baquba.