Arrest of cartoonist Aseem Trivedi a crime: Katju
Justice Markandey Katju, Press Council of India chairman, defended Aseem Trivedi, who was arrested for allegedly posting seditious content on his web portal, saying the cartoonist has done nothing illegal.
"My opinion is that the cartoonist did nothing illegal. In a democracy many things are said, some truthful and others false," Katju said in a statement.
Trivedi was arrested and produced in a Mumbai court which sent him to police custody till September 16. He was arrested following a complaint that he had put up banners mocking the Indian Constitution during the Anna Hazare rally held last year in Mumbai.
To drive home his point, Katju recalled his own words as a judge and said he used to often say in court that people can call him a fool or crook inside the court or outside but he will never initiate contempt of court proceedings, because either the allegation is true, "in which case I deserve it, or it is false, in which case I will ignore it".
"These are occupational hazards, and politicians, like judges, must learn to put up with them," Katju said.
He maintained that arresting a cartoonist or any other person who has not committed a crime is itself a crime under the Indian Penal Code as it is a wrongful arrest and
"So policemen, who make such illegal arrests, cannot take the plea that they were obeying orders of political superiors," he said.
Citing another example, he said, "During the Nuremberg trials, the Nazi war criminals took the plea that orders are orders, and that they were only obeying the orders of their political superior Hitler. But this plea was rejected by the International Tribunal which held that illegal orders should be disobeyed."
Please read our before posting comments
indianexpress.comindianexpress.com TERMS OF USE: The views expressed in comments published on indianexpress.com are those of the comment writer's alone. They do not represent the views or opinions of The Indian Express Group or its staff. Comments are automatically posted live; however, indianexpress.com reserves the right to take it down at any time. We also reserve the right not to publish comments that are abusive, obscene, inflammatory, derogatory or defamatory.