President Higgins calls for Savita investigation to meet the needs of 'concerned public'
PRESIDENT Michael D Higgins has said he hopes women will be safer in the wake of the death of Savita Halappanavar, adding that the investigation should meet the needs of a 'concerned public'.
PRESIDENT Michael D Higgins has said he hopes women will be safer in the wake of the death of Savita Halappanavar, adding that the investigation should meet the needs of a 'concerned public'.
He expressed his wish that Irish women will get the medical services they are entitled to internationally after Savita Halappanavar, 31, died 17 weeks into her pregnancy.
Her husband Praveen is battling the Irish Government and health chiefs to hold a sworn, public inquiry into her death, which he claims happened after she was denied an abortion on medical grounds.
Mr Higgins, on a three day trip to Liverpool and Manchester, rejected suggestions that Ireland's reputation around the world has been damaged by the controversy.
"I think that what is very important and what is very moving to me as president is to see the enormous response among the Irish public to the sad death of the wonderful Savita and how tragic it all is," Mr Higgins said.
"My wish, frankly, is that there be some form of investigation which meets the needs of the concerned public and meets the needs of the family and meets the need of the state."
At least 10,000 people marched through Dublin on Saturday demanding reform of abortion laws. Further protests and candlelit vigils have taken place in New York, India and elsewhere, including another demonstration at Ireland's Dail parliament tonight.
Mr Higgins urged respect for the Irish constitution, which gives equal right to life to the mother and unborn child, and for a 2010 European court ruling which found a woman living in Ireland had her human rights violated by being forced to travel overseas for a termination for fear she would suffer a cancer relapse during pregnancy.
"The Irish constitution and later European court cases have to be respected and we have to move on," he said.
The president said he hoped inquiries into Ms Halappanavar's death would meet needs on three fronts.
"But look, at this particular time, as President of Ireland, my sympathy goes to her husband and to her relatives in India and I do hope that there will be such a satisfactory investigation as meets those family needs and also meets the state's responsibility," Mr Higgins said.
"And also, particularly above all else, out of it women will be safer and get the medical services to which any woman is entitled in any part of the world."