Children to be released under changes to immigration detention
The Northam centre will house up to 1500 single men. The centre at Inverbrackie will house up to 400 family members, Prime Minister Julia Gillard said. The two new sites will allow the government to shut down temporary accommodation, including tents in use on Christmas Island, and some motels. Most children and families would be moved out of detention centres by the end of next June, Immigration Minister Chris Bowen said. Children will be required to go to school under the new arrangements, Mr Bowen said. Priority will be given to vulnerable families assessed to have experienced torture or trauma, or who are at risk of mental health problems, as well as to pregnant women.
Decisions would be made on a case-by-case basis from now until June next year. There are 4000 men, 319 women and 738 children (under 18) in detention, says the Immigration Department. It says 382 of the children arrived without a parent of guardian. "I recognise there are polarised views in the community about asylum seekers," Mr Bowen said. I don't think it's the Australian way to have children behind razor wire in the hope that will act as a deterrent "I think most people will also recognise that children are a special case, and that there is a care and responbility [Australia has] for children.
"And that whether a child or a family is eventually returned to their country of origin or is accepted for asylum in Australia, we need to ensure that their detention in Australia is managed as sensitively as it possibly can be." The changes would not encourage asylum seekers to bring their children on dangerous journeys, Ms Gillard told reporters in Canberra. "I don't think it's the Australian way to have children behind razor wire in the hope that will act as a deterrent," she said. The announcement delivers on the need to balance the government's policy of mandatory detention of unauthorised arrivals with the humane treatment of those fleeing persecution, Ms Gillard said. "This is especially important for children, for whom protracted detention can have negative impacts on their development and mental health."
Ms Gillard denied the decision had been made in consultation with the Australian Greens as some reports suggested over the weekend. "These decisions have been made by the government today," she said. "The decisions have been made by the government and the government alone." A further two sites, near Darwin and in Melbourne, will be prepared in case more accommodation is needed in the future, Ms Gillard said. A site near Darwin will be prepared to take on extra adult single men, while the Melbourne Immigration Transit Accommodation centre will also be expanded to take on extra unaccompanied children and their family members.
As previously outlined, the Darwin Airport Lodge also will be expanded. Mr Bowen said there were security and logistical concerns the government had to consider before releasing the families. "It would be imprudent to have a blanket release of all families without taking into account those security concerns," he said. The future welfare of children was important, no matter what their eventual visa outcome, Mr Bowen said. "It will still be necessary to hold families and children in detention when they first arrive in Australia and, of course, while churches and charities and the department increase their capacity for community detention."
Mr Bowen said it was the government's hope that the churches and other organisations involved in potentially housing some of the refugees would not be building new facilities. Former aged care facilities or church housing that is no longer used by clergy could be used, he said. Housing on the private rental market may also be used. On the way refugees would be kept under control when living in the community, Mr Bowen suggested he would use his powers to issue curfews, but would make any decisions on a case-by-case basis. The groups involved in housing the asylum seekers would also need to remain in close communication with the government. Mr Bowen said it was too early to say how many people would be in community detention by Christmas.
Many churches and charities had indicated they would use existing facilities which were no longer in use, such as former aged-care facilities, or former church facilities that were used for accommodating members of the clergy. "There will be some who seek to utilise housing from private markets, but we are talking about a spread across the country," he said. The government envisaged having several hundred people in community detention by June 2011. The Refugee Action Coalition said the government's new plan was an extension - and not an end - to mandatory detention for children.
"It is a disgrace that the government is opening yet more detention centres," RAC spokesman Ian Rintoul said. "This is not even an announcement to end the mandatory detention of children and families. "Maintaining mandatory detention will only perpetuate the abuses of detainees' human rights." Mr Rintoul said community detention was different to community processing. "If they are committed to keeping children and families out of detention why are they expanding the Darwin Airport Lodge and why are they opening Inverbrackie?" he said.
Mr Morrison would not say whether he supported moving children and families to community-based accommodation while their asylum claims were being processed. "If the Coalition were in government today Nauru would be open, the only beds that would have been reopened would have been those on Nauru, not the opening of thousands of beds onshore to cater for more border protection failures," he said. The Greens welcomed the announcement as "an important first step" but called on the changes to be enshrined in the Migration Act and not left up to the discretion of the Immigration Minister. "It shouldn't just be up to the goodwill of the minister," Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young said. "If we can put aside the petty politics of fear-mongering, of playing a political football game with the lives of vulnerable young people, then we should all be able to agree that we should enshrine these policies into the Migration Act, ensuring that children cannot be detained and that there is a time frame, a strict time frame, on the detention of adults." Ms Hanson-Young said the Greens, who have had one formal meeting with Mr Bowen since the election, and many community groups had a part to play in the changes. "This has been something the Greens have been talking about for a long time, this is something the community has been talking about for a long time," she said. "Yes the numbers of people in immigration detention are expanding and the Government needed to do something. "But we didn't just want to see people put in alternative forms of detention under lock and key, like they are in Darwin."