Clinton Demands FBI Release Newly Discovered Anthony Weiner Emails
Hours after Federal Bureau of Investigation Director James Comey rattled the world with the revelation he had discovered previously unknown emails related to its probe of Hillary Clinton’s private server, the former secretary of state’s campaign demanded he release the content of those messages to the public—messages reportedly found in the inbox of none other than Anthony Weiner.
Three months after determining Clinton’s use of a “homebrew” server while at the State Department had been “reckless” but not criminal, Comey penned a letter to Congress announcing his office had recovered further messages “that appear to be pertinent to the investigation.” The New York Times reported the FBI had found those emails on devices belonging to former Congressman Anthony Weiner and his estranged wife, vice chairwoman of Clinton’s campaign, amid a separate investigation into the lascivious one-time mayoral candidate’s alleged sexting with a minor.
“FBI Director Comey should immediately provide the American public more information than is contained in the letter he sent to eight Republican committee chairmen,” demanded Clinton campaign chairman John Podesta, no stranger to emails himself, in a statement to the press. “The director owes it to the American people to immediately provide the full details of what he is now examining. We are confident this will not produce any conclusions different from the one the FBI reached in July.”
Podesta also acknowledged the potential of the news to jar the impending presidential election, in which most projections currently show Clinton beating Donald Trump handily.
“It is extraordinary that we would see something like this just 11 days out from a presidential election,” wrote Podesta.
The Clinton operative’s calls echo those made by Trump’s running mate, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence.
“We call on the FBI to immediately release all emails pertinent to their investigation,” the Republican understudy tweeted earlier today. “Americans have the right to know before Election Day.”
Trump himself gloated over the findings at a rally in New Hampshire this afternoon.
“I need to open with a very critical breaking news announcement. The FBI has just sent a letter to Congress informing them that they have discovered new emails pertaining to former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s investigation,” the Queens-born businessman told the roaring audience. “Hillary Clinton’s corruption is on a scale we have never seen before. We must not let her take her criminal scheme into the Oval Office.”
Trump and his fellow Republicans had previously disparaged Comey—a member of their party—and his office’s investigation into the server as somehow compromised or “rigged.”
There is at present no evidence Clinton attempted to conceal the newfound correspondence, nor that the FBI has formally reopened its investigation, nor that anything in the emails is incriminating to anyone.
A protege of Sen. Charles Schumer and a friend to the Clintons, Weiner once appeared among the rising lights of New York City politics. Then, in 2011, he accidentally posted a partially nude photo of himself on Twitter while sharing explicit images with several women.
He resigned his Brooklyn-Queens seat, but then attempted to return from the political grave with a run for mayor in 2013. He briefly led the field in the Democratic primary, until it again surfaced that he had sent even more lewd messages to three more women.
The fallen pol ultimately placed fifth in the race, well below now-Mayor Bill de Blasio. Abedin remained beside him through each humiliation.
Then, in August, the New York Post published images Weiner had apparently sent to yet another woman—one of which pictured his five-year-old son cuddled up near his visibly erect member. In the thick of the campaign season, Abedin finally announced she would leave her husband.
The situation deteriorated further for the ex-congressman when the United Kingdom’s Daily Mail published sexualized online correspondence between Weiner and a 15-year-old girl. This, reportedly, is what triggered the FBI investigation.
Disclosure: Donald Trump is the father-in-law of Jared Kushner, the publisher of Observer Media.