Irish prime minister denies any application for euro bailout
Ireland's prime minister Brian Cowen tonight denied that the Republic had made any application for a multibillion euro bailout from the EU.
After a day of mounting drama as eurozone finance ministers gathered for a crunch meeting in Brussels, the taoiseach told the Dáil that Ireland had "made no application" for financial support from Europe. However, he conceded that the government was in talks with the EU about Ireland's banking system, but said the issues being discussed were not specific to Ireland.
The Taoiseach stressed that the country's public finances were under control, but admitted that further measures were required to stabilise the economy. He added that Ireland was still attracting inward investment and stressed that the turbulence in the markets was about wider concerns than the situation in Ireland.
The government was also edging closer to finalise its four-year financial plan to drive down national debt, Cowen told the parliament, and the government hoped to publish its plan next week. "We are at an advanced stage in its preparation."
Cowen told the Dáil that €15bn (£12.75bn) in adjustments/cuts must be made before 2014 and that budgetary consolidation was crucial. The EU has set 2014 as the target date for driving down national debt to 3% of Irish GDP.
He said bonds were a concern, but that Ireland was fully funded to the middle of next year. The Taoiseach said the government had made sure deposits were safeguarded. He said this was an overarching objective of the administration.
His speech to the Dáil came after much speculation again that Ireland is about to be bailed out by Europe to the tune of around €80bn, the bulk of which will go on covering a guarantee for the country's ailing banking system.
EU finance ministers were meeting this evening in Brussels as the European commission confirmed Ireland was in talks with the IMF, the European Central Bank and the EU about a bailout for Irish banks.
Enda Kenny, the leader of the main opposition party Fine Gael, has accused the Taoiseach of betraying the people of Ireland. Kenny said the incompetence of the current government had paralysed the Irish people.
The leader of the Irish Labour party challenged Cowen to "level with the people" as to whether assistance for the Irish state and its banking system is eventually on the cards.
Plucky little Ireland takes on the bond market vigilantes and, against all the odds, emerges triumphant. The Dublin government insists that it will not be bullied into a deal by Brussels and announces a new package of measures designed to cut the budget deficit. Markets are impressed, providing the Irish government with a breathing space. Bond yields fall and the economy starts to recover after three straight years of contraction. By toughing it out, Ireland buys itself a bit of time. But hopes in Dublin that tonight's crisis talks bring an end to the saga are misplaced. Dealers worry that the draconian measures outlined in the emergency budget will kill off any prospect of economic revival, and take fright at the impact of weak growth on Ireland's zombie banks. Bond yields edge higher and higher, ultimately precipitating a fresh crisis within the next few weeks. Having assumed that Ireland would agree to a bailout at the finance ministers' meeting, the markets go haywire when they find that the crisis remains unresolved. Irish assets are dumped on the financial markets, with the contagion spreading to the other weak links in the eurozone – Portugal and Spain. The euro crashes on the foreign exchanges and stock markets around the world take fright at a new sovereign debt crisis. Ireland quickly capitulates.