Phone Hacking: John Yates facing 'questions' over Neil Wallis links
The Assistant Commissioner will face “questions” over his links with the newspaper's former deputy editor, Boris Johnson, the London Mayor said.
Just hours after Sir Paul Stephenson, the Metropolitan Police Commissioner resigned as Britain’s top policeman Mr Yates came come under pressure to explain his links to Mr Wallis.
On Monday, the BBC reported that Mr Yates was the official "tasked with carrying out due diligence before the Metropolitan Police awarded a contract to the firm" operated by Mr Wallis.
It was claimed that Mr Yates "received categorial assurances from (Mr) Wallis that nothing would emerge that would embarrass either of them or the commissioner".
Earlier, in a radio interview Mr Johnson suggested that Mr Yates, who is in charge of the Yard's anti-terror unit, will be investigated by the Metropolitan Police Authority amid calls for his resignation.
The disclosures represent a fresh blow to Britain's biggest police force as the phone hacking scandalcontinues to engulf the Yard, the government and the media.
"The professional standards committee of the Metropolitan Police Authority is meeting this morning and I'm sure that questions surrounding other officers will be discussed,” Mr Johnson told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme.
"I think John Yates has done a very, very good job on counter terrorism. I think he is a very, very fine officer in that respect.
"Clearly, there are now questions about his relationship with Wallis and I'm sure the MPA is going to be having a look at it."
His comments came amid increasing pressure on Mr Yates to reconsider his position. At a press conference in Pretoria David Cameron said the fate of the Assistant Commissioner lay in the hands of the MPA.
Mr Yates, the senior Metropolitan Police officer who twice made the decision not to reopen the inquiry into telephone hacking, has already said he has no plans to resign.
Jenny Jones, Met Police Authority member, said she would be "quite surprised" that Mr Yates had not already tendered his resignation.
“I think it shows less dignity in a sense, because he has been contaminated by this,” she said.
“It would be very difficult for him to move on in the Met and so going would be the sensible thing for him to do as well.”
Brian Coleman, a Conservative member of the London assembly, also called for his resignation.
"The commissioner has done the right thing by resigning, and accepting the error of judgement in employing Neil Wallis," he said.
"(Mr) Yates, who has shown that his stewardship of the original hacking enquiry was to put it bluntly, inept, should go, and go now.
"Sir Paul has set the example to follow. Until (Mr) Yates has resigned and left Scotland Yard for the last time, the Metropolitan Police cannot hope to move on and restore confidence."
Christopher Boothman, a Metropolitan Police Authority member, also said Mr Yates's position had become "untenable" after Sir Paul's resignation.
Asked about Mr Yates, and whether she had full confidence in him, Theresa May, the Home Secretary: "I am not going to talk about any individual officers in the Met.
"What I would say is this - that until anybody is found guilty of wrongdoing and that has gone through a proper process, all Metropolitan Police officers have my confidence."
Asked again about Mr Yates, she told BBC Breakfast: "I do not want people to start going through lists of individual officers with me.
"My general point is very simple, which is that until an individual officer is found guilty of some wrongdoing and that has been established through a proper process, all Metropolitan Police officers have my confidence."
Speaking during his visit to South Africa, the Prime Minister, declined to back Mr Yates, the police officer previously charged with reviewing the phone hacking scandal.
He said that meetings over Mr Yates' position were currently taking place.
Senior Downing Street aides are "perplexed" by the apparent police criticism of the Prime Minister.
Mr Yates was ordered to look at the phone hacking investigation in July 2009 and in September 2010. But on both occasions he refused to reopen the investigation.
Last week he spoke of regret at his decision in light of recent revelations.
But he blamed News International, which, he said, had refused to co-operate with the police until January this year.
Appearing in front of the home affairs select committee, Mr Yates was asked by the chairman, Keith Vaz, if he had considered his position.
He replied: “No, I haven’t. And if you’re suggesting that I should resign for what News of the World has done and my very small part in it, I think that’s probably unfair.”
Mr Yates is said to have "no intention of resigning" and would only consider such a decision if he was condemned by the official inquiry, led by Judge Leveson.