Top structure of Democratic National Committee in collapse
Three top Democratic National Committee officials resigned from their posts in the wake of a recent hack that made thousands of internal emails public, incoming DNC Chairwoman Donna Brazile announced Tuesday.
Chief Executive Officer Amy Dacey, Communications Director Luis Miranda and Chief Financial Officer Brad Marshall have each left the DNC less than 100 days out from the general election. The departures come a week after hacked DNC emails, made public by WikiLeaks, showed party officials conspiring against Bernie Sanders throughout the Democratic primary.
Brazile had nothing but compliments for the three departing officials.
"Thanks in part to the hard work of Amy, Luis, and Brad, the Democratic Party has adopted the most progressive platform in history, has put itself in financial position to win in November, and has begun the important work of investing in state party partnerships," Brazile said in a statement. "I'm so grateful for their commitment to this cause, and I wish them continued success in the next chapter of their career."
Brazile, who was named chairwoman immediately after Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, D-Fla., resigned from the post last month, said the DNC is focused on replacing its outgoing staffers with "top talent to help the fight to elect Hillary Clinton and Democrats across the country" on Nov. 8.
"I am committed to adding to our team of skilled professionals who will make sure that Donald Trump is held accountable for his reckless rhetoric and harmful policies," she said.
With three top staffers headed for the door, Brazile has appointed former DNC executive director Tom McMahon to help lead a transition team that will prepare the committee for the general election and the installment of a permanent new chair.
"I am delighted that Tom is returning home to the DNC to lead our transition," said Brazile. "He brings with him a wealth of institutional knowledge and I look forward to having him by my side as we move toward November."
Brazile has also hired a new senior adviser to temporarily assist with the "transition of the senior leadership of the DNC."