Election results show collapse in support for Lib Dems
Nick Clegg suffered a humiliating reverse in his Sheffield backyard when the Liberal Democrats were ejected from power in the city, amid heavy losses for the party across northern England.
As voters punished the Lib Dems for their performance after a year in government, the party blamed a "decapitation strategy" by Labour and the unions which saw it lose power in Hull and suffer big losses in Manchester and Liverpool.
In the first full result of the night, Labour held onto Sunderland where it gained four seats from the Tories. The party's vote was up by an average of 20 points on 2007, the last time the same seats were contested.
Senior Lib Dems also said the party was on course to lose between nine and 12 of the 15 seats it was defending in Sheffield.
A third of the seats on the council, which the party has run as a minority administration for the past year, were up for election. The Lib Dems had 41 seats, with Labour trailing by just one, on 40.
David Blunkett, the former Labour home secretary who is a Sheffield MP, said: "The Cleggmania of this time last year has turned into a kind of Clegg pneumonia. There is a great deal of pleasure [for Labour] in terms of winning the council but a great deal of challenge. Of course because Nick Clegg is deputy prime minister, because of the decisions he has taken over the last 12 months, because of the promises that were made exactly a year ago and were broken people have taken their revenge."
Simon Hughes, the Lib Dem deputy leader said his party had suffered a poor result in Sheffield – Clegg is MP for Sheffield Hallam. "Sheffield is going to be different from every other council because it is Nick Clegg's seat," Hughes told the BBC. "It is his city so any anti-Nick view will be exemplified most in Sheffield."
Hughes admitted the government's controversial decision to cancel an £80m loan to Sheffield Forgemasters was a factor. He said: "The combination of that and tuition fees mean that in the city Nick has become the issue despite of the fact that we have run the council extremely well. We haven't had mass redundancies, we have protected the frontline services."
The Lib Dems lost control of Kingston-upon-Hull after a strong recovery by Labour which saw it gain as many as 10 out of 12 seats from the Lib Dems. The Lib Dems were also on course for losses in Liverpool, where the party had 35 seats to 50 for Labour, after the former Lib Dem leader on the council Warren Bradley criticised Clegg's "record and perception". Bradley stood down before the election.
Lord Mike Storey, who led the city council from 1998-2005, lost his seat to an 18-year-old.
The Lib Dems were struggling in the Midlands. There was a strong swing from the Lib Dems to Labour in Birmingham. John Hemming, the Lib Dem MP for Birmingham Yardley, admitted that his party was experiencing a bad night in the city. The Tories were on course to overtake the Lib Dems as the largest party in Birmingham.
Jeremy Browne, the Lib Dem foreign office minister who is a close Clegg ally, said the party was suffering from its first year in government since the second world war. "We are now in government and are making difficult decisions," Browne told Sky News.
Browne dismissed criticisms that the Lib Dems have broken promises. "We had the general election a year ago. The Lib Dems finished third. We got 8% of the MPs in the House of Commons, so we won no mandate to implement our manifesto in full. I wish we had. We are the junior partners in the coalition. No party won the general election so no party has a mandate to implement its manifesto in full. We are putting into effect about two thirds of our policies. It is worth saying it is 66 years since the second world war [when the Liberals were in government]. Nick Clegg has achieved more in one year than the previous 65 years put together so we have a record to defend."
But John Leech, the Lib Dem MP for Manchester Withington, Tweeted: "We've taken a real kicking in the ballot box tonight."
Mike Hancock, the rebel Lib Dem MP for Portsmouth South, said the party should table tougher demands to the Tories. He called on Lib Dems ministers to "spell out to our Conservative colleagues that we are not going to take anything lying down, we are going to be there fighting our corner and if we don't like it we are not going to go along with it.
Hancock told the BBC: "I am sure that that is what the majority of people in the country who voted for us would expect us to do and what a lot of our members - some of whom will have loyally supported the party and will lose their seats in local government today - will also be saying."
Labour was working hard to play down expectations after Iain Duncan Smith, the work and pensions secretary, said the party should gain 1,300 seats nationally. Colin Rallings and Michael Thrasher, of Plymouth University, have said that Labour should be in the strongest position of the three main parties because the same seats were last contested in 2007, a month before Gordon Brown succeeded Tony Blair as prime minister.
Ed Miliband, the Labour leader, believes the Tory prediction overplays expectations for Labour.
Labour said it was performing in the south. It achieved strong gains in Exeter and was gaining in Swindon, Thanet and Gravesham, all key swing parliamentary seats.