Uganda president hints at softer anti-gay bill
Proposed draconian punishments may be eased to 'take into account foreign policy interests' after overseas outcry
The Ugandan president, Yoweri Museveni, has broken his silence over controversial anti-gay legislation and hinted that the proposed draconian punishments may be reduced.
The bill currently before parliament threatens life imprisonment for anyone convicted of gay sex, and the death penalty in certain circumstances. While broadly supported domestically, the legislation has caused a storm of protest abroad.
Addressing a party conference yesterday, Museveni said the private member's bill had become a matter of international concern and more consultation was needed.
"When I was at the Commonwealth conference, what was [the Canadian prime minister, Stephen Harper] talking about? The gays. UK prime minister Gordon Brown ... what was he talking about? The gays," said Museveni. The US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, had also called him to express strong concerns about the proposed law, he added.
"It's a foreign policy issue, and we must handle it in a way that does not compromise our principles but also takes into account our foreign policy interests."
Museveni said the proposed law did not necessarily reflect government policy, and his cabinet would discuss the bill with David Bahati, the MP who introduced it, before it was put to a vote.
Homosexuality is already outlawed in Uganda under colonial-era legislation. In recent years some religious leaders have been warning that tougher measures are needed to prevent an increase in same-sex relationships. Accusations that gay Europeans are offering money to "recruit" Ugandan schoolchildren – a claim repeated by Museveni yesterday – have raised the level of entrenched homophobia.
The final impetus for the proposed legislation came after a conference hosted last year by three controversial US evangelists who claimed that homosexuality was a curable habit and warned of the danger of the international gay "agenda". The evangelists have since criticised the severity of the punishments in the proposed law.
Under Bahati's bill, "serial offenders" and HIV-positive people convicted of having gay sex will face the death penalty. Gay support groups will be banned, and members of the public will have to report any homosexual activity to police within 24 hours or face up to three years in jail.
James Nsaba Buturo, minister of state for ethics and integrity, who is a strong supporter of the bill, said before Museveni's speech that it was likely that the death penalty provisions would be dropped because of the international outcry.
Frank Mugisha, chair of Sexual Minorities Uganda, a Kampala-based coalition of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex groups, said this was not enough. "Even if the bill is watered down, as President Museveni seems to be suggesting, there will still be a lot of discrimination. He should come out and say that the entire bill is just wasting time."