Kourtney Kardashian strips to skintight mini dress as she parties with Mark Wright and Montana Brown at her PrettyLittleThing clothing launch
KOURTNEY Kardashian left very little to the imagination as she pulled out the stops for her PrettyLittleThing clothing launch on Wednesday night.
The 38-year-old reality star was bound to turn more than a few heads as she wowed the crowds in a thigh-skimming mini dress.
Throwing the legs or chest rule out of the window, Kourtney's LBD also boasted a daringly low-cut neckline.
The mother-of-three gave her pint-sized stature some added height with a pair of sexy, sparkle-encrusted stilettos.
Giving her party style a sleek finish, the brunette beauty swept her trademark raven tresses into a slicked-back ponytail - a favourite hair look among the glamorous Kardashian clan.
Kourt's racy frock is just one of a string of risque dresses fans can get their hands now the stunner has dropped her new collaborative range.
Other party styles available include diminutive slip dresses and raunchy lace leggings.
Joining Kourtney for the LA launch of her new collection was Love Island star Montana Brown - who has also signed a deal with the label - as well as rapper Wiz Khalifa, Christina Milian and even Essex's very own Mark Wright.
The 30-year-old TV presenter - who has landed a hosting slot on US entertainment show Extra - proved he has come a long way since his TOWIE days as he mingled with some of America's most famous faces.
The event was no doubt a welcome distraction for Kourtney, who is said to have locked horns with her ex, Scott Disick, over his new girlfriend, 19-year-old Sofia Richie.
Earlier this week, The Sun Online reported how the mumisn't keen on Scott’s teenage love interest meeting their children, Mason, Penelope and Reign just yet – and has told Scott to keep Sofia away.
“Kourtney is a fierce mom, and she’ll do whatever it takes to protect her kids,” the insider said.
“She doesn’t want them getting confused by Scott’s new girlfriend – Mason is seven, old enough to understand a lot of things now, and Kourtney doesn’t want them meeting another one of Scott’s new girlfriends, only for her to disappear from their lives in a month.
“Plus, it would kill her to see another woman ‘playing mom’ to her kids in public. It would break her heart.
“These past few months have been tough – she’s had to co-parent with Scott, and keep things nice between mom and dad. She spoke to Scott and said Sofia can meet the kids in a few months – and he’s agreed to do things her way … for now.”
Got a story? email digishowbiz@the-sun.co.uk or call us direct on 02077824220.
We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.