ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The Murray-Darling Basin Authority is calling for water consumption from some of the basin's river systems to be slashed by almost half to secure its future.
It is predicted that, if implemented, the reductions in water allocations may result in between losses of at least $800 million and $1.1 billion a year to irrigated agriculture production, 800 job losses and significant social impacts.
The authority has today released a guide to what will eventually be its final report on how the basin's 19 catchments need to be managed to balance environmental and economic needs after decades of over-allocation of water licences and almost 10 years of drought.
Billed by some as the biggest change to water management in Australia since the Snowy hydro scheme, the plan has already ignited anger from some communities which fear the cuts will decimate their towns if producers sell their water allocations and move away.
While the report recommends an overall cut of up to 37 per cent across the basin including groundwater collection, some catchment areas will face much higher cuts of up to 45 per cent, such as:
Authority chair Mike Taylor today described the plan as "extraordinary" and a world's first, but said it was not a "done deal".
"The guide provides an opportunity for Australians to contribute to one of the most significant water reforms in our history," he said.
The guide outlines three scenarios of proposed cuts in water usage which would see the return of somewhere between 3,000 gigalitres and 4,000 gigalitres to the system - enough to fill Sydney Harbour six times over.
This means an overall reduction to water allocations of between 27 and 37 per cent if only taken from watercourses, or from between 22 and 29 per cent if surface water is included from floodplain harvesting and farm dams.
While the report has determined that up to 7,600 gigalitres would give absolute certainty to the future health of the basin's ecosystems, it has only recommended up to a 4,000-gigalitre cut because of the devastating social and economic cost a much higher reduction would bring.
If the cuts were implemented, industries such as cotton and dairy would likely be the hardest hit and all catchments would suffer in the short and medium-term.
Mr Taylor also said the authority wanted further modelling undertaken to determine more accurate financial impacts, which could be much higher than the authority has so far outlined.
The authority says governments will need to consider assistance that can help communities create new industries and jobs and transitional arrangements will be needed to help people adjust.
Across the states, the report recommends the highest cut for the ACT at 34 to 45 per cent, with the other states' reductions falling between around 27 and 36 per cent.
The Government has already put almost $9 billion on the table over 10 years to buy back water licences and improve water efficiency by upgrading irrigator infrastructure in the basin.
The buybacks recommended by the authority may end up costing $6b depending on prices.
During the election campaign Prime Minister Julia Gillard pledged to do whatever the authority recommended in its basin plan.
But a stoush in Federal Parliament over the matter is likely with Coalition water spokesman Barnaby Joyce claiming the cuts will drive up food prices and kill regional areas.
The basin, often referred to as Australia's food bowl, is home to more than 2 million people, with another 1.3 million reliant on its water resources and provides 39 per cent of national income through agricultural production.
Environment Minister Tony Burke is able to override the authority's recommendations if he does not agree with it, but it remains to be seen whether he will do so.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard says there will be plenty of opportunity for people to raise their concerns about what is being proposed.
"Tony Burke will then lead a consultation process where everybody will get to have their say about what is in the report," she said.
"So I would say to anybody who is concerned, there will be a process of dialogue and consultation and they'll be able to have their voice heard."
Speaking before the report's release, Mr Burke stressed the report released today was only a guide.
And he said the Government would only buy back water from willing sellers.
The series of public consultations about the guide's recommendations will be held over the next four months before being finalised next year.