Kevin Rudd sworn in as Prime Minister again after dramatic leadership victory over Julia Gillard
Kevin Rudd has been sworn in as Australia's 28th Prime Minister.
Kevin Rudd has been sworn in as Australia's 28th Prime Minister.
Kevin Rudd has been sworn in again as Prime Minister almost three years to the day since he was ousted from the job by Julia Gillard.
Governor-General Quentin Bryce has also formally commissioned Anthony Albanese as the new Deputy Prime Minister and Chris Bowen as Treasurer, following Wayne Swan's resignation last night.
Mr Rudd seized back the top job last night winning a Caucus ballot 57 votes to 45 and will today face his first and likely last day of Parliament as Prime Minister before the next federal election.
The poll had been set by Ms Gillard for September 14 but Mr Rudd has given no indication he will stick with that date. 
In the face of fresh uncertainty about the election timing, Opposition Leader Tony Abbott has challenged the new Prime Minister to name the election date and make it soon.
"The real question for Mr Rudd today is - when is the election going to be?," he said on AM.
"About the only thing Julia Gillard was successful at this year was naming an election date and now even that is uncertain."
Mr Abbott says he wants the election held "as soon as possible".
Mr Rudd's return was prompted by hopes that he can lift Labor's disastrous polling.
But his rise has come at a heavy price.
More than one-third of the Gillard ministry have resigned, including Trade Minister Craig Emerson and School Education Minister Peter Garrett - who will also leave Parliament.
Following her loss in the Caucus vote, Ms Gillard confirmed she would also quit politics at the next election.
Communications Minister Stephen Conroy, Agriculture Minister Joe Ludwig and Climate Change Minister Greg Combet have all announced they will move to the backbench.
However, this morning key ministers have announced they will stay on Mr Rudd's frontbench.
Workplace Relations Minister Bill Shorten, who announced he had switched his crucial vote to Mr Rudd just before the ballot, says he will stay on the frontbench and assumes he will stay in the same job.
The right faction powerbroker had been under pressure from within sections of Caucus to back Kevin Rudd for weeks, despite being pivotal to ousting him in 2010.
He says Mr Rudd is a "changed" man and has learned the lessons from his previous stint as Prime Minister.
"I believe that he will operate in a more consultative, open style," he said.
He has revealed he spoke to Mr Rudd about the leadership "this week" - before the ballot - but says Mr Rudd "probably" would have won even without his numbers. 
He said he only made up his mind to vote for Mr Rudd after the ballot was announced and that Julia Gillard was "classy" when he informed her of his decision.
Finance Minister and Labor's new leader in the Senate, Penny Wong, has described her decision to back Mr Rudd as the most difficult decision of her political life.
"Yesterday I made the personal decision I could no longer support Prime Minister Gillard," she said.
"I met with her to advise her of that fact and it was the most difficult decision of my political life."
The Finance Minister said she would serve Mr Rudd in "whatever capacity", but anticipated she would keep her current portfolio.
Resources Minister Gary Gray has also confirmed the new Prime Minister has asked him to stay in the ministry, despite last week saying Mr Rudd lacked the courage to govern.
Mr Gray says he is being "practical and pragmatic" by staying on but, in a sign Labor's wounds are still raw, he has continued to accuse his new leader of actively working to bring down Julia Gillard.
"I think the internal behaviours of some in our Caucus in recent years have been simply beneath contempt and I've made my views about that very clear," Mr Gray added.
Environment Minister Tony Burke also offered Mr Rudd his resignation but the offer was refused.
"I'll wait for Kevin to work out how he wants to do the full reshuffle and what roles he wants people to have, but having offered and having had it rejected in a fairly emphatic way, my view is that we need to have a whole lot of us who are part of the healing and I'm prepared to be part of that," he told AM.
Mental Health and Ageing Minister Mark Butler has also revealed he switched allegiance to Mr Rudd in the ballot and will stay on in the new ministry.
A full reshuffle of the ministry is expected to be announced in the next few days.
Mr Rudd is also expected to mark out significant changes in key policy areas, including the carbon price and the vexing issue of asylum seekers.
After last night's ballot, Mr Rudd said Labor could "start cooking with gas" and vowed to take the fight to Mr Abbott in the election.
"In 2007, the Australian people elected me to be their prime minister. That is a task that I resume today with humility, with honour, and with an important sense of energy and purpose," he said.
"In recent years, politics has failed the Australian people. There has just been too much negativity all round. There has been an erosion of trust - negative, destructive personal politics has done much to bring dishonour to our Parliament but done nothing to address the urgent challenges facing our nation, our community, our families.
"Why am I taking on this challenge? For me it's pretty basic, it's pretty clear. I simply do not have it in my nature to stand idly by and to allow an Abbott government to come to power in this country by default."
The defection of Mr Shorten - who was key to dumping Mr Rudd in 2010 - is likely to have secured Mr Rudd the winning votes.
Mr Abbott said once again the "powerbrokers of the Labor Party" had decided who would be the nation's prime minister.
Last night Mr Rudd issued a special appeal to young Australians to re-engage with politics, acknowledging the recent political discourse had been a "turnoff".
"I understand why you've switched off - it's hardly a surprise. But I want to ask you to please come back and listen afresh," he said.
"We need you, we need your energy, we need your ideas, we need your enthusiasm and we need you to support us in the great challenges which lie ahead for the country.
"And with your energy we can start cooking with gas."
In recent months, published polling had consistently shown Mr Rudd was the most popular Labor leader. The party will be hoping those numbers can be sustained, if not boosted.
Mr Rudd thanked Ms Gillard for her work as prime minister, praising her as a "woman of extraordinary intelligence, great strength, and great energy".
"She has been a remarkable reformer," he said.
An emotional Ms Gillard earlier called on the party to "put its divisions behind us".
"I understand that at the caucus meeting today, the pressure finally got too great for many of my colleagues," she said.
"I respect that. And I respect the decision that they have made.
"But I do say to my caucus colleagues: 'don't lack the guts, don't lack the fortitude, don't lack the resilience to go out there with our Labor agenda and to win this election'.
"I know that it can be done. And I also say to my caucus colleagues that that will best be done by us putting the divisions of the past behind us, and uniting as a political party, making sure we put our best face forward at the forthcoming election campaign, and in the years beyond."
Mr Swan said it had been a privilege to serve with Ms Gillard.
"She is one of the toughest warriors that have ever led the Australian Labor Party," he said.
"I think she's done more as a politician for our country in three years than many other politicians could ever hope to achieve."
Ms Gillard says she will stand by her pledge to resign from politics following the ballot loss.
"I will have time in the coming weeks to be back home in my electorate to say hello and goodbye to the community that I've had the absolute privilege of representing in this Parliament since 1998," she said.