Barnaby Joyce to stand unopposed for Nationals leadership
Barnaby Joyce will stand unopposed for the leadership of the Nationals following the retirement of Warren Truss.
Mr Truss, the Deputy Prime Minister, farewelled Parliament today, and the ABC understands Mr Joyce will have no challenger when Nationals MPs gather later tonight to choose a new leader.
Mr Truss told the chamber that when he became party leader no-one wanted the job.
"I am pleased to say that now things are different, and everyone wants the job," he said.
"What I guess my objective was when I became leader, somewhat reluctantly, was to rebuild a party that was at that stage at a pretty low ebb.
"We lost the 2007 election, everybody was pretty dispirited, our numbers had declined and, indeed, the media was saying, yet again, that the Nationals were finished.
"Of course, we are used to that, they have been saying that for over 80 years now and we seem to have managed to survive most of our critics."
Mr Truss' departure will pave the way for a reshuffle of Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull's Cabinet, with the Nationals also pushing for another seat.
Trade Minister Andrew Robb has also announced his impending retirement, though it is expected he will serve in his portfolio until the election.
Mr Robb told Parliament today that while he arrived late to Federal Parliament, he was given a lot of breaks.
"It's been a great privilege, pleasure and not too many people get the sort of opportunities I've been given," he said.
"I thank all of you for your part and to all of you who have had some part in that contribution."
The Prime Minister described Mr Robb as the most successful trade minister in Australia's history, stating he "put in place some of the most important building blocks for our future".
Mr Turnbull also paid tribute to his deputy, Mr Truss, thanking both men and describing their departures as "a watershed".
Former prime minister Tony Abbott also addressed the chamber on the announcements, stating “there are few members of Parliament who leave at their peak, in their prime and at a time of their own choosing".