Fiji election: Large queues as thousands cast their vote in return to democracy
Voting in Fiji's first election since the 2006 military coup has drawn to a close, with counting due to begin at 5pm AEST (7pm Suva time).
People started lining up outside polling booths an hour before they were due to open.
In some places queues were several hundred metres long.
People said they were happy to be exercising their right to vote and choosing their own government after nearly eight years of military rule.
It is the first time polling has been conducted across the country in a single day, but the process in Suva appeared to be proceeding smoothly.
Many people were dressed in their Sunday best for the occasion, which local man Irivi Draundalo said represented a return to democracy that should usher in a new era of stability.
"I'm optimistic," he said as he waited with hundreds of other voters outside the Vatuwaqa Public School just outside Suva.
"After eight years, I'm looking forward to it [voting]. There's been too many coups. Fiji needs a new government with real democracy."
He said all parties should accept the result of a ballot he described as "the first free and fair elections" in Fiji's history.
Fiji's military said the lead-up to the election had been violence-free, but there have been reports of voter intimidation.
Speaking to the Fiji Broadcasting Corporation, Brigadier General Tikoitoga did not release details of the alleged threats.
"The very same people who didn't want the military to provide the security ... are now creating an atmosphere of intimidation against the people or parties that want to cast their vote in a free and fair environment," he said.
Brigadier General Tikoitoga said the army is on standby.
There are a number of parties fielding candidates including the mainly indigenous i-Taukei Social Democratic Liberal Party, the Fiji Labour Party and the United Front for a Democratic Fiji.
Interim prime minister Frank Bainimarama, a former military commander, is favourite to win the election.
The question appears to be not whether his Fiji First party will receive the most votes, but whether it will gain an outright majority of Parliament's 50 seats under Fiji's new proportional system.
He told reporters gathered at the Vatuwaqa Public School where he voted that he expected to win the election, and he praised election organisers for the smooth conduct of the poll.
"I've received excellent reports about the voting that's been carried out in Fiji for the last three weeks or so and that is really what we want. We want transparent, fair election process because we've come through a lot in the past eight years," he said.
"Today is very important for Fiji. This is the first time ever we are voting without any discrimination. We're just the one vote on the one day. Today is about being a democracy."
When asked if it would be a democracy that sticks, after a history of coups in Fiji, Mr Bainimarama said it would.
"We have a wonderful constitution to work with and it will stick," he said.
The European Union is part of the multinational observer group monitoring the elections.
European Commission spokeswoman Maja Kocijancic said credible elections would allow the EU to resume full development cooperation with Fiji.
"Fiji's return to democracy is crucial for the country but also for the wider Pacific region," she said.
"We as the European Union are providing support for the democratic process and will continue to accompany Fiji on this journey."
Former Australian defence minister Peter Reith is co-leading the 14-member observer group.
Vote counting is due to begin as soon as the polls close at 4pm AEST (6pm Suva time).
Although full results will not be available for some time, the winner is expected to be known within 24 hours.