Heir to the Saudi throne dies
Sultan, the half-brother of King Abdullah, was thought to be in his 80s. He had been ill for some time -- various reports indicated that he was battling cancer -- and was receiving treatment in New York.
"He was a strong supporter of the deep and enduring partnership between our two countries," Obama said. "On behalf of the American people, I extend my deepest condolences to King Abdullah, the royal family, and the people of Saudi Arabia.
"His passing marks the end of a significant era in Saudi Arabia," he said. "The steps taken to select a new Crown Prince will be scrutinized by the world and will provide insight into King Abdullah's vision for future leadership of the Kingdom."
Ascension to the Saudi throne does not pass from father to son. Rather, it's a complex process and decisions are always cloaked in secrecy in the conservative kingdom.
King Abdullah set up the Allegiance Council in 2006 to allow for more transparency in succession. It is unclear when this group, made up of members of the royal family, will be employed to make a decision on the next crown prince.
Nayef has been the interior minister since 1975 and as such, he oversaw the kingdom's counterterrorism efforts. Saudi Arabia is one of the only countries that has truly dismantled a domestic al Qaeda network, said Christopher Boucek, a Saudi expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
"Nayef is widely seen as a hard-line conservative who at best is lukewarm to King Abdullah's reform initiatives," said a classified U.S. Embassy cable leaked by the website WikiLeaks.
"However, it would be more accurate to describe him as a conservative pragmatist convinced that security and stability are imperative to preserve Al-Saud rule and ensure prosperity for Saudi citizens," the cable said.
"The king is still in charge, and nothing will change until the throne passes from him to the next brother."
Gregory Gause, a University of Vermont professor who has authored books on the Gulf states, said Nayef is hardly one to blaze a path for political reform, but that's not to say Saudi Arabia will feel any reverberations.
"There is truth to the idea that Nayef is not someone who sees political reform as a major goal of the government," Gause said. "But I do not want to say that if he were to become king, he would act in the same way as he is now."
Saudi Arabia is not immune to the sort of popular uprisings that have brought down regimes in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya. The nation suffers from the same political and economic issues, Gause said.
But the difference, he said, is that Saudi Arabia is wealthy and the king has recently deployed huge amounts of money for housing and salaries.