'Spirit of History': House Democrats Hold Sit-In on Gun Control
Lewis later told NBC News that "sometimes you are moved by history."
Related: Senate Votes Down Four Gun Control Measures After Fiery Debate
It is highly unusual for members to disrupt the functioning of the House this way.
If members do not leave the floor and no compromise is reached, it is largely up to Speaker Paul Ryan to decide whether to use the authority of the House to seek to clear the floor and/or sanction members, or to keep the House in recess and wait out the issue.
The protest was not being televised because the House has not formally gaveled into session.
So Rep. Scott Peters, D-California, has been using the video streaming app, Periscope, to share footage of the sit-in. C-Span has been broadcasting Peters' video feed.
House members also took to social media to lodge their protests using the hashtags #NoBillNoBreak, #NOMORESILENCE and #goodtrouble.
Outside, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi made sure the rest of the country knew about what was going on inside the chamber with a hastily-arranged press conference on the Capitol steps .
“Once again we are fighting an uphill fight to bring legislation to the floor,” Pelosi said. “We truly believe that if there was a vote, we would win the vote.”
The merging of old-school protest tactics and new-school social media strategy helped ensure that the House Democrats' revolution on gun policy reform was indeed televised.
"I did this in the '60s — I never expected to be doing it in my '60s," said Rep. Michael Capuano, D-Mass., just before 9 p.m., as the sit-in was still going strong.
Related: Can They Do That? These Rules Govern Protests on House Floor
The move led by Lewis, who was jailed and repeatedly beaten back in the 1960s when he helped lead the battle for equal rights for African-Americans, took the Republican leadership by surprise.
And it came after Lewis wrote House Speaker Paul Ryan a letter demanding that he keep the House in session instead of going into recess so there could more debate on gun control legislation in the wake of the Orlando massacre.