Telangana on the boil again; 78 MLAs, 10MPs resign
NEW DELHI/HYDERABAD: The Telangana spectre returned to haunt the Centre with 78 MLAs from across the political spectrum and 10 Congress MPs quitting to demand the formation of a separate state while a 48-hour bandh called from Tuesday threatens to paralyse normal life. Two Telugu Desam MPs, Nama Nageshwar Rao and Ramesh Rathod, are expected to quit on Tuesday. The gathering storm prompted the Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs – after urgent discussions on Monday evening -- to recommend repeal of a clause in a 1975 presidential order, a move that will provide preferential employment in police for Telangana residents in Hyderabad zone. The Centre's move could be intended to indicate the government does not have a closed mind on Telangana, but Congress MPs saw it as having come about as a result of pressure exerted by the resignations and the bandh call. It is a "welcome" step, but full statehood is non-negotiable, summed up their mood. The clause (f) of paragraph 14 of the presidential order makes Hyderabad a free zone for employment in police and its repeal will ensure residents get preference but the decision is seen as a sop as it restores what Telangana supporters feel is their right. The Telangana momentum driven by strong ground level sentiment prodded senior Congress Rajya Sabha MP Keshav Rao and nine Lok Sabha members to quit their seats. The bandh call is already having its effect, with people stocking provisions and government employees returning home early. Rail and road traffic running through the region could be affected as well with inter-state trains facing the threat of being stopped or badly delayed. The bandh has been called by a joint action committee led by Telangana Rashtra Samiti leader K Chandrasekhar Rao As many as 39 Congress MLAs, including 11 ministers, and 34 TDP MLAs resigned from the Andhra Pradesh assembly, delivering a hard blow to the stuttering Kiran Reddy government. Although the resignations of the MLAs and MPs have not been accepted, the emotive issue is on the boil again. The Centre quickly doused expectations of immediate action on statehood with home minister P Chidambaram saying, "I understand their impatience. But these are complex issues. We will try to expedite the consultations. We will try to take a final view. But these are extremely sensitive, complex issues. Therefore, one has to show understanding and patience." Having burnt its hand badly by its December 9, 2009 pronouncement that a "process of forming a state will be initiated", both Chidambaram and Congress in-charge of Andhra Pradesh Ghulam Nabi Azad stressed the need for further consultations, though the home minister promised to speed up the process. The Centre's options might get increasingly squeezed if the agitation revives and the "united" Andhra action led by Congress MPs like industrialist Lagadapati Rajgopal continues to provoke Telangana activists. Congress MPs warn that the mood in Telangana areas is hostile and the state government's control is nominal. Confronted with the resignations, senior Congress leaders could meet MPs again even as the members ruled out backtracking, pointing to party leaders being turned away from the funeral of Telangana ideologue K Jayashankar recently as an indicator of how high tempers were running. While the resignations of MLAs will not have an immediate impact as the assembly is not due to meet till winter, the sharp divisions over the statehood demand are likely to accentuate with MPs from non-Telangana regions also agreeing that bitterness was increasing. "If the Centre does not act soon, it will lose authority and face," said an MP. Congress spokesperson Shakil Ahmed stuck to generalities, saying, "We do hope an appropriate decision will be taken at an appropriate time", but the urgent discussions of the CCPA show that the government is worried by the developments.