Anonymous declares 'total war' on Donald Trump in new video threatening to bring down sites and expose embarrassing information
Anonymous has declared "total war" on Donald Trump, threatening to shut down his websites and expose what he doesn't want the public to know.
In a new video, the hacktivist collective describes the US presidential candidate's actions and words as "deeply disturbing".
"Your inconsistent and hateful campaign has not only shocked the United States of America. You have shocked the entire planet with your appalling actions and ideas," a cloaked man in a Guy Fawkes mask says in a computerised English accent.
"You say what your current audience wants to hear but in reality you don't stand for anything except for your personal greed and power."
The video calls on "every able person with a computer" to join Anonymous ' war on Trump, known as #OpTrump, with the aim of dismantling his campaign and sabotaging his brand.
#OpTrump's first action will be to target trumpchicago.com - the official website of Trump Tower in Chicago - on April 1 (April Fool's Day).
"This is a call to arms. This is a call to the freedom fighters, to the forgotten, to the censored. To our fellow hacktivists throughout the world," the masked man says.
"This is a call to protect out future, our freedom and our very way of life. This is a call to you.
"This is not a warning," he concludes. "This is a declaration of total war. Operation Trump engaged. We are Anonymous. We are legion. We do not forgive. We will not forget. Donald Trump , it is too late to expect us."
This is not the first time Donald Trump has been targeted by the group.
In December 2015, the hacktivist group attacked www.trumptowerny.com , after Trump demanded that Muslims should be banned from entering the United States.
"Donald Trump think twice before you speak anything," the group said in a video posted on YouTube. "You have been warned Mr. Donald Trump."
Read more: What is Anonymous? Get behind the mask with our guide to the global hacktivist collective