Chris Christie suspends campaign
(CNN)New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has suspended his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination after a disappointing finish in New Hampshire, he formally announced in a Facebook post Wednesday.
Christie made the announcement earlier on a call with his campaign. He staked his hopes on New Hampshire, but finished sixth on Tuesday night with just 7% of the vote.
New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has become a well-known face for the Republican party, but in his home state he's still the second-best-known Boss, next to Bruce Springsteen. Pictured above, Christie speaks at a news conference on October 4, 2011, in Trenton, the capital.
Christie addresses state legislators during his State of the State Address on January 8 in Trenton.
Christie tries to comfort Alice Cimillo, whose home was damaged by Superstorm Sandy, on November 1, 2012, in Moonachie, New Jersey.
President Barack Obama and Christie talk with local residents affected by Hurricane Sandy at the Brigantine Beach Community Center on October 31, 2012, in Brigantine, New Jersey, in this photo provided by the White House.
Christie speaks to the media before the start of the abbreviated first day of the Republican National Convention on August 27, 2012, in Tampa, Florida.
Former first lady Nancy Reagan, center, is recognized before Christie delivers remarks at the Reagan Library on September 27, 2011, in Simi Valley, California.
Christie lays a white rose on wreckage pulled from ground zero during the dedication for the Empty Sky Memorial at Liberty State Park on September 10, 2011, in Jersey City, New Jersey.
Christie and his wife, Mary Pat Christie, arrive at the White House for a state dinner on January 19, 2011, in Washington.
Christie exits the voting booth after casting his vote on November 3, 2009, in Mendham, New Jersey. Christie beat incumbent Democrat John Corzine for the gubernatorial position.
Christie and his running mate, Sheriff Kim Guadagno, left, make phone calls to voters at Monmouth County Republican Headquarters on November 2, 2009, in Freehold, New Jersey.
Then U.S. Attorney for the District of New Jersey, Christie pauses on May 8, 2007, before a news conference concerning a thwarted terrorist plot to attack the U.S. Army's Fort Dix outside Trenton.
I ran for president with the message that the government needs to once again work for the people, not the people work...
The decision marks a sudden end for someone once seen as a potential front-runner. In the wake of the 2012 election, Christie appeared poised for a strong bid for the Republican nomination -- he won a second term as the Republican governor of a blue state and led the Republican Governors Association, giving him a perch to travel the nation fundraising for other Republicans and building his stature.
two lanes onto the George Washington Bridge But shortly after he was elected to his second term in November 2013, he was engulfed by the "Bridgegate" scandal. Emails and texts from top aides show they requested that two lanes onto the George Washington Bridge be shut down in September 2013, causing massive traffic jams in Fort Lee, New Jersey, after the town's Democratic mayor declined to endorse Christie's re-election.
had many wondering whether his campaign A federal investigation determined that Christie had no knowledge of the decision to close the lanes, but the political damage was real. By the time he announced his bid at the end of June 2015, the damage from "Bridgegate" had many wondering whether his campaign was dead from the start.
But Donald Trump's ascendance over the summer quickly sucked the air out of the room for almost any other political narrative, including "Bridgegate."
according to NECN's candidate tracker Christie, meanwhile, embarked on a tenacious strategy focused almost exclusively on winning New Hampshire. By February 8, he had made 190 stops in New Hampshire, more than any other candidate, according to NECN's candidate tracker
That attention to the first-in-the-nation primary state paid off in December, when Christie won the endorsement of the New Hampshire Union Leader. At the same time, he won 2016's somewhat informal mark of arrival — withering attacks from Trump.
Christie often talked of his personal experience on September 11, 2001, waiting anxiously for his wife to return from lower Manhattan. But after the terrorist attacks in Paris and San Bernardino last year, Christie began telling that personal story more, as well as playing up his experience as a federal prosecutor immediately after September 11.
But he still faced fallout among the Republican primary electorate after his warm welcoming of Obama in October 2012, after Hurricane Sandy walloped his state.
When pollster Frank Luntz replayed clips of the meeting for a focus group in New Hampshire, after the first Republican debate, Republicans in the room said they were still unhappy, three years later.
told Jake Tapper on CNN's "State of the Union" "I think the whole race changed last night. Because you know there was a march among the chattering class to anoint Sen. Rubio," Christie told Jake Tapper on CNN's "State of the Union" one day after the debate. "I think after last night, that's over. So I think there could be four or five tickets out of New Hampshire because the race is so unsettled now."