Greek New Democracy leader hails 'victory for all Europe'
The unpopular bailouts that have kept Greece from defaulting on its debts in the face of an ongoing recession include budget cuts demanded by international lenders. Voters punished New Democracy and its former coalition partners in the socialist party Pasok in the earlier vote in May, but reopening the agreement would set up a confrontation with the other countries that use the euro -- the common currency of 325 million people across 17 European nations.
With less than half of 1% of ballots still to be counted, New Democracy had won nearly 30% of the vote, according to Interior Ministry figures. But that showing translates to 129 seats in the country's 300-seat parliament, forcing it to seek other coalition members from the fragmented field.
Samaras "has the opportunity to form a government on the basis of the people's verdict and on the basis of his own program," Tsipras said. But he said Syriza -- which was projected to win 71 seats -- would continue to demand "from the position of the opposition" that the bailouts be scrapped.
"What's very clear is the Greeks today voted, including those that voted for Syriza, in favor of the euro and the European Union," Doukas said. He predicted that Greece could now come to better terms with its creditors, whom he said understand "that you can only squeeze so much so fast out of a country and out of its people."
"Unfortunately, the political system in Greece has not been honest with the voters," Alafouzos said. "And so a lot of people believe there is a way out of this without all the pain we have been suffering for the past two or three years."
The possibility that Tspiras could emerge as prime minister prompted waves of fear that Greece could crash out of the euro and Europe's ambitious experiment with a common currency could collapse. Some analysts have estimated that the collapse of the euro would cost $1 trillion, while others say talk of the break-up of the currency is alarmist and unlikely to happen.
The situation in Greece is likely to be on the minds of world leaders as they meet in Mexico on Monday for the Group of 20 summit. Some experts argue that a potential Greek exit would be manageable, assuming the European Central Bank and European Union policymakers respond aggressively, while others worry that the pullout would cause chaos in financial markets and shock the global economy.