Kuwait election turnout shrinks after opposition boycott
Opposition says new parliament does not represent majority of people, after turnout was officially 43% – and reportedly 28%
Kuwait's opposition has claimed a victory by boycotting Saturday's elections and warned that the new parliament does not represent the majority of people in the Gulf emirate, at a time of mounting nervousness about political change throughout the region.
Officially the turnout was 43%, but opposition supporters claimed it was only 28%. Previous elections, including one held in February this year, saw a turnout of around 60%.
The boycott means the opposition, composed of tribes, Islamists and youth groups, will now have no representative in the 50-seat parliament. The opposition had objected to the government's unilateral amendment of the electoral law that reduced the number of votes per person from four to one.
The change was seen as designed by the emir, Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmed Al Sabah, to weaken the opposition and to end a state of near paralysis in parliament. The outcome weakens Kuwait's claim to have the most representative political system in the Gulf – even though the ruling family controls most key government posts.
Ahmed al-Saadoun, a leading opposition figure, said the election was unconstitutional. The government defended it. "The election result is the foundation for a new start of development and co-operation between the legislative and executive powers to advance Kuwait and all its people," said the information minister, Sheikh Mohammad al-Mubarak Al Sabah.
Independent analysts questioned the claim. "It is a pro-government parliament," political scientist Shafeeq Ghabra told Reuters. "Now the government can do all the things it wanted to, which it said it was prevented from doing. The question now is, will it do it? While it has a parliament that does not oppose it, there is a population which is on the opposition's side."
Unprecedented protests have erupted in Kuwait in recent months in a crisis that long predates the changes of the Arab spring elsewhere in the Middle East and north Africa. It has been watched closely and nervously by Saudi Arabia and other Gulf neighbours where there is far less political representation.
The opposition Popular Committee for Boycotting the Election said the new parliament "does not represent the majority of Kuwaiti people and has lost popular and political legitimacy".
The political turmoil of recent years has held up urgently needed economic reforms, including a $108bn development plan aimed at diversifying the heavily oil-reliant economy and attracting foreign investment. Thanks to its oil reserves, which still provide 95% of government revenues, Kuwait is fabulously rich. But it is also underdeveloped in significant ways.
Political parties are banned and candidates run as individuals. The election saw big gains for Kuwait's Shia minority, which won 17 of the 50 seats, up from seven in the last parliament, which was dissolved in June. The biggest losers were the three largest Bedouin tribes, which boycotted the polls: more than 400,000 people who had up to 17 MPs in previous assemblies now have just one. Only three women were elected.