Kenya minister suspended over fraud case
"Following consultations with the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, His Excellency the President has stood aside Hon. William S. Ruto, EGH, MP from Office of Minister with immediate effect pending conclusion of the Nairobi Chief Magistrates Case No. 973 of 2004 as allowed by the Nairobi High Court Suit No. 1192/2005 (0S)," said a statement from Kibaki's office.
Judges Jeanne Gacheche, Leonard Njagi and Roseline Wendoh said that they were not convinced that any of Mr Ruto’s rights had been infringed because he was still innocent until the trial court proved otherwise.
Mr Ruto and four other persons face fraud charges over the alleged sale of a piece of land in Ngong forest to Kenya Pipeline Company Ltd for a total of Sh272 million.
In the case, the Eldoret North MP and Berke Commercial Agencies, a company associated with him, Mr Joshua Kulei, a former aide of retired president Daniel Moi, Mr Sammy Mwaita (Baringo Central MP) and two other firms were sued for allegedly obtaining money from KPC between August 6 and September 6, 2001.
Section 62 of the Anti-corruption and Economic Crimes Act stipulates that “a public officer who is charged with corruption or economic crime shall be suspended at half pay, with effect from the date of the charge.”
Such a suspended public officer continues to receive the full amount of any allowances, according the law. The law now requires that President Kibaki and Prime Minister Raila Odinga move to suspend Mr Ruto until the case against him is determined.
The move to have Mr Ruto step aside comes after Attorney General Amos Wako said that he would advise President Kibaki and Prime Minister Raila Odingaon the next course of action following the court's ruling.
“As you know, I cannot make comments like other ministers and politicians. I have my clients, the two principals, and will advice them as required,” Mr Wako said.
Addressing a news conference at his Jogoo House office on his return from Japan, he said the suit was politically-motivated and questioned why it has been dragging in court for close to seven years.
“It has taken this long so that every year, Kenyans would be reminded that there is a certain case Mr Ruto is facing. But there is nothing new in it,” he said.
In April, Mr Ruto was transferred to the Higher Education Ministry from his Agriculture docket. At the time, he was leading campaigns against the new Constitution.
However, President Kibaki overturned the suspensionssaying Mr Odinga had no powers to remove ministers and the suspension was done in violation of the Constitution.
In other appointments, Bishop Margaret Wanjiru Kariuki was taken back to the Housing Ministry as assistant minister. She successfully defended her Starehe seat in a by election last month.