Cleveland officials approve new RNC security rules following lawsuit settlement with ACLU
CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Cleveland officials on Wednesday signed off on new rules for the Republican National Convention that will reduce the size of a heightened-security "event zone," among other changes resulting from a legal settlement between the city and the American Civil Liberties Union of Ohio.
City officials also extended the official protest route for demonstrators who want to legally march in the streets during the GOP convention. The new route includes a longer time marching near Progressive Field, one of the main convention venues, and now ends in a less-isolated area of downtown Cleveland.
Wednesday's vote memorializes a tentative agreement that was struck late last week between the ACLU and Cleveland, as previously reported by cleveland.com, following a June 14 lawsuit filed by the ACLU on behalf of three groups planning to demonstrate during the convention. The new rules replace the old ones, which were thrown out last Thursday by U.S. District Judge James Gwin, who ruled they would have violated the First Amendment.
In a written statement, ACLU officials called the new rules a "victory for free speech" that was negotiated under a time crunch. The four-day convention is scheduled to begin in 19 days.
"This agreement prevents the 2016 RNC from being defined by an unnecessary conflict between freedom and security," Chris Link, the ACLU of Ohio's executive director, said in a written statement. "The RNC offers a unique stage to groups from all sides of the political spectrum to lift their voices to a national audience. The new rules ensure that people have meaningful opportunities to express themselves on some of our most important national issues."
The plaintiffs in the ACLU lawsuit were an unofficial group supporting presumptive GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump and two left-leaning groups that are opposed to Trump. The three groups said the city's restrictions and delays in granting permits illegally harmed their abilities to organize for the GOP convention.
The ACLU said the new event zone is about half the size, and will no longer include the area between the west bank of the Cuyahoga River and West 25th Street.
The new zone also cuts out an area north of Payne Avenue and east of East 23rd Street, spanning to the Innerbelt.
(Click here to view documents released Wednesday by the ACLU, and here for a map released by Cleveland, which can also be seen below. And click here to view a PDF of event zone restrictions. The list of banned items is on pages 12-14, and the list of changes approved Wednesday can be seen here.)
Within the event zone, camping, as well as a laundry list of legal weapons and more innocuous everyday items will be banned in public areas. Police say the items -- including coolers, puppets, rope, string, squirt-guns and tennis balls -- have been used as weapons or to conceal explosives during past large-scale political protests.
The ACLU had argued the zone was disruptive to everyday life, and needlessly large.
Wednesday's changes also explicitly said homeless people living with in the event zone will be allowed to possess the items banned under the event zone rules, provided that the items are kept and used in the area in which the person lives.
The new rules also extend, from about one mile to about 1.25 miles, the official "protest route" for demonstrators who want to legally march in the street during the GOP convention.
Under the new route, demonstrators will begin at the west end of the Lorain-Carnegie Bridge, march eastward toward Downtown, turn southeast at Ontario Street, turn north on East 9th Street, return to Carnegie Ave., and continue east before ending at East 14th Street.
The old route began identically, but ended at East 9th Street.
Cleveland's new rules also offer extended "parade" times between July 19 and July 21. Under the new rules, the city will grant protest permits on these three days between 8:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. The old time for these days was 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.
Rick Horvath, a top city attorney, said city will grant parade permits for July 18, the first day of the convention, between 2 p.m. and 4 p.m. While this is unchanged from the old rules, Horvath said the city will attempt to fit in a fourth parade on July 18, if possible.
"Each parade probably will kick off on the hour, but if a parade is not completely through the parade route by the time that hour is finished, we will continue to allow them to process until they finish the parade," Horvath said.
The city also added language to its RNC rules saying it will work with protest organizers to ensure "a safe distance between each parade," Horvath said.
Some activists had raised concerns about the city's original parade route resulting in ideologically opposed groups interacting in tight quarters.
The city's updated rules also will clarify that a designated "speaker's platform" in Public Square will not be the only place where people can stand and make a speech.
While the city's event zone rules bar people from bringing in their own platforms or public-address systems, the new rules clarify that anyone can stand on existing objects -- such as a picnic table -- or "use of the natural topography" to speak from an elevated position, Horvath said.