Why a cool reception was just what Beto O'Rourke wanted on his U.S. Senate campaign trail
After talking to Jones, O'Rourke approached Patricia Nealy as she got out of her car. She invited the busy candidate to the upcoming grand opening of her store on Second Avenue, which she said will sell school supplies. Nealy listed economic development and having elected officials help all business owners as top issues.
Pamela Dickinson was unloading groceries when she came upon O'Rourke and Johnson.
She said she was concerned about crime and the lack of speed bumps on her street, and she thanked O'Rourke for the visit.
"Half the time, we don't know who the people are we're voting for," she said.
A man who said his name was Daryl said he was startled by O'Rourke, who he said didn't look like a politician.
"I thought he was a fed," he said. "I was worried. We don't see a lot of politicians around here."
Sheray Hamilton, who gave O'Rourke the Popsicles, said she was also worried about crime and unsavory activity on her street.
But the three-year South Dallas resident, who said she got married Friday, told O'Rourke that residents there have a lot of pride, and their votes should not be taken for granted.
"I love my street," she said. "I love my neighbors."
Hamilton said she would support O'Rourke against Cruz, as did at least two other voters encountered that day.
While O'Rourke would like to walk Texas blocks every day, the enormous size of the state makes it impractical.
His strategy involves talking to every voter — Republican, Democratic and independent.
That's why his stop Saturday in Cooke County was so important. He's urged Democrats to think beyond a base fight and develop messages that incorporate Republicans and all other Texans.
Cruz has said that O'Rourke's policies are too liberal for Texas, including his support of the Affordable Care Act, a path to citizenship for immigrants in the country without authorization and a vow to vote for the impeachment of Trump.
But O'Rourke sees his campaign as promoting the kitchen-table issues important to the prosperity of all Texans, including jobs and education.
A base fight it will certainly be, but O'Rourke is counting on crossover support.
That's evidenced by his belief that Tarrant County, a reliable Republican stronghold,  could determine the outcome of his race against Cruz.
"Tarrant County is going to determine the direction of this state," O'Rourke said recently in Dallas. "I don't want to just do well in Tarrant County. I want to win in Tarrant County." 
Like Dallas County, though, it's black and Hispanic voters in the core of Fort Worth who could make the difference.
And O'Rourke acknowledged that a midterm election year, in which Republicans usually vote in higher numbers than Democrats, would be challenging.
"Dallas has so much untapped potential," O'Rourke said. "People have not come into these elections in years past in midterm opportunities. Though there's not a presidential candidate on the ballot, though we don't have contested races in some parts of the country, we're going to have to transcend that and give everyone a reason to be part of this campaign and this election."