Thai Police Boost Patrols as Protesters Mark Coup
Thai security forces stepped up patrols today as anti-government protesters across the nation marked a 2006 military coup by staging their biggest rallies since clashes that left 89 dead four months ago.
Thousands of protesters blocked traffic for several hours at the downtown Bangkok intersection they occupied in April and May, floating red balloons, lighting candles and dancing in the streets. The crowd reached 10,000 in Bangkok, a number 10 times the police estimate, group leader Sombat Boonngarm-anong said.
“We survived and we’re not scared,” Sombat, 42, told reporters in a nearby McDonald’s restaurant as dozens of supporters cheered and took his photo. “A lot of people came out even though Bangkok is still under an emergency decree.”
The gatherings will test the country’s ability to cope with demonstrations as all parties prepare for an election that Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva must call next year. Abhisit has kept Bangkok and six other provinces under a state of emergency since using troops to clear protesters from the capital in May after they rejected an offer for a November election.
The red-shirted group also rallied at a stadium in the northern province of Chiang Mai, the home of ousted ex-leader Thaksin Shinawatra, who lives overseas after fleeing a jail sentence. About 7,000 people attended that meeting, Prawut Thavornsiri, a police spokesman, said by phone.
“Everything has been peaceful,” he said. “We haven’t arrested anyone.”
Police stationed 1,000 officers in the Bangkok commercial area where pro-Thaksin demonstrators gathered, Prawut said. Protesters shouted anti-government statements, waved flags and held signs with slogans like “Red Shirts Never Die.”
Thailand’s benchmark SET Index gained 21 percent, the third-best performer after the Philippines and Indonesia among Asia’s 15 biggest markets, since the earlier demonstrations ended, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. The baht has strengthened 5.2 percent to a 13-year high in that period, the biggest gain among Asia’s 10 most-traded currencies.
“I want to beg people who may join the protest to gather in peace,” Kobchai Chirathivat, chief executive officer of Central Pattana Pcl, told reporters on Sept. 16. The company plans to re-open its Central World shopping mall, which was torched by protesters after the May crackdown, later this month following a 2.8 billion baht ($91 million) renovation, he said.
Most of the demonstration leaders are behind bars, charged with terrorism for the gun battles and arson attacks that marred the protests. Six of 25 leaders facing charges, including Thaksin, are outside the country. Nineteen other cases are with the courts, with all but three suspects in jail.
Protesters will focus on reforming the judicial system and have no plans to hold prolonged demonstrations, leader Jatuporn Prompan said by phone Sept. 15. In the past few days, the group called for jury trials of those being held and laid roses at their prisons.
The emergency decree allows the government to detain suspects for 30 days without charge, freeze bank accounts, censor opposition media outlets and block websites. Three grenades have exploded in Bangkok since July, killing one person and wounding about a dozen, and soldiers are guarding train stations and other public spaces to deter more attacks.
Thaksin-linked parties have won the past four elections on support from the northeast, Thailand’s poorest region, where his micro-lending programs and cheap health-care plan proved attractive. Abhisit’s Democrat party has sought to woo those voters with programs to refinance loans, guarantee crop prices and give cash to the elderly in a bid to win the most seats in a nationwide vote for the first time in two decades.