Maria Miller faces parliamentary investigation into her expenses
Maria Miller is to face an investigation into her expenses by the parliamentary standards watchdog after a Labour MP lodged an official complaint stating that the culture secretary has breached parliamentary rules.
As David Cameron declared that Miller had provided "excellent answers" to questions about her expenses, the parliamentary standards commissioner John Lyon opened an inquiry following the complaint from John Mann. The MP claimed that Miller's domestic arrangements were identical to those of the former Labour minister Tony McNulty, who was ordered to pay back more than £13,000.
The Daily Telegraph reported on Monday that between 2005 and 2009 Miller claimed more than £90,000 for a house in Wimbledon where her elderly parents lived with the rest of her family. Miller's office told the newspaper that her parents were living "as dependents", the arrangements were approved by the parliamentary fees office and they were audited on two occasions.
Mann said the parliamentary commissioner ruled against McNulty on the grounds that it was not acceptable for his parents to live in his house "as dependents". McNulty's claims were also approved by the fees office.
The prime minister offered strong support for Miller. As he arrived at the EU summit in Brussels on Thursday, he said: "A newspaper has asked her a number of questions. So far as I can see, she has got excellent answers to all those questions."
As the prime minister was speaking, the London Evening Standard published an interview in which Miller struggled to explain why she abruptly stopped making claims on her Wimbledon home in 2009 – the moment when the Daily Telegraph published its groundbreaking investigation into MPs' expenses.
Miller told the Evening Standard: "Because I think there was a lot of concern about the rules and, er, a lot of concern about, you know, the whole issue, and it's something I felt that I didn't want to be, sort of, mixed up in, the fact that I ..."
She then paused and said: "I just made that decision." The minister repeated her claim that her expenses had been "audited twice independently".
Asked by the Standard's political editor Joe Murphy who had carried out the audits, Miller said that one had been done by the Conservative party after Cameron ordered a review of the expenses of all his MPs. She said the second audit had been carried out by Sir Thomas Legg, the former civil servant who audited MPs' expenses.
Asked whether Legg knew her parents lived in the Wimbledon house, she said: "I obviously spoke to the fees office about my claims and they were happy that everything was in order".
The decision by Lyon to launch an inquiry means that Miller, who is entering an intense period as she attempts to broker a deal with national newspaper editors over the Leveson report, could face a lengthy investigation. The commissioner is not obliged to carry out an inquiry after receiving a complaint.
But Lyon could decide on closer examination not to uphold Mann's complaint. If he does accept the complaint, Lyon can either try to rectify the complaint with Miller or write a full-blown report for the Commons standards and privileges committee.
The Telegraph published further details about Miller's expenses on Thursday. The newspaper reported that she failed to declare that she rented her home in her Basingstoke constituency from a wealthy Tory donor at more than £6,000 a year below the rate at which the property is now being advertised.
Miller designated the home as her main property, allowing her to claim expenses on the other property she owned. She denied that she had been given a preferential rate.
The investigation by the commissioner will add to the pressure on Miller, who has been in embroiled in a row with the Telegraph, which reported that her special adviser had asked it to consider the minister's role in the Leveson negotiations before publishing details about her expenses. The paper quoted Joanna Hindley saying she wanted to "flag up" Miller's role in negotiating with the Telegraph editor and other national newspaper editors.
The Telegraph reported on Wednesday night that Craig Oliver, the No 10 director of communications, had threatened its editor, Tony Gallagher, in a similar way. No 10 vehemently denied this, saying Oliver had simply raised concerns with Gallagher that the Telegraph had approached Miller's elderly and infirm father at the house before contacting Miller. Downing Street said Oliver did mention the Leveson negotiations, but this was reportedly in the context of stressing how upset Miller was at a busy time.