UPDATE 1-Japan eyes sales tax hike, using reserves for budget
* Govt has set itself June 20 deadline for tax, welfare reform package
* Opposition lawmakers see 2nd budget proposal as stalling tactic by PM Kan
TOKYO, June 17 (Reuters) - Japan’s government said on Friday it would double the country’s 5 percent sales tax over four years to fund rising social security costs and would tap reserves for a second extra budget as natural disasters in March strain fiscal discipline.
The central government gave into demands from regional governments to share revenue from the planned tax increase, but it is still uncertain which welfare projects will be eligible for funding.
Japan does not need to sell new bonds for a second extra budget after a massive earthquake and tsunami three months ago, the finance minister said, though this means it will have to reduce the amount of money it sets aside to pay down existing debt.
Ratings agencies, who are watching the results of tax and welfare reform due on June 20, have already threatened Japan with downgrades as it grapples with the world’s costliest natural disaster. A divided parliament and moves to oust Prime Minister Naoto Kan also cast doubt on whether the government can enact policies needed to address the country’s ills.
“For the additional 5 percent increase in the sales tax, we will have to distribute that money to regional governments based on their welfare spending,” said Economics Minister Kaoru Yosano.
Sharing tax revenue won’t delay the government’s goal of lowering the primary budget deficit in fiscal 2015 to half of what it was last fiscal year, Yosano also said. A primary budget balance exists when spending equals revenues excludng income from bond sales and debt servicing costs.
Japan’s public debt is already about twice the size of its $5 trillion economy, so it must tread carefully on fiscal policy.
The government will submit a bill to allow it to fund a second extra budget without issuing debt, Japanese Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said on Friday.
Noda declined to comment on the size of the second budget, which the government plans to submit in July to provide relief for homeowners struggling to repay mortgages after a large tsunami wiped out many towns on the northeast coast.
The new bill will allow the government to spend all surplus funds from previous budgets, seen around 2 trillion yen. Under current legislation, the government is required to use half of the surplus to redeem existing debt.
The finance minister expressed optimism that the legislation would pass, but the outlook is less bright for both fiscal and tax proposals as opposition parties have blocked several important pieces of legislation.
One bill stalled in parliament would allow the issuance of bonds to fund about 40 percent of a $1 trillion yen budget for the year from April. If this bill isn’t passed, it could lead to a government shutdown. (Editing by Joseph Radford)