Opposition seek to form minority government after Tsipras resigns and calls snap election: as it happened
• Tsipras defends his government but admits they failed to get concessions from lenders • PM presents himself as a moderate between hard Left and conservative forces • Vote to be held on September 20 • Greek opposition say they are ready to form minority coalition
That's all from us tonight. You can read a summary of all today's events here. Goodnight.
A bit of light relief (though it's also not far from reality) from Alberto Gallo at RBS:
Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, is relaxing in Brazil this evening as uncertainty hangs over Greece. Here she is having a drink with the country's president Dilma Rousseff.
Speaking to reporters, Ms Rousseff said Ms Merkel has told her that “Tsipras stepping down is part of the solution, not part of the crisis".
With the election date set at September 20, the southern periphery of the eurozone will be facing a crucial three weeks. Sept 27 will see the Catalan regional elections - where separatist forces are fighting for independence form the central goverment.
A week after that on October 4, the Portuguese go to the polls where the anti-austerity Socialist party want to reverse years of Troika-imposed austerity in a strugging economy.
Eurogroup chief Jeroen Dijsselbloem has said the new programme will need broad support in the Greek parliament and hopes the looming elections will bring that much closer, according to his spokesman Michel Reijns
The Greek constitution says that the leaders of the opposition will be given three days to work out whether or not the can come up with a viable parliament to continue ruling. New Democracy's Evangelos Meimarakis has now said that he will consult with the centrist Potami and Socialist Pasok to do exactly that.
New Democracy, the second largest party in the Greek parliament, have said they are ready to step in to prevent new elections. The centre-right party have an interim leader in charge, Evangelos Meimarakis, who is holding a press conference right now.
He's said his party will seek to fill the void following Mr Tsipras's resignation and try to form government. The Greek constitution states that a caretaker regime can be put in place once both leaders of the second and third largest parties fail to form a new parliament.
Mr Meimarakis added that Mr Tsipras's decision to resign was "dishonest" towards the country's creditors and he called him a "bit of a liar".
The PM is now formally requesting an interim government be put in place as his government is dissolved. The candidate to take the post is president of the Greek supreme court, 65-year-old Vassiliki Thanou.
Pierre Moscovici is the first member of the euro elite to formally welcome Mr Tsipras's announcement.
The rumour mill is well under way, with talk suggesting that speaker of the Greek parliament Zoe Constantopoulou will join a breakaway Leftist faction. Ms Constantopoulou has been a constant thorn in the side of the PM, and is one of the most vocal critics of the new bail-out deal in the government.
However, former minister Yanis Varoufakis - who is not affiliated with the Left Platform - is likely to stick by his prime minister and current finance chief Euclid Tsakolotos.
Rating's agency Moody's, who recently upgraded Greece's credit rating on two days ago, say tonight's election announcement with throw the implementation and disbursement of a new programme at risk.
The PM is now making the short trip to the country's head of state in order to submit his resignation and trigger a new election for September 20.
The main message from that address is that Mr Tsipras thinks his vallant attempts to fight for better terms from the country's creditors was a better than the alternative of returning to the drachma (like some rebels in his party) or voluntarily submitted to the conditions (as previous regimes have done).
The Prime Minister is now defending his government's actions, admitting that the outcome was not what he intended. He repeats an earlier wish to have the European Parliament included in the country's bail-out programme and calls on the Greek people to decide whether to continue backing him.
"I'm very proud of my government. We've negotiated hard for a long time".
And with that the address is over.
The prime minister confirms that he will tender his resignation to the Greek president tonight, triggering new elections.
He criticises parts of his party which want a return to the drachma and calls on the Greek people for their backing. "We struggled to say true our beliefs" he adds.
Some translation courtesy of Greek tweeps. Mr Tsipras begins by saying:"I want to be completely honest, we didnt achieve the agreement we wanted. We're obliged to honor deal'
You can watch live here.
Former government minister Dimitris Stratoulis has told Greek TV today that the "no" voices wthin Syriza will have their voices heard. Mr Stratoulis is a member of the Left Platform, and his words will add fuel to the claims that the faction is set to breakaway from Syriza tonight.
Joan Hoey of The Economist Intelligence Unit says the snap election is a much needed step for Mr Tsipras to weed out the rebels in his Leftist government:
An election will create more political uncertainty, delay economic recovery and impede reform implementation.
However, it appears to be unavoidable if Greece is to have a government committed to implementing the bail-out agreement. An election will give Mr Tsipras the opportunity to secure a mandate for the reform programme and remove troublesome left-wingers from parliament.
Under Greek electoral law, if an election is held within 18 months of the previous poll, the order in which candidates are listed on ballots is also the order in which they are elected, and that order is set by the party leader.
The mind-boggling scope of the reforms in the new agreement, which extend into virtually every area of the economy and polity, exceed anything visited upon even the post-communist states of eastern Europe. The referendum result of 5 July, in which 61pc of voters rejected austerity measures demanded by Greece's creditors, revealed that there is a large body of opinion that is prepared to countenance a break with the euro. In coming months and years, support for remaining within the euro zone "at all costs" will diminish significantly.
You can watch it live on ERT here. (It's all in Greek)
Where we stand on the numbers: Three bail-outs in five years; five elections in three years.
Jean-Claude Juncker's chief of staff has tweeted a welcoming response to the announcement of a Greek election. Martin Selmayr said: "Swift elections in Greece can be a way to broaden support for ESM stability support" programme just signed by PM Tsipras on behalf of Greece".
That's a far warmer response compared to the last time Mr Tsipras tried to involve the electorate in the country's bail-out future. The announcement of a July referendum left Mr Juncker feeling pretty hurt and betrayed by the PM's audacity to hold a plebiscite.
From Jennifer McKewon of Capital Economics who argues that the any new government in Greece will struggle to implement bail-out conditions demanded by creditors.
The election is unlikely to change a great deal. It seems likely that Tsipras will run again given his earlier pledge to stand by the harsh terms to which he signed up. Syriza is still easily the most popular party in Greece (with about 40% of the vote compared to runner-up New Democracy’s 20% based on a July 18th poll).
It should therefore win the election even if rumours that the radical Leftist wing will announce a breakaway party prove correct. But, given its anti-austerity roots, the remaining Syriza party will still struggle to implement the demanding bailout conditions, especially in the likely event that Greece sinks further into recession.
And major reforms seem unlikely to be passed in the period running up to the election, during which reports state that the anti-austerity Supreme Court President Vassiliki Thanou-Christophilou will take the helm. This all increases the risk that Greece will fail to pass the first review of its bailout in October and confirms that the threat of Grexit has far from evaporated.
The Greek constitution lays out the conditions under which a caretaker government will need to be appointed. It states that should the leaders of the second and third largest parliamentary parties fail form a government, then the President can summon the head of the supreme court to head a cabinet as parliament is dissolved.
Article 37 states: If all exploratory mandates prove to be unsuccessful, the President of the Republic summons all party leaders, and if the impossibility to form a Cabinet enjoying the confidence of the Parliament is confirmed, he shall attempt to form a Cabinet composed of all parties in Parliament for the purpose of holding parliamentary elections. If this fails, he shall entrust the President of the Supreme Administrative Court or of the Supreme Civil and Criminal Court or of the Court of Audit to form a Cabinet as widely accepted as possible to carry out elections and dissolves Parliament.
1. The President of the Republic may dissolve the Parliament when two Governments have resigned or have been voted down by Parliament and its composition fails to guarantee governmental stability. Elections are held by the Government enjoying the confidence of the dissolving Parliament.
You can read it in full here.
Bit behind the curve, but the ECB have now put out an official confirmation that Greece repaid a maturing bond today. Statement below:
“The ECB confirms that all Greek government bonds maturing today and owed to the ECB and Eurosystem national central bank have been repaid by Greece.”
One man who will be backing Mr Tsipras is Podemos leader Pablo Iglesias. He tweeted this a couple of days ago along the lines of, "no-one likes us, we don't care"
Today is officially day one of Greece's third "Memorandum of Understanding". Under the terms of the deal, the Greek parliament is expected to pass a series of reforms needed to continue meeting their obligations and securing the drip feed of emergency cash. The possibility of an election throws the process into turmoil.
Creditors are set to carry out their first official "review" of the programme in October - an assessment which is vital to secure the debt relief that both Athens and the IMF have long called for. But without a government in place for at least the next month, the passage of any new reform bills and legislative deals is in severe doubt.
Former finance minister Yanis Varoufakis is still a Syriza MP, but will he continue to stand on the party's platform in a new election?
The economist has spent the last month lambasting the terms of the new Greek deal, providing a 60 page blistering annotation of the diktat on his personal website.
But, he's previously proclaimed his loyalty to Mr Tsipras and current finance minister Tsakalotos, who he considers "good friends" and said he enjoys the life of a backbench MP.
Reports that the radical Leftist wing of the Syriza party, who make up a third of the country's MPs, will announce a formal breakaway from Syriza later tonight. It is expected that former energy minister Paniogotis Lafazanis will lead the faction. He has consistently called on the government to reject the onerous bail-out terms of European creditors and called on his members to vote against the package in the Greek parliament earlier this month.
With Mr Tsipras's meeting over, multiple media sources are now reporting that September 20 will be the date for the election.
The rumours are growing. Another national broadcaster is now reporting that the PM will dissolve his government and call a snap vote.
The PM's meeting with his aides and ministers is reportedly over. He's been holed up with them since the early afternoon, and we now expect a decision on a snap election to be imminent.
If an election is called, Mr Tsipras will be constitutionally obliged to dissolve his government and have a caretaker regime in place until the vote.
The chief contender for the post is Vassiliki Thanou, the current president of the Supreme Court and a critic of the country's bail-out programme.
Reuters are reporting German government sources saying that Berlin is determined to the get the IMF on board because of the disciplinarian role it has in enforcing tough bail-out conditions, rather than providing financial help.
The IMF has called on Greece to carry out wide-ranging pension reforms to get back on a sustainable growth track.
Despite the fact the Germans and Ms Lagarde have been at loggerheads over the issue of writing down Greek debt, Angela Merkel has promised her parliament that IMF involvement is a sine qua non for her government.
Explaining Germany's eagerness to involve the IMF, a government source in Berlin said: "It is foremost about the expertise, the expertise in the supervision of the reform measures."
Such expertise would lend credibility to the bailout plan. Without the IMF's involvement, the European Commission - which has a responsibility to represent Greece along with other European Union countries - would be left to supervise Athens' implementation of its reform measures.
The big catch is that while the IMF wants Athens to get debt relief, Berlin strictly opposes cutting Greek debt.
Greek stocks are down just over 3.5pc today, led by the country's banks which have fallen more than 13.5pc today.
Yields on 10-year Greek bonds have also risen to 11.6pc. Although they don't represent the actual borrowing costs faced by the government (Greece has been locked out of financial markets) they are a good indicator of rising default risk for the country.
Euclid Tskalalotos, Greece's finance minister, addressed his parliament earlier today. Hinting at the possibility of a general election, he said any decision to dissolve the government would not cause the kind of political instability that was wrought on the country three years ago.
"These elections which, as I hear, are ahead, will not be the same as those in 2012", said Mr Tsakalotos, who also urged Greeks to start putting deposits back in the banking system.
"Now there is an agreement. There is a course ahead, a framework for the recapitalization of banks, the buffer of €15bn, the gradual lifting of capital controls," he said.
"If the next government is stable, it will be able to handle the recapitalization of banks and non-performing loans. People can bring their money back from abroad."
And they say August is a dull month...
There were suggestions earlier this week that Mr Tsipras had decided against calling a snap election, opting to wait until October when creditors were due to carry out their first review of the new bail-out programme. October has also been the suggested date that European lenders would finally come round to providing some form of debt relief to Athens in a bid to get the IMF on board with the rescue.
So today's election announcement, if it comes, would be something of a surprise. But it would hint at the levels of dissent within the ruling coalition over the terms of the new deal. August 20 is officially the start of a new three-year Memorandum of Understanding. If Mr Tsipras does step down, he is likely to be replaced by a caretaker prime minister. It would also mark the country's second snap elections in just under nine months. Syriza were only elected in late January.
A key and much-disputed quetsion if we do have an election is what exactly the PM will campaign for.
He has prevously denounced the terms of the country's new Memorandum, but defended his actions as neccessary to save Greece from the oblivion of a euro-exit.
Syriza's energy minister said earlier today that a vote would help "clear up" the political landscape in the country.
"We need to know whether the government has or does not have a majority," said Panos Skourletis.
Earlier today, a Greek government official told reporters that "everything is possible," when asked whether Tsipras could announce elections today.
According to Greek media, the PM has been holed up with his aides and officials in the Maximos Mansion in Athens deciding on what his next move will be.
It's important to note that the Leftist premier is likely to win any new election with polls showing that he commands overwhelming support from the Greek electorate, amid weak opposition parties in the form of the conservative New Democracy and near non-existent Socialist party.
Hello and welcome to live coverage of Greece's political crisis, where it seems that Alexis Tsipras is on the verge of calling a snap election on the same day his country managed to secure its first bail-out cash from international creditors in over a year.
Greek state broadcaster ERT is reporting that the embattled prime minister will announce the vote later today. The PM has been meeting with government officials this afternoon and could resign from office having called the vote. September 13 and 20 have been touted as possible dates.
The 41-year-old Syriza leader remains the most popular politician in the country, despite presiding over six months of ill-tempered talks with creditors in which he was forced to capitulate when faced with the threat of a euro exit.
Greece finally managed to secure its first injection of bail-out money from creditors since August 2014 on Thursday, having ratified a series of punishing austerity measures and economic reforms as its price to remain in the single currency.
Mr Tsipras had been expected to face a vote of confidence among Syriza party members in September. But the announcement of a potential election is likely to derail that process and look to the electorate to decide on whether or not to provide a fresh mandate for the Leftist party.