'Duterte Harry' tipped to win as Philippines votes
Manila (CNN)Millions in the Philippines started casting their votes as polls opened Monday to select a new government that will shape the country for the next six years.
Nearly 55 million of the country's 100 million population have registered to choose not only a new president and deputy, but also to elect half of the Senate, the entire House of Representatives as well as tens of thousands of local posts, from governors, mayor and members of the provincial councils.
Leading in presidential polls is Rodrigo Duterte, a long-time mayor of the southern city of Davao.
He's a colorful and controversial figure known for his inflammatory comments on a gang rape his sexual conquests and tough stance on crime.
Five candidates are contesting the 2016 Philippines presidential elections. From left to right: Jejomar Binay, Rodrigo Duterte, Miriam Defensor Santiago, Grace Poe and Manuel 'Mar' Roxas.
Rodrigo Duterte has cursed the Pope, 'joked' about the rape of an Australian missionary, and been accused of involvement in extrajudicial killings while mayor of Davao City. Despite the headlines, the major presidential polls show that around one in three Filipino voters want him as president, making him a clear favorite.
Grace Poe, the popular daughter of the late Filipino action star, Fernando Poe Jr., started out as the front-runner but was formally disqualified by the electoral commission in early December 2015. Poe defeated the ruling in the Supreme Court of the Philippines in March 2016, but now faces an uphill battle to regain popularity. Polls presently place her in second place behind Duterte, with between 22-24% of the vote.
Currently Vice President of the Philippines, Jejomar Binay's run for the highest office has been marred by serious allegations of corruption. A March 2016 Philippines Commission on Audit report recommended that he be punished for a wide array of offenses with removal from office, although that can only be implemented through impeachment proceedings or by Philippine court proceedings. Binay slipped from third to fourth place in the latest SWS polls, with an estimated 14% of the vote.
Manuel 'Mar' Roxas, grandson of former Philippine President Manuel Roxas, is a well-known local politician who serves in the Philippines senate. An investment banker in New York prior to returning home to run for office, the former Interior Secretary has overtaken Binay for third place in the most recent SWS poll, with support from 19% of respondents.
Miriam Defensor-Santiago is a long time civil servant and notable for having served in all three branches -- judicial, executive, and legislative -- of government. However, she was forced to take nearly six weeks off from the campaign scene due to her battle with stage four lung cancer, not helping her position -- she has consistently placed at the bottom of multiple race surveys.
If elected, he has vowed to execute 100,000 criminals and dump them into Manila Bay
In his last campaign stump Saturday, Duterte, 71, played his role to the hilt, and again vowed to butcher criminals as he told thousands gathered in central Manila: "Forget the laws of human rights."
"If I make it to the presidential palace, I will do just what I did as mayor. You drug pushers, hold-up men and do-nothings, you better go out. Because as the mayor, I'd kill you," Duterte, said to wild cheers from the throng of supporters.
"We've always raised the concern that the death squads in Davao has ushered in an epidemic of similar death squad-style killings in other cities. HRW documented this particularly in Tagum City, not far from Davao."
"Politicians who popularize death squads as a form of crime control are helping spread this epidemic across the country. At the bottom of this, of course, is the breakdown of rule of law," he told CNN.
He noted that "death squad killings" have a measure of support among the citizenry wary of high crime, but stressed they also breed "lawlessness, corruption and disregard for the rule of law that will spell disaster for the years to come."
President Benigno Aquino, the son of the country's democracy icons Benigno and Corazon Aquino, was elected in a landslide in 2010, but his popularity has taken a dent in the past two years as crime worsened — even as the economy chugged forward.
Roxas, 57, said the campaign had been extremely taxing and characterized by mudslinging. He said the Philippines once again was in the world's spotlight, and urged all voters to make the right choice.
"We are here fighting for our future, fighting for the continuation of our way of life," he said Saturday. "No matter what they say, critics cannot deny that the Philippines is now Asia's bright star."
Indeed, the Philippine economy has steadily grown since the early 2000s, earning credit ratings upgrades, with the economy and spending power fueled by the money sent home by the country's army of overseas workers.
On the political and diplomatic front, the government has been feted for standing up to China over a row in the South China Sea.
Ramon Casiple, a political analyst and head of the Institute for Political and Electoral Reform, said Duterte leads in the polls because choosing him is considered "a protest vote."
"He is a symbol for the people. Nothing happened for many people in the past six years, and he has capitalized on his image as the folk hero here," Casiple told CNN.
He said the electorate were mesmerized at how Duterte continued his attacks on the country's elite, and seemed to care little that he is portrayed, at times, as uncouth.
"Even some in the business elite are intrigued by what he has promised, and the way he proposed to step down as president if he failed to solve crime, traffic, congestion," he said, but cautioned as well that when "moths fly closely into the fire" oftentimes, they get burned.