Paris shooting overshadows election campaign
Paris (CNN)A deadly attack on a police bus in the heart of Paris has dramatically changed the course of the French presidential election campaign.
The three main candidates canceled campaign events and instead made televised statements in which they competed to talk tough on security and vowed a crackdown on ISIS.
One police officer died after a gunman wielding a machine gun leapt out of a car and opened fire on the Champs-Elysees, Paris's most famous boulevard, as candidates were engaging in their final TV debate.
The far-right candidate, Marine Le Pen, demanded the closure of all Islamist mosques. Prime Minister Bernard Cazeneuve accused her of trying to capitalize on the attack.
ISIS swiftly claimed the attack was carried out by one of its "fighters." The assailant -- Karim Cheurfi, a 39-year-oldFrench national with a long and violent criminal record -- was shot dead as he tried to make his escape. Prosecutors said a note defending ISIS fell out of his pocket, although there was no previous evidence of radicalization.He was also carrying the addresses of police stations.
"In times such as these we have to demonstrate that France is united," he said. "We also have to be clear that we are in a state of emergency. We are at war. This fight for freedom and for the security of the French people must be the priority of the next five-year term."
Macron appealed to voters not to succumb to fear. "Do not give in to fear, do not give in to division, do not give in to intimidation," he said. "The choice that you have to make on Sunday must be a choice for the future."
A man who turned himself in to Antwerp police was Youssef El Osri. The man's lawyer, Nabil Riffi, told CNN his client was "very shocked" at being linked to the Paris shooting and that he had been working at a gas station in Antwerp at the time it occurred.
Security in Paris has been stepped up in recent days, but the presence of 50,000 police officers on the streets was not enough to prevent the latest assault, which was being investigated by anti-terror officials.
Molins said the attacker had a long criminal record. He spent 11 years in jail after shooting two police officers in 2001. While in custody, he shot and injured a prison officer after grabbing his gun. He was jailed again in 2013 for lesser offenses and released on probation two years later.
Molins said Cheurfi was investigated by counterterror officials in late Febrary because of alleged threats he made to kill police officers. He was briefly placed under house arrest and investigators discovered knives and masks in his home but no evidence linking him to terror groups, Molins said.
Despite his long criminal record, Cheurfi was never placed under what is known as a "Fiche S" surveillance file, Molins told reporters. Molins did not clarify if Cheurfi had been on other surveillance lists in France excluding the "Fiche S" file. Cheurfi never showed any sign of radicalization during his previous detention, Molins said.
Speaking in Indonesia Friday, US Vice President Mike Pence said the attack was just the latest reminder "that terrorism can strike anywhere at any time."
according to her spokesman Steffen Seibert German Chancellor Angela Merkel said her sympathy "goes out to the victims and their families," according to her spokesman Steffen Seibert
France has been in a state of emergency since the 2015 Paris attacks, which left 130 people dead. Parliament voted in December to extend the extraordinary provisions to ensure the protection of upcoming presidential and general elections.