Guinea regime promises unity government after shooting of leader
Guinea's interim leader has pledged a move towards civilian government as doubts grow over the health of the country's military ruler after an assassination attempt.
Moussa "Dadis" Camara was shot in the head at point blank range by a former aide in early December. He was evacuated for treatment in Morocco and has not been seen in public for more than a month.
Sekouba Konate, Guinea's deputy junta chief, told state television this week: "His life is not in danger but it will need time and patience and medical attention for some time for him to recover fully."
Konate, who is also defence minister, promised to form a national unity government and said he would accept a prime minister drawn from the opposition. "We need to act to restore peace and the unity of all Guineans, and to put our state and political system on a new foundation."
The Moroccan foreign ministry issued a statement welcoming Konate's comments and revealed that Camara has been in intensive care. "The Kingdom of Morocco … which has received President Dadis Camara for intensive care, is pleased by the decision announced today by the acting president General Sekouba Konate to immediately name a prime minister from the political forces to lead a transition government of national unity."
Western diplomats in Rabat said they believed Morocco had joined hands with Paris and Washington to keep Camara away from Guinea and bolster efforts there to bring back civilian government in his absence.
An opposition leader said the success of the transitional government would depend on the powers given to the prime minister. Oury Bah, a senior member of the UFDG opposition party, said: "The important thing is not the choice of the person. The fundamental thing is the mandate, the powers and responsibilities of the new prime minister."
Camara and his junta allies became the subject of international outrage and sanctions after security forces killed more than 150 people and raped scores of women protesting in a Conakry stadium last September. A renegade soldier, Lieutenant Toumba Diakite, has said he shot Camara after being ordered take the blame for the Conakry massacre.