Catalonia election: Separatists claim victory in regional vote; results show pro-independence win
Separatists in Catalonia have claimed victory in a regional election that they have vowed will lead to them declaring the region independent from Spain.
"We have won," bellowed nationalist regional president Artur Mas before a crowd of supporters.
Official results with 97 per cent of the votes counted showed secessionist parties were on track to secure 72 out of 135 seats in the powerful region of 7.5 million people, that includes Barcelona.
The main secessionist group Junts pel Si (Together for Yes) was on track to secure 62 seats, while the smaller leftist CUP party would get another 10, according to official results.
They would jointly obtain 47.8 per cent of the vote, on a record turnout of 78 per cent — a big boost to an independence campaign which has been losing support over the past two years.
The strong pro-independence showing dealt a blow to Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy, three months before a national election.
His centre-right government, which has opposed attempts to hold a referendum on secession, has called the separatist plan "a nonsense" and vowed to block it in court.
Spain's constitution does not allow any region to break away, so the prospect of a breakaway remains highly hypothetical
Both separatist parties had said before the vote that such a result would allow them to unilaterally declare independence within 18 months, under a plan that would see the new Catalan authorities approving their own constitution and building institutions like an army, central bank and judicial system.
Addressing supporters of Together for Yes in central Barcelona, Mr Mas said a "democratic mandate" now existed to move forward with independence.
"That gives us a great strength and strong legitimacy to keep on with this project," Mr Mas told the exultant crowd, which chanted "Independence!" and waved secessionist flags.
Albert Llorent, a taxi driver from Barcelona who had come to celebrate, said the result was of historic proportions.
"What I think, what I feel, is that I belong to the best possible nation in the world. Long live Catalonia," he said.
Spain's national government brands secession illegal and wants the country to stay united as the eurozone's fourth-biggest economy recovers from recession.
Campaigning has been tense and emotional but no incidents were reported.
The vote in Catalonia, Spain's second most populous region, is widely expected to influence the course of the Spanish general election in December.
Spain's two dominant parties — the ruling People's Party and the opposition Socialists — lost tens of thousands of votes compared with the last vote in 2012, boding ill for their national ambitions.
Personalities such as Barcelona football club's beloved former coach Pep Guardiola back independence. The club is a powerful talisman for the independence movement.
Its defender Gerard Pique said on Facebook he had voted "on a historic and important day".
Past polls have indicated Catalans favour a referendum but are evenly split over independence.
"Without independence, nothing will change," said one voter, Alex Donate, 29. "I love Spain, but I think independence will be good for us."
Mr Mas says the region would be better off independent, with greater control over its taxes.
"That guy is a liar," said Francisco Serrano, a 70-year-old former labourer in the Barcelona suburb of Santa Coloma de Gramenet who voted against independence.
With its own language and cultural traditions, Catalonia has seen numerous bids for greater autonomy over the past century. Secessionist demands have surged in the recent economic crisis.
Nationalists complain they get less back from Madrid than it takes in taxes.
Madrid has garnered support from US president Barack Obama and British prime minister David Cameron, who have defended the unity of Spain.