Samoan ruling party set for landslide victory in general elections: electoral office
Preliminary results from Samoa's general election show the ruling party is set for a landslide win, results released by the Pacific island nation's electoral commissioner's office have shown.
The Human Rights Protection Party's (HRPP) domination of Samoan politics since the early 1980s will continue, with preliminary results showing the party won 47 of the 49 seats.
The results are a significant improvement on HRPP's previous 2011 election results when the party won 36 of 49 seats.
"I would like to extend my gratitude to all of Samoa for the support, and the overwhelming vote of confidence in our vision for this country," Prime Minister Tuilaepa Sailele Malielegaoi, who has led the country since 1998, said.
"Looking at the results, about half of Parliament's seats are going to change.
"This is democracy at work."
Mr Malielegaoi said the overwhelming support for the HRPP was indicative of the level of trust the country had in its leadership.
"HRPP has been leading Samoa for a very long time and there are many developments done during that time. The country is mindful of it."
In the Samoan electoral system parties can put up multiple candidates for one seat, which has seen a number of new HRPP faces replace older members.
Several of the party's MPs, including three cabinet ministers, have been voted out and replaced by younger members of the same party.
The main opposition has been all but wiped out in the election.
Only the Tautua Samoa Party's deputy leader, Aeau Peniamina and new MP Ili Setefano Ta'ateo have been elected.
A new quota system enacted in 2013 requires women fill at least five seats in the Parliament.
There were predictions ahead of the elections that enough women would be voted in for the special measures would not need to be enacted.
However only four women have been elected to Parliament, meaning a fifth woman will be added raising the number of seats to 50.
More than 110,000 people registered to cast their vote for more than 170 candidates vying for a place in Samoa's Parliament.