Fiji to keep union jack on its flag
Prime minister says cost of changing the flag, removing British colonial symbols, was too great and should be directed at cyclone recovery work
The Fijian government has announced it will not be progressing with plans to change the country’s flag - and the union jack will stay part of it.
Prime Minister JB Bainimarama said that the potential cost of a flag change would be redirected towards the ongoing recovery of Tropical Cyclone Winston, in which 43 Fijians died and tens of thousands were left homeless in February.
He also said he had been deeply moved to see Fijians rally around the flag as they celebrated the country’s recent gold medal at the Rio Olympics.
“While I remain convinced personally that we need to replace some of the flag’s colonial symbols with a genuinely indigenous expression of our present and our future, it has been apparent to the Government since February that the flag should not be changed for the foreseeable future,” he said in a statement.
“The cost of any flag change is better spent at the present time assisting Fijians back on their feet.”
Last February Bainimarama announced plans to change the flag which was first flown in 1970 when Fiji declared independence from Great Britain.
The current flag features the union jack along with a coat of arms with a lion holding a cacao pod, and the local symbols of sugarcane, coconuts, bananas and the Fiji dove surrounding the arms of the cross.
One of Fiji’s opposition parties, the National Federation Party, said it was a waste of taxpayers money and there had been no public consultation to determine whether Fijians even wanted a flag change.
Since then there has been ongoing debate.
However the government’s refusal to hold a referendum to allow the public to vote on a flag change angered many - and today some Fijians took to twitter to express their annoyance about the Prime Minister’s flip flopping on the flag debate.
“So how much money has the Fiji Government wasted thus far in trying to convince us all that we needed to change...” said Lani Vakatale.
Bainimarama said he hoped Fijians would proudly display their flag to welcome the Fijian Rugby Sevens team on Sunday.