 Atlanta, Georgia 1847 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) Atlanta metropolitan area cities Cities in DeKalb County, Georgia Cities in Fulton County, Georgia Cities in Georgia (U.S. state) County seats in Georgia (U.S. state) Populated places established in 1837 Populated places on the Chattahoochee River Urban forests in the United States Nashville, Tennessee Cities in Tennessee Consolidated city-counties in the United States County seats in Tennessee Cities in Davidson County, Tennessee Populated places established in 1779 Cities in Nashville metropolitan area Weather hazards Severe weather and convection Tornado Types of cyclone Wind Storm Electric power transmission Electrical engineering Monopoly (economics) Electrical safety Memphis, Tennessee Cities in Shelby County, Tennessee Cities in Tennessee County seats in Tennessee Cities in the Memphis metropolitan area History of voting rights in the United States Planned cities in the United States Populated places established in 1819 Tennessee populated places on the Mississippi River Reuters Companies established in 1851 Media companies based in London Multilingual news services News agencies based in the United Kingdom Financial news agencies 1851 establishments in the United Kingdom Webby Award winners Cities in Georgia (U.S. state) Cities in Butts County, Georgia County seats in Georgia (U.S. state) Populated places established in 1826 1826 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) 1979 births People from Great Harwood Living people Association football midfielders English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. managers Dodge County, Georgia 1870 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) Georgia (U.S. state) counties Populated places established in 1870 Fire Articles containing video clips Cooking techniques Colquitt County, Georgia 1856 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) Georgia (U.S. state) counties Populated places established in 1856 Georgia Power Power companies of the United States Hydroelectric power companies of the United States Nuclear power companies of the United States Companies based in Atlanta, Georgia Energy companies established in 1945 Non-renewable resource companies established in 1945 Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Southern Company Atlanta metropolitan area Regions of Georgia (U.S. state) Metropolitan areas of Georgia (U.S. state) Public utilities Political economy Monopoly (economics) Flow meters Economics of transport and utility industries Precipitation Snow or ice weather phenomena Storm Weather hazards Water ice Roads Copiah County, Mississippi Mississippi counties Jackson, MS Metropolitan Statistical Area 1823 establishments in Mississippi Populated places established in 1823 Emergency management State agencies of Tennessee 1951 establishments in Tennessee Monday Night Football 1970 American television series debuts 1970s American television series 1980s American television series 1990s American television series 2000s American television series 2010s American television series American Broadcasting Company network shows ABC Sports English-language television programming ESPN network shows West Coast of the United States Coasts of the Pacific Ocean Coasts of the United States Regions of the Western United States Landforms of California Landforms of Oregon Landforms of Washington (state) Regions of the United States Western United States Articles containing video clips