 Atlanta, Georgia 1847 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) Atlanta metropolitan area cities Cities in DeKalb County, Georgia Cities in Fulton County, Georgia Cities in Georgia (U.S. state) County seats in Georgia (U.S. state) Populated places established in 1837 Populated places on the Chattahoochee River Urban forests in the United States Controlled-access highways Types of roads Fulton County, Georgia Georgia (U.S. state) counties Atlanta metropolitan area counties 1853 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) Populated places established in 1853 U.S. Route 1 Interstate 85 Interstate Highway System Dielectrics Nonwoven fabrics Plastics Thermoplastics Vinyl polymers Commodity chemicals Television stations in Atlanta, Georgia NBC network affiliates Tegna, Inc. WeatherNation TV affiliates Television channels and stations established in 1951 1951 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) Justice Network affiliates Employment Public transport Periodic phenomena Georgia (U.S. state) Former British colonies Southern United States States and territories established in 1788 States of the Confederate States of America States of the United States States of the East Coast of the United States 1942 births 20th-century American lawyers American anti–illegal immigration activists American prosecutors American judges Baptists from the United States Democratic Party members of the United States House of Representatives Georgia (U.S. state) Democrats Georgia (U.S. state) Republicans Georgia (U.S. state) State Senators Governors of Georgia (U.S. state) Living people Members of the United States House of Representatives from Georgia (U.S. state) Mercer University alumni People from Gainesville, Georgia People from Millen, Georgia Georgia Salzburgers Presidents pro tempore of the Georgia State Senate Republican Party members of the United States House of Representatives Republican Party state governors of the United States United States Army officers Driving Youth rights History of the United States (1945–64) Interstate Highway System Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower Transport systems Types of roads Articles with images not understandable by color blind users Law enforcement in the United States Law enforcement units Constitutional law Emergency laws Emergency management Government Inclement weather management Law enforcement United States Department of Transportation Transportation in the United States Government agencies established in 1966 United States federal executive departments 1966 establishments in Washington, D.C. World Digital Library related 1969 births African-American mayors American people of Igbo descent American people of Nigerian descent Georgia (U.S. state) Democrats Georgia (U.S. state) State Senators Howard University School of Law alumni Living people Mayors of Atlanta, Georgia Members of the Georgia House of Representatives People from Fulton County, Georgia People from Plainfield, New Jersey Igbo lawyers Igbo politicians African-American lawyers Government agencies established in 1908 1908 establishments in the United States Espionage in the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation United States intelligence agencies Terrorism Fear Abuse War on Terror Organized crime Violent crime Transportation in Georgia (U.S. state) State departments of transportation of the United States State agencies of Georgia (U.S. state) 1972 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state) Structure Systems Causality Causal inference Conditionals Philosophy of science Concepts in physics Concepts in epistemology Concepts in metaphysics Determinism Philosophy of science Metaphysical theories Randomness Causality Concepts in logic Statements Helicopters Aircraft configurations Italian inventions Articles containing video clips Central business districts in the United States Neighborhoods in Atlanta, Georgia Neighborhoods in Atlanta, Georgia Beverly Hills, California 1914 establishments in California Cities in Los Angeles County, California Communities on U.S. Route 66 Incorporated cities and towns in California Populated places established in 1914 Populated places in the Santa Monica Mountains Westside (Los Angeles County) Waves American graphic designers Living people American illustrators Science fiction artists 1962 births County governing bodies in the United States Legislatures of country subdivisions Public transport Sustainable transport Articles containing video clips Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority Underground rapid transit in the United States Transit authorities with natural gas buses Transportation in Atlanta, Georgia Bus transportation in Georgia (U.S. state) Electric railways in Georgia (U.S. state) Proposed public transportation in Georgia (U.S. state) Intermodal transportation authorities in Georgia (U.S. state) School districts in Georgia (U.S. state) Education in DeKalb County, Georgia Road traffic management Parking Companies based in Kirkland, Washington Southeastern United States Eastern United States Regions of the Southern United States East Coast of the United States Southern United States Alabama Southern United States States and territories established in 1819 States of the Confederate States of America States of the Gulf Coast of the United States States of the United States Virginia States of the United States States of the Mid-Atlantic Southern United States States of the Confederate States of America States of the East Coast of the United States Warehouses Distribution, retailing, and wholesaling Manufacturing Logistics Montgomery, Alabama Capitals of former nations Cities in Alabama Cities in Montgomery County, Alabama County seats in Alabama Montgomery metropolitan area Populated places established in 1816 Charlotte, North Carolina Charlotte metropolitan area Cities in Mecklenburg County, North Carolina Cities in North Carolina County seats in North Carolina Populated places established in 1755 1940 American television series debuts NBC News National Broadcasting Company NBC network shows