 Pig farming Industrial agriculture Animal rights Meat industry  Towns in South Australia Towns in South Australia Bushfires in Australia South Australia States and territories of Australia States and territories established in 1836 Former British colonies Agriculture Towns in South Australia Gravity hills 1997 singles 1997 songs Billboard Dance Club Songs number-one singles Depeche Mode songs Music videos directed by Anton Corbijn Mute Records singles Number-one singles in Denmark Number-one singles in Spain Number-one singles in Sweden Songs written by Martin Gore Collaborative projects Social media Mass media Revolutionary tactics 1978 births Living people Australian male film actors Australian male television actors Australian male soap opera actors Australian television presenters Australian people of Irish descent Place of birth missing (living people) South African emigrants to Australia Cattle Animals described in 1758 Herbivorous animals Articles containing video clips Animal breeding Horse breeding and studs Horse breeds Horse health Dogs Cosmopolitan animals Scavengers Vertebrate animal models Extant Late Pleistocene first appearances  1986 American television series debuts 1988 American television series endings 1980s American television series American drama television series English-language television programming NBC network shows Television series by Warner Bros. Television Soil Land management Horticulture and gardening Granularity of materials Natural materials Natural resources Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP Architectural elements Industrial processes Industrial furnaces Smoke Chimneys Highways in Australia Riverina Highways in New South Wales Highways in South Australia Highways in Victoria (Australia) Towns in South Australia 1966 births People from Cirencester Living people English footballers English expatriate footballers Swindon Town F.C. players Torquay United F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Macclesfield Town F.C. players Northwich Victoria F.C. players Leek Town F.C. players The Football League players Leek Town F.C. managers Nantwich Town F.C. players Northwich Victoria F.C. managers English football managers National League (English football) players Association football midfielders Sportspeople from Gloucestershire One Direction Brit Award winners English boy bands English pop rock music groups English vocal groups Bubblegum pop Columbia Records artists Musical groups established in 2010 Musical groups from London Musical quartets NME Awards winners Syco Music artists Sony/ATV Music Publishing artists Sony BMG artists Vocal quartets The X Factor (UK TV series) contestants Vocal quintets Suburbs of Adelaide Towns in South Australia 1836 establishments in Australia Emergency services in South Australia Fire and Rescue services of Australia 1976 establishments in Australia South Australian Country Fire Service