Sneijder wraps up Galatasaray move
Wesley Sneijder has completed his move from Inter Milan to Galatasary after passing a medical and said his former Inter coach Jose Mourinho and Netherlands boss Louis van Gaal had helped convince him to join.
Sneijder, 28, leaves Inter after three-and-a-half years at the San Siro in which he won the treble under Mourinho in 2009-10.
The €7.5 million deal has been finalised after a protracted transfer process that caused frustration to both Inter and the Turkish club, with Inter boss Andrea Stramaccioni saying on Monday he was glad the "soap opera" was at an end.
Last week, Sneijder had said he did not want to be rushed in to making any decision on his future, with Premier league clubs also thought to be interested in signing him.
But after the deal was finally agreed on Sunday, Galatasaray said: "The conditions of the deal will be made public and the player will sign the contract after health checks."
Sneijder had been frozen out of the Inter squad in a dispute over his salary but told reporters in Turkey that he had left on good terms.
"I am happy to be here," he said. "Before choosing this team I spoke with Van Gaal and Mourinho, and they advised me to accept this offer.
"I also want to thank [Inter President Massimo] Moratti, as our problems were only economic, never personal. I leave Inter on good terms - they allowed me to win everything possible.”
He added: "I can’t wait to wear the Galatasaray shirt. I know that Turkish people are very passionate about football, and I hope to learn Turkish soon.
"I feel in good shape and hope to play in the next match against Besiktas. I heard a lot about coach Fatih Terim, and know his career in Italy well. It will be good to work together."
He has signed a contract until June 2016, and told Dutch newspaper De Telegraaf: "I have no doubt now that Galatasaray are a step forward for me. I will get regular playing time again and will play in a strong league.
"Galatasaray are a beautiful club and I'll have some great team-mates. This is all quite important with the World Cup coming up in 2014.
"Why did I not join one of the top five clubs in Europe? Because I am no longer one of the top five players around, and Inter are not among the five best clubs."
Javier Zanetti, Sneijder’s captain at Inter, wished his old colleague well and told Sky Italia: "He proved at Inter to be a player of value, a great player.
"He’s now made this personal choice and I hope that everything goes as well as he hopes. Good luck to him."