ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Collingwood and St Kilda will go through it all again in a replay after remarkably battling it out for just the third draw in AFL/VFL grand final history at the MCG.
Norm Smith Medallist Lenny Hayes ensured the combatants would return next Saturday when his kick bounced through for a behind in the dying moments, leaving both sets of players bewildered at the final siren in front of 100,016 fans.
The Magpies kicked 9.14 (68) to the Saints' 10.8 (68), meaning both teams will have to wait another week to arrest premiership droughts.
"It's probably going to take this for the AFL to change the rules because it's an absolute joke," Pies skipper Nick Maxwell said.
"There's no way it should be decided after another game.
"Guys come here for a win or loss and that's what we should be leaving with."
St Kilda midfielder Brendon Goddard, edged out by Hayes for best afield, added: "It's just wrecked my holiday plans. It's weird, really strange. It's not too often you come back and fight another war a week later. We're up for it."
The AFL has announced that the replay will take place at 2:30pm (AEST) next Saturday, with tickets to go on sale to members of the competing clubs at 9:00am on Monday.
AFL members will be able to purchase tickets from 9:00am on Tuesday, with any remaining tickets to go on sale to the general public from 9:00am on Wednesday.
In the event of the replay finishing in a draw, five minutes of extra time from each end will be played.
The Saints' only success came in 1966 when they edged the Magpies by a point, and that result eerily presented itself as a real possibility again late in this afternoon's encounter after St Kilda fought back from four goals down at half-time.
The Magpies' 24-point long-change buffer should have been greater but for some more wastefulness in front of the goal, probably the only thing which has blighted an otherwise wonderful season.
Notorious shanker Travis Cloke kicked two goals for the Pies but also missed with four other opportunities, with two of them not even registering a behind, while Dale Thomas spurned a chance he should have taken and rookie Jarryd Blair struck the post.
The Colliwobbles were threatening to rear their ugly head as the Saints took full advantage, ramming home six goals to two in the second half as they drew on the misery of last year's 12-point heartbreak at the hands of Geelong.
Their fight-back was all the more remarkable considering sole ruckman Michael Gardiner was lost to injury in the first half, a selection gamble which appeared to have backfired disastrously for Saints coach Ross Lyon.
After the Saints managed three goals to zip in the third quarter to pull within eight points at the last change, the stage was set for a thrilling climax and both sides delivered.
The much-maligned Leon Davis snapped on the run eight minutes in to put Collingwood clear by 14 points, with youngster Robert Eddy then hitting the post for the Saints in reply.
Hayes however asserted his authority when he marked from outside 50 and pumped it through, with Stephen Milne then marking and slotting home 90 seconds later as St Kilda pulled to within a behind.
A dribbled effort a long way out from Nick Riewoldt was desperately touched on the line by the Pies, only for Goddard to give the Saints the lead for the first time a minute later after taking a flying mark in the goalsquare.
Collingwood had been in front for one hour and 52 minutes and when play shifted to the other end and Cloke again missed, it appeared their race might have been run.
Cloke however atoned when he found himself in space seconds later and slotted home to once again put the Pies in front, only for Hayes to dramatically ensure the replay.
The Magpies had entered the match as the hottest of favourites to win their first flag since 1990, having cruised to the minor premiership before humbling the reigning Cats in last weekend's preliminary final.
Pies ruckman Darren Jolly's goal after just 24 seconds was ominous for St Kilda and after they had kicked seven goals to four by half-time, it was looking like Collingwood fans would be all smiles at the final siren.
Hayes amassed 32 disposals, 12 tackles and a goal while Goddard had 31 touches, five tackles and two majors.
Thomas was Collingwood's best, picking up 26 touches to go with eight marks, eight tackles and a goal.
Hayes finished with 13 Norm Smith votes, ahead of Goddard (seven), Thomas (six), Saints defender Sam Fisher (two) and Maxwell (two).
The last grand final draw was in 1977, between the Pies and North Melbourne, with the Kangaroos going on to prevail easily the following week.
Melbourne beat Essendon in their replay after their initial 1948 encounter ended all square.