Chelsea v Aston Villa: live
FULL TIME Chelsea 8 Aston Villa 0 One of the great Premier League pastings, an absolutely savage evisceration of Paul Lambert's young side by Chelsea. Their attacking trio of Mata, Moses and Hazard poured forward down either flank, exposing Lamber's plan of three centre backs and finding huge gaps where the wingbacks ought to have been. Rafa Benitez was able to call on the talents of Ramires, Piazon and Oscar from the bench, and they simply ran Villa ragged. It had all started with a smashing Torres header, he looked back to something like his best, while Lampard and the impressive Luiz, who both scored, dominated the midfield. Ruthless from Chelsea as they gave Benitez his first home League win. Be interesting to see how Lambert's youngsters bounce back from this. Thanks for following it with us. We'll be back on Boxing Day for further football live bloggery. Have a great Christmas. Cheers.
90 mins: No further pain for Villa as Phil Dowd mercifully pulls the plug.
GOAL! Dear me. After doing so well for the penalty, a poor bit of goalkeeping puts the cherry on the top of a poo sundae for Villa. Ramires bursts down the middle and side-foots a shot. Straight at Guzan, but the keeper flaps at it rather pitifully and the net bulges. Horrible for these young Aston Villa players. The only question now seems to be if Chelsea can get nine? Ramires (89) and it is Chelsea 8 Aston Villa 0
Umkete writes: "Guess Villa didn't count on having to play the brazillian national team today." Chelsea have indeed been marvellous.
87 mins: Clark brings down Piazon. Stone cold penalty. Piazon himself to take it.. but Guzan saves! It was a really good diving stop with the right hand.
Marc Melander: "The Mayans would have been met with less derision if they had forecast that one day the Chelsea (est 2003) fans would sing their Interim Manager's name. I can actually predict that the first time his name will be sung is on 20th April 2013 by the home fans. As that's when Chelsea play Liverpool at Anfield."
84 mins: Have Chelsea got more punishment for Villa? The problem for Villa is these substitutes - all with something to prove. Nimble little blighters, taking advantage of a tired and disorientated Villa backline.
GOAL! Great play from Hazard, tricking and dummying and nipping around Villa defenders from the right hand corner of the box, fashioning himself enough space for an unstoppable shot. This has been an awesome offensive display from Chelsea. (Hazard 83) and it's Chelsea 7 Aston Villa 0
82 mins: No incidents for a few minutes as Chelsea play the ball about in their own half.
78 mins: It's a crowd scene in the Villa area. Chris Herd grabs Oscar very lightly, the Brazillian makes the best of it and then gets up to take the penalty kick.....
GOAL! ..... Which he lashes into the roof of the net. Oscar (79 pen) and it is Chelsea 6 Aston Villa 0
GOAL! Piazon has only been on the pitch for a few seconds when he runs from deep and plays a lovely pass, perfectly waited, and Ramires clips a shot through the legs of keeper Guzan. Ramires (75) and it is Chelsea 5 Aston Villa 0
73 mins: Mata comes off to give Lucas Piazon his league debut. Been a fun afternoon for Mata, he has had the freedom of Stamford Bridge.
72 mins: Baker checks Azpilicueta in the area but, at 4-0 up, nobody is that bothered for the penalty.
Umkete asks: "Where has sturridge gone wrong? didn't even make the subs bench today" He's being sold to Liverpool, isn't he?
69 mins: Yet another Chelsea attack as they pour forward down the left. No sense that they are letting up yet.
67 mins: Oscar is still hunting his first Premier League goal, and it is hard to see him getting a simpler chance than that, as Moses slips him the ball after a powerful run. He drills it wide from 12 yards.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Paul Hayward - Torres looked peeved to be taken off on 66 mins. It's 4-0 so it makes sense but he was playing so well he probably fancied a few more goals.&lt;/noframe&gt;
65 mins: That's the end of Torres' afternoon, he comes off in favour of Oscar.
63 mins: Ireland slips the ball to the right, and a good drilled shot from Weimann is well saved by Cech. Shades of off-side maybe.
62 mins: Torres making life a misery for the three Villa centre halves and only a stumbled miscontrol denies him.
61 mins: Villa in danger of going to pieces. Guzan clears and Moses closes down the full-back Bennett, pinches it and slips it inside to Hazard who might have done better with a shot.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Matt Holland - I can't believe Chelsea haven't offered Frank Lampard a new deal yet. Top pro with so much still to offer.&lt;/noframe&gt;
60 mins: Lampard is coming off to a rousing cheer. Ramires on. Terry congratulates his long-term comrade.
GOAL! Frank Lampard! 500 appearances for Chelsea, and now he is their highest scorer in the top flight, thanks to a drilled shot from the outside of the box. Lampard (58) makes it Chelsea 4 Aston Villa 0.
57 mins: Torres has the ball in the net but it is offside.
56 mins: Two subs for Villa as Ireland and Bennett come on. Westwood and Lichaj the men to make way.
55 mins: Torres is free in the inside left channel, just breaking towards the edge of the six yard box. Because he cannot kick it with his left foot, he tries an elaborate reverse passy crossy over foot thing and the moment passes.
54 mins: But Chelsea break right down the other end and Mata very nearly slips it to Torres.
53 mins: Rare bright spot for Villa as Lowton gets to the byline down the right before drilling it across for Benteke. Cahill with a good saving tackle after Ivanovic nearly turns the ball into his own net.
51 mins: Deep corner and the ball drops to Lampard on the edge of the box. He shows good technique to keep the ball down but it is easy for the keeper. The following tweet is not related to this match but is worthy of your consderation.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Nicklas Bendtner - first time I have spend 7 days in bed without getting off&lt;/noframe&gt;
49 mins: Brilliant save from Guzan! The ball is cut back to Mata from the right as he bursts into the area. He looks odds-on to score but Guzan tips it over.
48 mins: Just checking that Villa have, in fact, got eleven players as Chelsea run them around like big blue bullies. Benteke is caught outside for the 123907th time.
46 mins: Villa kick off. Early dangers again as Torres finds some space all too easily onto a Mata ball and Villa have to clear it behind for a corner.
17.00 The players are back out, although I should imagine Aston Villa would have been happy for it to be called off after 45 minutes. Let's see if there is any way back for them....
HT: Chelsea 3 Aston Villa 0 Only one team in it, to be honest, as Chelsea looked dangerous on both flanks, classy finish from Torres and a belting freekick from the impressive Luiz, who has bossed it in midfield. Chelsea have been rock solid at the back, and Aston Villa have never looked remotely like getting into it. Going to need a minor miracle from Paul Lambert to turn it around from here.
45 mins: The half ends with Chelsea making another dangerous attack, this time Mata and Hazard down the left, but it peters out and the half time whistle brings temporary respite for Aston Villa.
43 mins: Bannan tries a through ball but there just doesn't seem to be any space at all for Villa. Chelsea squeezing them all over the pitch.
40 mins: Long clearance and just for a second it looks like Mata might get onto this before Guzan... no, the goalie gets it to safety.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: OptaJoe - 5 - Of the 5 defenders to score 5+ PL goals since the start of last season, 3 play for Chelsea (Ivanovic 7, Terry 7, Cahill 5). Versatile.&lt;/noframe&gt;
39 mins: Benteke cutting a lonely, frustrated figure as he again gets himself caught offside when Villa had a decent attack going.
38 mins: Mata and Lampard link up as Frank dinks a ball through the defence but the linesman's flag puts an end to the fun.
36 mins: The dominant Luiz has a run in from the right, cutting inside, and then he unleashes a swerving shot. Guzan gathers it.
GOAL! The ball is hit across the goal from the Chelsea right. Cahill does well to keep the ball alive, swivels and drills in a shot, and it's parried straight into the path of Ivanovic, who keeps his composure to head into the gaping net with the goalie struggling. Ivanovic (34) it is Chelsea 3 Aston Villa 0 and this has all the hallmarks of a cricket score unless Villa can get a handle on things pronto.
32 mins: Warm applause for Lampard as he goes across to take a couple of corners. Scarcely credible that Chelsea are underusing him so much, still an excellent player.
29 mins: Chelsea have another freekick, this one perhaps 32 yards out. Mata hits it but nothing doing. That Luiz freekick would have pleased C Ronaldo himself.
GOAL! Brilliant freekick! Luiz! The Brazillian caps an extremely impressive midfield display so far with a super freekick, hit with terrific dip and power from the centre of the park, perhaps 25 yards out. Top class. Luiz (28) and it is Chelsea 2 Aston Villa 0
27 mins: Herd chops down Hazard on the edge of the box and Chelsea have a chance to line one up.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Paul Hayward - Azpilicueta has been a good signing for Chelsea. Impressive crossing again from right-back. Confident and quick across the ground.&lt;/noframe&gt;
25 mins: Raking ball forward from the Villa but Benteke does not time his run too well. Ashley Cole has just given referee Phil Dowd some tablets! Like, pills. Not the Ten Commandments.
24 mins: Chelsea are knocking it about nicely. What can Villa do to get a toehold in the game?
21 mins: A period of possession for Chelsea, they are giving Aston Villa a bit of a going-over here so far. No clear chances since the goal, in fairness, but the home side looking considerably more powerful and dangerous.
20 mins: Luiz tries a long shot but it is charged down. Cole's ball into the area sees Baker manhandle Torres in the area but the penalty shouts are muted.
19 mins: And now it's Aston Villa's turn for a time-sensitive chant, the 19th minute tribute to Stiliyan Petrov.
18 mins: Luiz barnstorms forward and Moses nearly manages to wriggle down the right and deliver the cross.
Shane O'Leary says: "Just woke from a power nap and my, how things have changed. Britain is pulling at the euro-leash, it's quite rainy and Torres is scoring goals for Benitez."
16 mins: Chelsea fans sing their De Matteo song, because he used to be number 16. "I'm bored of this now," says Gary Neville. "They might not like him (Rafa) but they just have to get on with it now, I think."
14 mins: Good attack from Villa now, they have a spell of the ball 30 yards from the Chelsea goal with Holman prominent. Chelsea have their defence massed back, though, and eventually a hopeful ball for Benteke goes wild.
12 mins: Some good defensive work from Luiz (honest) as he tracks back well from centre midfield to help out an out-of-position Ivanovic and shepherd a Villa attack into touch. Perhaps that central midfield role will be the making of the boy.
11 mins: Signs of nerves from Villa as Westwood tries to slip it through to Lowton but finds that his colleague down the right had failed to make the run.
10 mins: A good run from Holman down the Villa left leads to a corner, but it is hit too high over the area.
8 mins: Villa allow Moses too much time to steady himself and whip a dangeorous ball across from the right. It just evades his Chelsea colleagues.
6 mins: Chelsea are looking to hit early balls for Torres to run onto.
5 mins: Quiet couple of minutes since the goal, Chelsea happy to play it about, Villa trying to find their feet. Average age of the Villa outfield players is under 23 and a half, so this is a big test.
3 mins: So what a start that was from Chelsea. Wonderful header from Torres, a great leap as the ball came across him, power and placement to bury it from a good way out. Guzan had no chance.
GOAL! Goal machine Fernando Torres is at it again! Good build up play from Chelsea and Azpilicueta slings it in from the right. Torres leaps and deflects a really excellent header home. Villa centre half Clark was rooted to the floor. Torres (3) and it is Chelsea 1 Villa 0
2 mins: Lampard drills the freekick at the wall and it is cleared.
1 mins: First Chelsea attack is a long ball and Torres is fouled by Herd. Torre has his first hurt and disappointed face of the day.
16.00 It will be Chelsea to kick off.
15.55 Over in the other game today, don't know if you saw it, but Williams of Swansea kicked the ball at Van Persie of United as the latter lay prone on the pitch after a challenge. Sir Alex Ferguson: "The lad could have been killed. It was the most dangerous thing I have seen on a football pitch."
Marko Marjanovic: "This season like the last, 2 contenders from Manchester, 3rd place battle between Chelsea and Arsenal, 4th place will be the best fight this season with Tottenham, Everton and West Brom. West Brom plays great at home, Everton fans finally have something to cheer about, all thenks to their coach i believe."
15.50 In the six games Terry and Lampard have played together this season, Chelsea have 13 points. In the five they haven't, three points. Good dad's army stuff then. It looks like Luiz will play in the centre of the pitch today for the Blues.
15.45 So it's a return to the XI for Lampard. He starts a Barclays Premier League match for the first time since early October.
Victor Moses once again gets selected ahead of Oscar for the clash at Stamford Bridge, while the returning Ramires has to be content with a place on the bench.
Unsurprisingly Aston Villa are unchanged from the side which beat Liverpool 3-1, although Stephen Ireland is fit to be named among the substitutes after missing their last match through illness.
Ron Vlaar and striker Gabriel Agbonlahor fail to recover from calf and thigh problems respectively.
15.40 And here comes the team news.
15.35 Here is Jason Burt with a view on Paul Lambert, Randy Lerner and the progress being made at Aston Villa.
There is a revolution, a bold gamble, going on at Aston Villa where the owner, Randy Lerner, has finally hired a manager who has bought into his vision of how to sustain the club.
15.30 Good afternoon all and welcome to our live blog of Villa against Chelsea. After some pretty dispiriting years, there are some exciting things happening at Villa Park, and visits to a classy but creaky Cheslea are exactly sort of games in which we can measure the progress of Paul Lambert's young side.
Here's the match preview from our man John Ley.
TV: Live Sky Sports 1, Highlights, BBC ONE Match of the Day2.
Team News: Rafael Benítez has admitted he could not guarantee John Terry would be fit for Chelsea's Christmas fixtures.
Terry's recovery from knee surgery is proving more problematic than first thought and he will definitely miss Sunday's Premier League game against Aston Villa.
Ramires, John Obi Mikel and Gary Cahill all return from suspension, Daniel Sturridge is available for selection after his hamstring injury, but Ryan Bertrand is doubtful after being forced off in Wednesday's Capital One Cup quarter-final at Leeds.
Meanwhile, Aston Villa midfielder Stephen Ireland is available.
The Republic of Ireland international missed the 3-1 win over Liverpool at Anfield last weekend through illness.
But skipper and central defender Ron Vlaar and striker Gabriel Agbonlahor remain major doubts with calf and thigh problems respectively.
Match Notes: Chelsea showed few signs of fatigue from their trip to Japan for the Club World Cup in dispatching Leeds United on Wednesday night but Aston Villa will provide a far sterner test of their squad’s depth and recovery.
Villa go into the match unbeaten in six matches, reaching their peak with the surprise 3-1 defeat of Liverpool last week and look well capable of inflicting another dent to Chelsea’s fading title hopes.
Stat of the game: There have been 56 goals scored between these teams in 20 Premier League meetings at Stamford Bridge.