US Senate condemns Paris attacks
PARIS (AP) — The latest on the deadly attacks in Paris. (All times local):
The U.S. Senate has passed a resolution condemning Friday's attacks in Paris and pledging to stand in solidarity with France.
The resolution approved Monday also pledges to help France "pursue justice against those involved in these heinous attacks."
The resolution was authored by Sens. Bob Corker of Tennessee and Ben Cardin of Maryland, the Republican chairman and the top Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. It was co-sponsored by all 100 members of the Senate.
Earlier Monday, the U.S. House of Representatives observed a moment of silence in memory of those killed in the attacks.
Belgium has called off Tuesday's friendly against Spain because of security concerns.
The Belgian football federation says the decision was taken late Monday after the government recommended that the game not be played.
France has identified a 27-year-old Belgian as the mastermind of the Paris attacks that killed 129 people on Friday.
France's ambassador to the United States says authorities have yet to identify 15 victims of the Paris attacks.
French President Francois Hollande said earlier that the dead included people of 19 nationalities.
At least 129 people were killed in Friday night's coordinated attacks.
The U.N. Security Council has held a minute of silence for the victims of the attacks in Paris and elsewhere in the world.
A spokesman for France's mission to the U.N. told reporters that the pause was dedicated to "every victim of terrorism."
Britain's international development secretary, Justine Greening, opened the meeting by expressing "our profound sadness and deep outrage."
She spoke of Paris and also mentioned last week's suicide bombing last week in Beirut, where at least 43 people were killed a day before the Paris attacks.
Environmental activists say they want to go ahead with plans to march in Paris before the U.N. climate summit later this month despite the attacks in the French capital.
A coalition of activist groups including Avaaz, Greenpeace and 350.org said Monday they intend to "hold all the mobilizations currently planned," including a march set for Nov. 29, the day before the conference begins.
Demonstrations have been banned in France after a state of emergency was declared following the attacks that killed 129 people on Friday.
Nicolas Haeringer of 350.org said the activists would discuss with French authorities how to move forward, saying "we can think of few better responses to violence and terror than this movement's push for peace and hope."
The TNT network isn't airing an episode of its drama "Legends" on Monday because it depicts an extremist shooting into a crowd in Paris.
The U.S. network said Monday it will instead air a rerun of "Legends" that was originally shown a few weeks ago.
TNT isn't the only U.S. network to shuffle its schedule because of sensitivity surrounding the attacks last Friday. CBS said it was replacing episodes of the Monday prime-time dramas "Supergirl" and "NCIS: Los Angeles." The "NCIS" episode concerned Islamic State recruitment of women, and the "Supergirl" episode was supposed to deal with a bombing.
"Legends" is in its second season on TNT.
Showtime aired a new episode of "Homeland," its drama that involved fighting Middle East extremism, on Sunday with a printed message beforehand that warned viewers that the show may contain disturbing content in the context of the Paris attacks.
"We extend our deepest sympathies to all touched by the Paris attacks," Showtime said in the message.
U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry has arrived in Paris to show American solidarity with France after Friday's attacks in Paris that left at least 129 dead.
Kerry landed in the French capital on Monday under unusual security precautions that precluded journalists accompanying him from reporting his planned visit — believed to be the first such restriction for a secretary of state's travel to a European capital.
U.S. State Department spokesman John Kirby said Kerry will meet and thank U.S. Embassy staffers and hold talks with French officials.
Kirby said Kerry will reiterate Washington's commitment to the strong U.S.-France relationship, express condolences to the victims of the attacks and reiterate the shared resolve to counter violent extremism in France and elsewhere.
A hoteliers' union says reservations at Paris' top hotels have fallen by 50 percent in the wake of the attacks that rocked the French capital.
Charlotte Le Moniet, a spokeswoman for France's hoteliers' union, said Monday that reservations had been canceled across the board after the attacks, which rattled tourists before the busy Christmas season.
"The same thing happened after Charlie Hebdo," she said, referring to the attack on the satirical weekly in January, saying it took a month or two for reservations to return to normal.
Le Moniet, whose union also represents restaurants and cafes, said its members would weather the blow.
The proprietors of Paris' Bataclan concert hall, where 89 people died on Friday, say no words can express their sorrow.
They said in a statement on Twitter that the authorities were still carrying out work in the building and they didn't know when the venue would be able to reopen.
They said their thoughts were with the victims, the injured and their loved ones and thanked people for their support, "which has touched us deeply."
Gunmen stormed the longstanding rock venue in Paris' 11th arrondissement Friday during a concert by American band Eagles of Death Metal, firing on the crowd and killing dozens.
The area around the theater is now heaped with flowers, cards and tributes to the dead.
Offering condolences and prayers, U.S. first lady Michelle Obama says the nation must continue to keep the victims and families of the Paris attacks in their thoughts and hearts.
The first lady echoed the words of the president, saying the attack was not just on France, a "dear friend and ally, but on all humanity and our shared values."
Mrs. Obama made the remarks as she welcomed more than 40 students Monday to the White House for arts and theater workshops. She said the young people are a reflection of those values, including their passion and creativity.
American basketball player Shawn James has not traveled with his Spanish club to play a game in France because of security concerns following the terrorist attacks in Paris.
Club Dominion Bilbao Basket said Monday that James and his family were worried about his safety and the center decided not to make the trip for Tuesday's game in Nanterre, west of Paris.
Coach Sito Alonso said the club respected James' decision and was not in a position to oblige the player to travel along with the rest of his teammates.
Club officials said they tried to postpone the game because of safety concerns but their request was denied by Eurocup officials.
The 32-year-old James was one of the Duquesne players targeted in the 2006 shootings at the university's campus. He previously played in Israel.
France's U.N. ambassador says he is working on the timing of a U.N. Security Council meeting and the content of a resolution on the fight against terrorism.
Francois Delattre told reporters he was following up on French President Francois Hollande's announcement that France would urge the U.N.'s most powerful body to take action following the Paris attacks.
A council resolution adopted immediately after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States demanded that all 193 U.N. member states adopt national laws to combat terrorism.
The council has also adopted resolutions against the recruitment and financing of foreign fighters supporting "terrorist groups."
The council on Friday condemned "the barbaric and cowardly terrorist attacks" in Paris in the strongest terms and called for the perpetrators to be brought to justice.
British tennis player Andy Murray says the Paris attacks are a "terrible, terrible tragedy" and he thinks the best course of action is to "live our normal lives."
Murray won his opening match at the season-ending ATP finals on Monday. He was asked about the attacks in Paris after the match.
He says "all of sport really has shown that it's a terrible, terrible tragedy. Obviously everyone was very upset by it. But it's not something I would say I know enough about to really give a fair comment on."
After the ATP tournament, Murray will play for Britain in the Davis Cup final against Belgium from Nov. 27-29 in Gent.
Murray says he is not afraid to go to Belgium despite the links of the Paris attacks to Brussels.
He says "I think everybody right now is concerned about things. But I do think the best thing that we can do is to live our normal lives, not change too much, because then the terrorists are the ones that are winning."
The Eiffel Tower, which dimmed its lights in mourning following Friday's attacks in Paris, has been relit in blue, white and red.
The 116-year-old international symbol of Paris will remain lit up in the colors of the French flag for three nights. Monuments around the world have done the same in recent days in a show of sympathy with Paris, including the Sydney Opera House, Berlin's Brandenburg Gate and Rio de Janeiro's Christ the Redeemer statue.
After the relighting, Paris' motto "Fluctuat nec mergitur" or "Tossed but not sunk." was to be projected onto the 300-meter (986-foot) monument visible across the French capital.
The army says it is stepping up security to increase protection of some military sites and installations in the Czech capital, Prague, following the terror attacks in Paris.
The general staff says in a statement Monday soldiers will be deployed outside the sites that have not been identified and in the surrounding public areas.
Authorities increased security at the country's international airports, major shopping centers, the French embassy and other sites shortly after the attacks.
The captain of France's national soccer team says the players had some concerns about playing England in a friendly match, four days after the Paris attacks, but were told they had to by the president of the football federation.
"Like all my teammates, we respect this decision and it will be a good opportunity to represent the national team," Hugo Lloris said at Wembley Stadium, where the game will take place on Tuesday. "The French nation is more important than French football team."
Lloris says the members of the France squad have been holed up at the team's training base in Clairefontaine and unable to see their families since the attacks on Friday that killed 129 people.
"Of course we are human. We would have liked to spend time with our nearest and dearest " Lloris said. "But we have not been cut off from the world. We have kept up to date with what's happening through the Internet."
Lloris says "tomorrow will be a great moment of solidarity — the last three days have been dramatic and I think we were in mourning all together."
Kensington Palace officials have announced that Prince William will attend Tuesday's friendly match in London between England and France amid heightened security following the Paris attacks.
Police have announced extra security will be in place for the game at Wembley Stadium. A similar friendly match between Germany and France was the subject of an attack in Paris Friday night when suicide bombs were set off near the stadium.
London police said in a statement Monday that security plans have been reviewed "in light of the tragic events in Paris."
It said that "extra, highly-visible armed officers" will be patrolling around Wembley Stadium.
The statement said the plans are precautionary and not the result of any specific threats.
The Islamic State group has released a video showing one its fighters in Iraq vowing to attack Washington the way Paris was attacked last week.
The nearly 12-minute video shows unidentified fighters praising Friday's attacks in Paris, which killed 129 people, and calling on Muslims in France to "ignite and kill soldiers and tyrants."
One fighter says Muslims should strike in the West because the U.S.-led coalition is targeting IS in Iraq.
Another fighter warned nations that are taking part in the "Crusaders' campaign," saying that as "we struck France on its ground in Paris we will strike America on its ground in Washington."
One of the three brothers who have been linked to the Paris attacks has said upon his release from detention in Brussels that he and his family "are moved by what happened" in Paris and "could never have believed that one of our brothers was involved."
After his weekend detention, Mohamed Abdeslam was released Monday and spoke to reporters about his brother Brahim who died during a suicide attack Friday and his other brother Salah who is a fugitive.
"We don't know where he is at the moment," he said of Salah. "We don't know, because of the current tensions, if he will dare to turn himself in to the justice," Mohamed told reporters.
He said that because of the events "my parents are in shock and don't realize what happened."
NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg says the 28-nation political and military alliance will work even more closely with other countries "to fight extremism and terrorism."
Without announcing any new concrete actions, he said Monday that "we must stand vigilant, determined and united."
Stoltenberg spoke during the annual conference of the European Defense Agency in Brussels. Earlier in the day, employees at NATO headquarters honored the victims of last Friday's terror attacks in Paris with a minute's silence.
French President Francois Hollande wants the constitution changed so that the government can revoke the citizenship of convicted terrorists born in France who have dual nationality.
Hollande said Monday in a rare joint session of parliament at the Palace of Versailles that "we must be able to revoke the French citizenship of a person convicted for threatening the nations' interest or for terrorist acts."
Under current French law, citizenship revocation can only be applied to people who have been naturalized, if they have dual nationality.
Norwegian police say they have postponed a decision to go unarmed following the Paris attacks and will carry guns until next month.
Kaare Songstad, director of safety and security at the National Police Directorate, said Monday that following the carnage in Paris, "the most important thing we can do is obtain the best possible overview of the situation internationally and nationally" by cooperating with all the various police departments.
Norwegian police, who have traditionally patrolled streets unarmed, had been carrying weapons for about a year as a temporary measure after the country's security service raised the terror alert level. After the level was downgraded, police announced last week that there were no grounds to continue the temporary measure and would lay down their arms this week.
Germany's Foreign Ministry says a second German citizen has been identified among those killed in Friday's Paris attacks.
The statement Monday provided no further details on the man's identity.
A video released by the Islamic State group shows fighters praising last week's deadly attacks in Paris and urging Muslims to carry out similar acts.
A fighter who appears in the video released Monday, which was filmed in the northern Iraqi province of Kirkuk, calls on Muslims all over the world, especially in France, to "intensify their attacks against Crusaders."
Another fighter says "we congratulate the oppressed Muslims worldwide for this sacred act that our brothers carried out against the enemies of religion."
The unidentified fighters say members of the U.S.-led coalition carrying out airstrikes against the Islamic State group "will not enjoy peace and security until Muslims live" safely.
IS claimed the attacks in Paris on Friday that killed 129 people.
French President Francois Hollande says the Paris attacks targeted "youth in all its diversity" and that the victims were of 19 different nationalities.
Speaking in a special joint session of parliament at the Palace of Versailles, Hollande said the attackers targeted "the France that likes life, culture, sports, parties."
The English Football Association says there will more security checks, a greater presence of armed police and a slower entrance procedure for Tuesday's soccer friendly match between England and France at London's Wembley Stadium, which is being played four days after the Paris attacks.
"The match tomorrow is going to have massive global significance," FA chief executive Martin Glenn said. "It's the first big event to happen since the tragedy of last Friday ... the eyes of the world will be on Wembley tomorrow, not just the eyes of the French and English people."
Glenn said it was important for the French and English teams to play and show solidarity, "to demonstrate that terrorism won't win."
England captain Wayne Rooney said he and his teammates had no concerns about playing the game.
"I think the world of football has to stay strong together," Rooney said. "I'm sure everyone will do that and try to deal with the situation to the best everyone knows how to do. I'm sure football will bring people together."
France's president says a bill to extend the country's state of emergency for three months will be presented to parliament on Wednesday.
Francois Hollande declared a state of emergency following Friday night's attacks across the capital and at the Stade de France. Parliament must approve extending it.
The state of emergency extends some police powers of search and arrest and limits public gatherings, among other changes.
French President Francois Hollande says he will meet with U.S. and Russian leaders to discuss pooling their efforts to destroy the Islamic State group.
Hollande, speaking at a special joint meeting of the upper and lower houses of parliament in the Palace of Versailles, said he had requested meetings with Presidents Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin.
Hollande said he wanted the talks "to unify our strength and achieve a result that has been too long in coming." Hollande called for "a union of all who can fight this terrorist army in a single coalition."
He didn't specify if he'd meet Obama and Putin together or separately.
President Barack Obama says that the U.S. had no intelligence information ahead of the Paris attacks that killed 129 people last week that would have given a clue that an attack was imminent.
Speaking at a news conference at the Group of 20 leading economies summit in Antalya, Turkey, Obama said that the U.S. is constantly sharing intelligence with European allies about the Islamic State group and other extremist threats, but had no useful information before the Paris attacks.
He said: "I am not aware of anything that was specific."
In light of the Paris attacks, a key figure in Poland's Roman Catholic Church has expressed concern about security at next summer's meeting of youth with Pope Francis in Poland.
The archbishop of Krakow, Cardinal Stanislaw Dziwisz, said Monday the church leaders are "worried because the events in Paris have shown that peace, security in Europe are threatened."
More than 2 million young Catholics from around the world are expected to take part in World Youth Day with the pope in Krakow July 25-31.
Dziwisz said he hopes that Europe and the U.S. have "enough strength" to jointly ensure security to make "Europe and Poland feel safe, and to allow Youth Day" and the Euro 2016 soccer championship in France to be held in "safety and peace, which Europe deserves."
French President Francois Hollande is addressing parliament about France's response to the Paris attacks, in a rare speech to lawmakers gathered in the majestic congress room of the Palace of Versailles.
Hollande, in Monday's speech, is especially expected to evoke France's military operations in Syria and domestic security measures.
The last time a French president made a speech in front of both houses of Parliament in Versailles was in 2009, when Nicolas Sarkozy addressed the global financial crisis.
Suspended UEFA president Michel Platini has observed a minute of silence in honor of the victims of the Paris attacks in a ceremony at the headquarters of European soccer's governing body.
Platini's legal team has told The Associated Press that the Frenchman was so affected by the string of attacks in Paris that killed at least 129 people that "it was impossible for him not to attend" the ceremony on Monday in Nyon, Switzerland.
Platini's decision is a potential breach of the ban preventing him from entering UEFA's headquarters.
Platini has been suspended from all soccer activities for 90 days over a 2011 payment from FIFA.
UEFA said earlier that all teams playing in European internationals this week will wear black armbands, with a minute of silence held before kickoff in honor of those killed in Paris.
The Eiffel Tower, which dimmed its lights in mourning following Friday's attacks in Paris, will be relit in red, white and blue.
The 116-year-old international symbol of Paris will light up in the colors of the French flag at 1800 GMT (1 p.m. EST) Monday. Monuments around the world have done the same in recent days in a show of sympathy with Paris, including the Sydney Opera House, Berlin's Brandenburg Gate and Rio de Janeiro's Christ the Redeemer statue.
After the relighting, Paris' motto "Fluctuat nec mergitur" or "Tossed but not sunk." will be projected onto the 300-meter (986-foot) monument visible across the French capital.
A Turkish security official says authorities have arrested more than half a dozen suspected Islamic State militants who had exchanged messages with the militants in Paris who conducted the deadly attacks across the city.
The official said that the militants were planning a similar attack in Istanbul.
The security official said Monday that the suspects included a man they believe is associated with Mohammed Emwazi, the Islamic State militant known as "Jihadi John."
The official spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly on the investigation.
Belgium's federal prosecutor's office says that five of the seven people who were detained over the weekend because of possible links to the Paris attacks have been released.
Two others have been changed with being part of a terror group and links to a terror attack, the office said in a statement.
The office also said that a major police operation in Molenbeek during much of Monday failed to yield any arrests related to the Paris attacks.
The director of the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency says the United States has not underestimated the threat posed by the Islamic State group.
John Brennan said Monday the success by the United States and its coalition countries in containing the group's momentum inside Iraq and Syria is "why I think they are looking abroad" to make attacks.
Asked whether the U.S. had underestimated the threat, Brennan said, "I don't think we are underestimating the capability of ISIL," using an alternate name for the group.
He told an audience at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank, that while it was "inevitable" that the Islamic State will try to carry out such attacks, "to me it is not inevitable that they are going to succeed."
Czech authorities say they are planning to boost security in the capital on Tuesday, the anniversary of the 1989 anti-communist Velvet Revolution.
Prime Minister Bohuslav Sobotka says the presence of extra force in the streets of Prague is meant as precaution.
Interior Minister Milan Chovanec says authorities have information some unspecified extremist group might misuse the national holiday but did not give any details.
Chovanec says: "We're ready to show that police is ready to protect the citizens."
Police also say in a statement they plan an increased presence also in other major cities across the country and that the decision is a reaction to the Paris attacks.
German authorities are investigating claims that an Algerian man warned fellow migrants last week of an imminent attack in Paris.
A spokesman for prosecutors in Arnsberg says the unidentified 39-year-old was detained at a refugee shelter in the western German town, after two Syrian men contacted police Saturday.
Werner Wolff confirmed Monday a report by public broadcaster WDR that the man had told the Syrians that Paris would be subjected to "fear and terror."
New York Police Commissioner William Bratton says his department is operating as though attacks like those in Paris could happen in New York City.
Bratton said Monday on MSNBC's "Morning Joe" that his force has beefed up security and staffing, including at the French consulate, France's mission to the United Nations and Times Square.
Bratton says the Paris attackers' use of suicide vests is of particular concern, and officers are trying to learn more about the capability and types of arms used in the vests. He says New York police team will go to Paris this week.
A local official says the massive police operation in the Brussels neighborhood of Molenbeek has ended and that no one was injured.
Mayor Francoise Schepmans said Monday that the operation ended after more than three hours. It was unclear whether there was a major arrest during the operation which centered on a suspect in the Paris attacks.
Two small explosions were heard and dozens of masked and heavily armed security officials had sealed off the area and neighbors were told to stay out of harm's way.
Police arrested three suspects in the impoverished Brussels neighborhood on Saturday and continued house searches.
Activists say French airstrikes on the northern Syrian city of Raqqa did not kill civilians and only hit military targets in the Islamic State group's de facto capital.
Rami Abdurrahman, who heads the Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, said Monday the French targeted military facilities on the northern and southern edges of the city.
He says there are casualties among IS but did not provide numbers.
Sarmad al-Jilane, of the Raqqa-based collective called Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently, said the city is tense, with few people venturing out even though markets are open.
France's Defense Ministry said 12 aircraft dropped a total of 20 bombs Sunday night in the biggest air strikes since France extended its bombing campaign against the extremist group to Syria in September.
The lawyer for Mohammad Abdeslam, one of the brothers of a dead suicide bomber in the Paris attacks, has been released after he had been detained over the weekend. Another brother, Salah Abdeslam, is the object of a massive manhunt.
Brahim Abdeslam died when he detonated his suicide vest on Friday.
Mohamed Abdeslam's lawyer, Nathalie Gallant, told the RTL network that her client "hadn't made the same life choices."
A French police union is calling for the Molenbeek neighborhood of Brussels, which authorities consider a focal point for extremists and fighters, to come under EU security control, saying the government has ceded the area to the Islamic State group.
The neighborhood, which police raided Monday in a sweep for the fugitive Frenchman suspected in the Paris attacks, was home to the Belgian Islamic State jihadi believed to be behind the attacks and two other thwarted attempts.
The France Police union said Belgium's national institutions failed and demanded "necessary measures to protect the Belgian and European populations from terrorism." The EU has no provisions for the demand, which appeared to be largely a sign of frustration with what some are calling a massive security failure.
Police were standing guard outside the two major French elementary and high schools in Dublin, Ireland's capital, on Monday. Both schools asked parents to ensure that their children went straight inside to classrooms, not linger outside at the entrance or in playgrounds.
They also said parents seeking to enter the schools would have to identify themselves to security staff and give the reason for their visit.
"There is no particular concern in Ireland, but we must be vigilant," school directors said in a message to parents and the school's approximately 500 pupils, thanking them "for your understanding, your help and your solidarity."
Two small explosions were heard during a major police action in the Brussels neighborhood of Molenbeek amid a manhunt for a suspect in the Paris attacks. Dozens of masked and heavily armed security officials had sealed off the area and neighbors were told to stay out of harm's way.
Police refused to provide any details about who may have set off the explosions or the purpose for them.
Two hours into the siege a first explosion was heard and a similar followed it one hour later on a higher floor of a building with special security forces close by on roofs.
Police arrested three suspects in the impoverished Brussels neighborhood on Saturday and continued house searches. The special action began early Monday.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel and British Prime Minister David Cameron joined French Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius and other European leaders at a G-20 summit for a minute of silence in honor of the 129 victims Paris attacks.
Standing between the French and the European Union flags, the leaders stood in silence at 1100GMT Monday, at the same time as French President Francois Hollande observed a minute of silence to along with schoolchildren and bystanders in Paris.
Black ribbons were tied around the French and EU flags in a mark of mourning. The leaders were seen hugging Fabius at the end of ceremony.
G-20 leaders are meeting on the sidelines of the summit at the Turkish seaside resort of Antalya to discuss next steps in Syria and the Islamic State campaign
A Russian official has revealed a possible plot ahead of the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, saying female suicide bombers had planned to smuggle explosives onto an aircraft in hand cream.
Deputy Foreign Minister Oleg Syromolotov, who has responsibility for counter-terrorism, said the women were detained in Austria and France.
The head of Russia's FSB security services said in July that many countries had helped to prevent an array of attacks at the Olympics — primarily Austria, France, Germany, Georgia and the U.S. — but no details were given.
The Sochi Games were held amid high concern that insurgents from nearby restive Caucasus republics including Chechnya were planning attacks.
Syromolotov, whose comments were carried by Russian news agencies, spoke Monday before the upper house of Russia's parliament.
The French president, schoolchildren, bystanders have held a minute of silence to honor the 129 people killed in the country's worst attacks in decades.
President Francois Hollande stood in a crowd of students from Paris' Sorbonne university, some with their heads bowed, others looking up defiantly.
Crowds gathered at a makeshift monument at Republique Plaza in a neighborhood targeted by the attacks, where a banner reads "Can't Scare Us."
Schools and businesses across the country also held a moment of silence.
Prime Minister David Cameron says seven terror attacks have been foiled in Britain the past six months.
Cameron, speaking on the BBC on Monday, said attacks directed at civilian targets "was the sort of thing we warned about" and that authorities would determine whether further steps are needed to thwart such atrocities.
Cameron announced earlier that his government is doubling spending on aviation security and is recruiting some 1,900 security and intelligence agents.
French Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve says 168 locations across France have been raided overnight, and 104 people have been placed under house arrest in the past 48 hours.
Cazeneuve said Monday: "It's just a start, these operations are going to continue, the response of the Republic will be huge, will be total. The one who targets the Republic, the Republic will catch him, will be implacable."
A major action with heavily armed police is underway in the Brussels neighborhood of Molenbeek amid a manhunt for a suspect of the Paris attacks.
Police arrested three suspects in the impoverished Brussels neighborhood on Saturday and continued house searches. The special action began early Monday.
Neighbors were told to stay away from the street where masked police have sealed off a section.
A senior Turkish official says authorities flagged one of the suicide bombers in the Paris attacks to their French counterparts back in 2014 but received no response.
The official said Monday that Turkish authorities identified Omar Ismail Mostefai as a possible "terror suspect" in October 2014. It notified French authorities in December 2014 and in June 2015.
The official said Turkey had no response from France until after the Paris attacks when it requested information on Mostefai.
The Paris prosecutor's office says Mostefai had been flagged as having ties to Islamic extremism five years ago.
The Turkish official said Mostefai entered Turkey in 2013 but authorities have no record of him leaving. He said Mostefai's case shows that intelligence-sharing and effective communication are crucial to counter-terrorism efforts.
The official cannot be named because of rules barring civil servants from speaking to reporters without authorization.
A French official says the suspected mastermind of the Paris attacks was also linked to thwarted train and church attacks.
A French official has identified the suspected mastermind as Belgian Abdelhamid Abaaoud, and says he is believed linked to thwarted attacks on a Paris-bound high-speed train and Paris area church.
The official, who has direct knowledge of the investigation, was not authorized to be publicly identified as speaking about the ongoing probe.
Seven people are in custody in Belgium suspected of links to the attacks and an international arrest warrant has been issued for a Belgian-born Frenchman believed involved in the attacks and who is still at large.
France is urging its European partners to move swiftly to boost intelligence sharing, fight arms trafficking and terror financing, and strengthen border security in the wake of the Paris attacks.
The top French official in charge of European affairs, Harlem Desir, told reporters on Monday that "clearly, decisions must be taken."
He underlined the need for "cooperation in matters of intelligence, (between) police and the judiciary, the fight against terrorism on European territory."
Desir's remarks came in Brussels ahead of talks with European Union foreign ministers.
He said that "France was attacked, but all of Europe was hit. We were hit together, and we will respond together."
Britain's government says it is doubling spending on aviation security and is recruiting some 1,900 security and intelligence agents as part of Britain's response to the Paris attacks.
Prime Minister David Cameron announced the actions during the G-20 summit being concluding Monday in Turkey.
Cameron, who, pledged a 15 percent increase in the 12,700-strong staff of the security and intelligence agencies and a doubling of the 9 million pounds ($13.7 million) annual outlay on aviation security. Funds will also be provided for aviation security experts to provide regular assessments of airports around the world.
The steps are part of an extensive review of spending and not a direct response to the Paris attacks.
The Paris prosecutor's office says two more suicide bombers involved in deadly attacks in the French capital have been identified.
Prosecutors said Monday that one suicide bomber who blew himself up in the Bataclan music hall Friday night was Samy Amimour, a 28-year-old Frenchman charged in a terrorism investigation in 2012. He had been placed under judicial supervision but dropped off the radar and was the subject of an international arrest warrant.
Prosecutors say three people in Amimour's family entourage have been in custody since early Monday.
A suicide bomber who blew himself up outside the national soccer stadium was found with a Syrian passport with the name Ahmad Al Mohammad, a 25-year-old born in Idlib. The prosecutor's office says fingerprints from the attacker match those of someone who passed through Greece in October.
A previous version corrects the spelling of French Interior Minister Cazeneuve's last name on second reference.