The time for talk is over as the opening EHF EURO 2012 games are played this evening The wait is over Every afternoon the European Handball Federation publishes a brief summary of the stories that have gone online on the EHF EURO 2012's dedicated website ehf-euro.com. This is the weekend's and Monday's summary. The 2012 Women's EHF European Championship in Serbia (4 to 16 December) begins today and as the tournament progresses, the number of stories on the host nation and the 16 participating teams steadily increases. For more information, pictures, and stories from the tournament, check out the Women's EHF EURO Facebook page, and every game can be seen live on the EHF EURO YouTube channel. Day 1 match previews Match previews from all eight games this evening are available, with hosts Serbia taking on reigning champions Norway in the highlight of day 1. Click here. Norway ready to fire on all cylinders Defending EHF EURO champions Norway start their EHF EURO 2012 campaign against hosts Serbia on Tuesday in what promises to be a cracking opener to the 16-team tournament rallying the continent's best national teams.Click here. Adžić and Radičević prepared to win The biggest enigma for Montenegro before the start of EHF EURO 2012 in Serbia is whether Marija Jovanović will be ready to play in the championship. Click here. Iceland on a steep road to victory The way from the Millennium Hall in Vršac to the Icelandic team's mountain-located hotel 'Villa Breg' is very, very steep, but Icelandic assistant coach Gustaf Adolf Björnsson told ehf-euro.com that he will walk the tough walk back up if his team lose their opener against Montenegro. Click here. "Russia never surrender" says Krokhin Things have changed in the Russian women’s handball national team. More than ten – mostly successful – years with Evgeny Trefilov in charge as Russia’s head coach had come to an end in September and several weeks later his former assistant, Vitaly Krokhin, became his successor. Click here. EHF EURO 2012 livestream update Due to contractual and licence reasons the following matches will not be streamed live on EHF EURO's designated Youtube channel, but slightly delayed. Click here.   EHF / cor