Fabrice Muamba 'showing small signs of improvement' as his heart beats unaided
A joint statement from Barts and the London NHS Trust said: "Fabrice Muamba remains in intensive care at the London Chest Hospital, where today he is showing small signs of improvement.
"His heart is now beating without the help of medication and he is also moving his arms and his legs. However his long-term prognosis will remain unclear for some time.
"He is still critically ill and will continue to be closely monitored and treated by staff in the London Chest Hospital's intensive care unit."
The positive update will be gratefully received by those who have spent the day at Muamba's bedside, and by the millions of football fans who have been eagerly awaiting updates.
<noframe>Twitter: Shauna Muamba - 2 everyone out there thank u so much for all the love and support collectively as a family we appreciate it all. Plz continue 2 pray 4 fab x</noframe>
Bolton manager Owen Coyle and chairman Phil Gartside visited the hospital this morning. Muamba's father, Marcel and his fiancée Shauna remain by his bedside. Bolton's club doctor, Jonathan Tobin is also at the hospital.
Johan Djourou, Ashley Cole and Shaun Wright-Phillips have visited Muamba this afternoon.
Coyle, who accompanied Muamba to hospital, offered his personal thanks for the messages of support that continue to be received, both at the hospital and the Reebok Stadium.
"From our end, and on behalf of the family, we want to say a big thanks to everyone," said Coyle.
"We have been inundated by good messages, everyone praying for Fabrice which is very important. It has been a real source of strength for the family. We know how difficult a time it is for everyone.
"I can't really quantify it (the support). It has been incredible, not just from the football world, from everyone.
The Premier League agreed to Bolton's request for Tuesday's planned encounter with Aston Villa at Villa Park to be postponed.
No new date has been confirmed and it is still not clear when Saturday night's game will be played.
Bolton's next game is due to be in the Premier League, against local rivals and relegation scrappers Blackburn, at home on Saturday, although no decision will be made until later in the week about whether that match can proceed.
After scoring in Chelsea's FA Cup win over Leicester at Stamford Bridge yesterday, Muamba's former Bolton team-mate Gary Cahill revealed a T-shirt with the message 'Pray 4 Muamba' printed on it.
Supporters at Wolves' home game with Manchester United combined in a minute's applause before kick-off.
Referee Howard Webb, whose prompt actions on Saturday, in addition to those of medical staff have received such praise, withdrew from fourth official duties at Wolves on the advice of a psychologist who works with the Professional Game Match Officials Limited (PMGMOL).