Woods falls short in Dubai
Spain's Alvaro Quiros produced an unusual final round to capture golf's Dubai Desert Classic on Sunday as Tiger Woods' bid to win his first tournament in 15 months collapsed.
The 27-year-old Quiros had a hole-in-one, chipped in for an eagle and also lost a ball up a palm tree in a final-round 68 to win by a stroke at 11 under par.
Denmark's Anders Hansen, needing to birdie the last hole to deny Quiros, posted a 70 to end with a 10-under-par tally.
Woods is still seeking his first tournament trophy in more than a year after falling well short with a final round 3-over 75 and ending tied for 20th with a total of 4-under 284.
On a day when the leaderboard constantly changed, the 70th-ranked Quiros shot 68 to end with a total of 11-under 277.
Quiros had an eagle on the second hole to move into the lead before a triple bogey on the eighth left him tied with Hansen who briefly took the lead soon after.
Quiros responded with a birdie on the ninth and then a hole-in-one on the par-3 No. 11 to get back into the lead. He fell back again with a bogey on the 14th but a birdie on the 16th gave him the lead for good.
Hansen briefly took the lead with an eagle on No. 13 but gave it up with a bogey on the 15th, finishing the round on 2-under 70.
James Kingston of South Africa was also second with a final round 67.
Coming into the final round a shot off the lead, Tiger Woods had two early bogeys on the second and third holes due to bad putting and chipping.
Woods managed to claw a shot back when his approach shot on the 6th ended up a few feet from the pin. However, Woods alternated two birdies with two bogeys on the back nine and then double bogeyed the 18th.
"It was a very frustrating day," Woods said.
"But I got off to such a poor start, to be two-over through three holes and I just couldn't make it up from there.
"When it was calm this week, I hit the ball pure, and that's the thing. When the wind blows, I have to shape shots and hit shots differently and all of my old feels are kind of out the window.
"That's the thing about making changes, As I've said, I've been all through this before with my last two instructors, and it will come around. I just need more work and more practice."
Woods, who won in Dubai in 2006 and 2008, is now in the middle of his longest drought without a victory. His last victory came at the Australian Masters in November 2009. 