Aussies clinch International Rules series at Croke Park
Ireland's Kevin Reilly tries to get away from Australia's Leigh Montagna Australia fended off a late Ireland revival to deservedly clinch the International Rules Series on a 10-point aggregate margin at Croke Park. As was the case a week ago, the Aussies dominated the opening three quarters as they led 16-9, 28-17 and 48-38. James Kavanagh hit Ireland's goal and Michael Murphy's form breathed life into the Irish as they moved ahead on the night late in the fourth quarter. But the Aussies hit two late steadying overs to secure a 55-52 victory. An improbable series victory for the home side seemed on with seven minutes remaining after Ireland had notched 18 points without reply to take a 52-48 lead. However just as the momentum appeared to be with the Irish, Down star and former AFL player Martin Clarke took a wrong option by aiming for a huge three-pointer from distance instead of attempting to find his unmarked county-mate Benny Coulter. After the let-off the Australians, who had dominated the vast majority of the contest, regained control and four points from the excellent Dane Swan and man-of-the-series Brad Green enabled the visitors to close out the contest. For the opening three quarters, the Australians had given Irish an object lesson in the kind of skills which, regrettably, have been disappearing from modern day gaelic football. Despite the presence of the round ball, the Aussies possessed a range of kicking which the majority of the Irish players could only have dreamt of - from the clever dinks to team-mates to towering passes from distance. Ireland had made a promising start with a Steven McDonnell over helping the home side to a 4-0 lead but Green, Leigh Montagna, captain fantastic Adam Goodes and the impressive Swan all landed three-pointers to put the visitors 16-9 ahead after the opening 18-minute period. Relented and watched the last quarter. Still not a fan of the game It was more of the same in the second quarter although the introduction of Benny Coulter and the brave efforts of the Down team-mate Kevin McKernan helped the Irish from being totally over-run. At that stage, big-name Irish players such as Clarke, Sean Cavanagh and Tadgh Kennelly were being totally overshadowed by their Australian counterparts and but erratic shooting, the visitors would have had more to show for their dominance than their 28-17 half-time lead. Todd Banfield was Australia's star turn in the third quarter and his delightful over which put the visitors 32-23 ahead was the score of the match. Colm Begley's three-pointer cut Australia's lead to 33-28 but the visitors responded with 12 straight points to seemingly kill off the Irish. But another Coulter over cut Australia's advantage to 48-38 after three quarters and Sean Cavanagh finally finding his form at the start of the final quarter, enabled Ireland to further trim the margin. Cavanagh's own three pointer cut Australia's lead to five points and Michael Murphy, who surely should have been introduced earlier, then came into his own with two superb three-pointers in a minute to put Ireland 52-48 ahead. Suddenly and incredibly, the series was within touching distance for Ireland as the 60,000 plus Croke Park crowd generated some noise but it proved a fleeting moment as Clarke took the wrong option with seven minutes remaining by blazing wide from distance. Having regained their composure, the Aussies levelled on the night thanks to four Dane Swan points and after Brad Green notched another over, the visitors held possession in the closing minute to confirm their series triumph. After the damp squib of last week's opener in Limerick, the Dublin contest was a significant improvement but it will not have silenced the many critics of the hybrid code.