Danish driver Allan Simonsen, 34, killed at Le Mans
Aston Martin driver left track at speed after nine minutes He died shortly afterwards of injuries at medical centre on site
An investigation has been launched into the fatal accident suffered by Allan Simonsen at the 90th anniversary running of the Le Mans 24 Hours
Simonsen, a leading GT driver, had qualified on pole in his class, the GTE Am category of race-prepared road cars, and was a favourite to finish strongly in La Sarthe. After nine minutes of racing and on the fourth lap, his No95 Aston Martin came off at high speed at the Tertre Rouge corner.
A statement issued by race organisers said the investigation was focusing on the possibility that the accident occurred "due to circumstances in the race". On-board footage from the car following immediately behind Simonsen at the time of the crash appears to show another GTE-class competitor going off the track in a separate incident just seconds earlier.
"Following the accident which claimed the life of Allan Simonsen, an investigation has been launched as is the case for every fatal accident on a public road," the statement read. "This investigation is moving towards the fact that he went off track due to circumstances in the race. Allan Simonsen's body has been returned to his family.
"The Aston Martin Racing team has decided to continue with the participation of its other cars, at the request of the family, and in tribute to Allan Simonsen."
The 34-year-old was the first race fatality since the Austrian Jo Gartner in 1986, although the Frenchman Sebastien Enjolras lost his life during pre-qualifying in 1997.
Simonsen was approaching the fast corner that leads into the Mulsanne straight before the car shifted sharply to the left, leaving the track and hitting the barriers.
The race was immediately yellow-flagged and safety cars deployed as marshalls dealt with the incident.
Simonsen had taken part in seven Le Mans 24 Hour races, with a best finish of second in class in 2010. Racing since 1999, he won the Danish Formula Ford Championship, the Australian GT championship and the Asian Le Mans Series. He shared his car for Le Mans with fellow Danes Christoffer Nygaard and Kristian Poulsen in the class that mixes pro and amateur drivers over the 24 hours, with Simonsen the top professional in this strong driver squad.
There was a sense of disbelief among fans, many of whom witnessed Alan McNish walk away from a huge accident an Audi in 2011 and Anthony Davidson escaped an equally horrific crash last year with only a fractured back.
Simonsen's family was told by Aston Martin Racing's principal, David Richards, but the team, which is mounting a major challenge at this year's race with five entries across the two GTE Pro and Am classes, said it would continue racing with the family's consent.
John Gaw, Aston Martin Racing's managing director described the incident as a "terrible tragedy". No further statements were expected while the accident is under investigation and the cars continued to race on despite the tragic circumstances.
A thrilling early battle for the lead between leading prototype protagonists Audi and Toyota saw Audi with the advantage at the nine hour mark with the No2 car of Allan McNish, Loïc Duval and Tom Kristensen holding the top spot ahead of the two Toyotas, while mechanical problems and a puncture beset the German marque's sister cars.
Aston Martin's remaining cars were one and two in GTE Pro and in seventh place in GTE Am, with Richards stating as the race continued into the night: "The team is, of course, deeply saddened by the loss of one of our drivers, however we are as focused as ever to win this race, but we are now racing to win for Allan."