Oxford University beat Cambridge to win Boat Race by length and a half
"Which blue are you?" inquired the signs erected around Putney bridge for the start of this year's Boat Race, the 159th edition of an arcane ritual that was won by Oxford, whose victory was more emphatic than the boat length and a bit that separated the boats at Chiswick bridge suggests.
Hypothermic, Scott-of-the-Antarctic blue was the most appropriate rejoinder, following a decidedly bracing 17-minute jaunt down the Thames on board an exposed wooden launch for the ladies and gentlemen of the Fourth Estate that was part of the following flotilla.
After the events of last year, when an anti-elitist act of civil disobedience earned Trenton Oldfield global notoriety and a six-month stretch in Wormwood Scrubs, this year's race was disappointingly incident-free. Rogue invaders and broken oars were conspicuously absent on the murky waters, unlike the noticeable police, army and lifeboat presence.
It is probably fair to say that Oldfield's heroic foray into the drink was in vain. A sporting event generally enthused over by the kind of Midsomer-dwelling middle Englanders who don't really like sport, an accurate idea of the Boat Race's place in the cosmic scheme of things can be gleaned by a perusal of this year's sponsors: a global financial services firm with assets valued in trillions of dollars, a Champagne merchant and an exclusive gentleman's outfitters whose "perfect dot" silk pocket squares retail at £26 each.
But while it is easy to sneer at the kind of event where triumphant, red trouser-wearing hooray-henrys greet their returning heroes with a rousing rendition of the timeless rowing shanty I'd Rather Be A Leper Than A Cam, the obvious post-race exhaustion of both crews, not to mention their contrasting moods of unbridled elation and utter despair, dictate that those competing in a sporting conundrum that has endured since 1829 are worthy of the heartiest respect.
The participants of recent years no longer espouse the British Corinthian spirit for which this contest was once fabled. From cox to bow, the losing Cambridge boat contained four Americans, two Australians, a Czech and just two Britons, while the victors boasted five Britons, bolstered by two Americans, a New Zealander and a Canadian.
Oxford went into the race as red-hot favourites and seemed to scupper any faint hopes of an upset by winning the toss of the ceremonial gold sovereign and choosing Surrey, on the Putney Barnes side of the course, leaving Cambridge with Middlesex. Under starter's orders from Sir Matthew Pinsent, who was umpiring a Boat Race for the first time, Oxford pulled their way into a slender early lead, immediately putting their Cambridge counterparts on the back foot; a setback from which Cambridge never recovered. Upon passing Hammersmith bridge it became apparent the jig was up for the Light Blues, who were two kilos a man lighter than their rivals.
"What limited brainpower I have was devoted to deciding which warning to give and when," said Pinsent, who beyond occasional bouts of flag-waving and megaphone-shouting enjoyed a relatively stress-free maiden voyage. "Towards the end of the race Oxford rowed a bit strangely, but I think Oskar [Zorrilla, their cox] was looking behind him to see where Cambridge were."
Having accepted the trophy and attended to the team custom of throwing the victorious cox into the freezing water, The Oxford president, Alex Davidson, a loser last year, voiced his delight at his team's change in fortune. "It's completely chalk and cheese, it's such a different feeling," he said. "I'm very happy with the performance and proud of the result. I'm very proud of the guys. It was so gutting last year, to lose in those circumstances."
Oxford's win crowned a clean sweep on an excellent afternoon for the Dark Blues, with Isis having prevailed over Goldie in the reserve team race, while their women were also triumphant.