Michael Garcia: Fifa investigator resigns in World Cup report row
Fifa's independent ethics investigator Michael Garcia has quit in protest over the handling of his report into bidding for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups.
The American lawyer cited a "lack of leadership" at the top of football's world governing body.
Garcia said he lost confidence in the independence of judge Hans-Joachim Eckert, an ethics committee colleague.
Uefa president Michel Platini said: "We wanted all transparency but this is a new failure for Fifa."
The head of European football spoke out as Garcia resigned a day after Fifa's appeals panel rejected his challenge of Eckert's summary of his report.
Garcia said: "It is the lack of leadership on these issues within Fifa that leads me to conclude that my role in this process is at an end."
Fifa president Sepp Blatter said: "I am surprised by Mr Garcia's decision. The work of the ethics committee will nonetheless continue."
The association said in a statement that an acting chairman of the committee would be appointed, pending the election of a successor to Garcia.
She added: "Not even an extensive, purportedly independent, two-year investigation and report could affect its culture."
Russia won the right to host the 2018 World Cup, while Qatar was awarded the 2022 tournament. Fifa cleared both of corruption despite a series of allegations.
Garcia's findings were released as a 42-page summary of the 430-page report.
He said the summary was "erroneous" and complained to Fifa, which said his appeal was "not admissible".
In his resignation statement, he said: "No independent governance committee, investigator, or arbitration panel can change the culture of an organisation."
Garcia said his submission to the Fifa appeal committee outlined what he called "the most serious failings" of Eckert's response.
"Among other points, the brief explained why, when viewed in the context of the report it purported to summarise, no principled approach could justify the Eckert Decision's edits, omissions, and additions," he said.
Fifa meets in Morocco this week and will decide whether to release a full, redacted copy of Garcia's report.
Jerome Champagne, the former Fifa executive who plans to stand against Blatter for the presidency, said: "Michael Garcia's resignation is a step backwards.
"We needed to know what happened before and after the 2 December 2010 World Cup vote. Today, more than ever, we need to know.
"When will the facts be known fully, transparently and above all without suspicion? When will we be able to start rebuilding Fifa's image?"
Fifa vice president Jim Boyce, Britain's most senior football official, said he was "totally shocked and disappointed" at Garcia's resignation.
"I have said on many, many occasions, the ethics committee was the most important committee formed by Fifa following its reform process," said Boyce.
Prince Ali bin Al Hussein of Jordan, a Fifa vice president, said Garcia's decision to quite was "emblematic" of the challenges faced by the organisation.
"I have tremendous respect for people who take principled positions," said Prince Ali.