A-League grand final: Mark Milligan stamps class on Melbourne Victory's win over Sydney FC
The A-League grand final was expected to be a battle between two sets of lethal forwards, but it was the Victory's lynchpin Mark Milligan who stamped his mark on the match more than any other player.
The Victory captain was awarded the Joe Marston medal as the best player on the pitch for his inspirational performance at the base of midfield.
Milligan showed why he is a regular in Ange Postecoglou's Socceroos set-up, playing the role of both destroyer and creator in the centre of the pitch.
His dominance over Sydney FC's midfielders, and Milos Dimitrijevic in particular, was the platform on which his side's superiority was built.
Early on, Milligan appeared to come off second best in a series of physical clashes with FC's big Austrian forward Marc Janko, but the man who runs the Victory engine room soon made his presence felt as a defensive shield and ball-winner.
Not only that, he took on the role of quarter-back, spraying long, accurate passes from deep which regularly landed at the feet of the Victory's wide attacking players.
The 29-year-old's service to Kosta Barbarouses on the right flank was particularly decisive, with the nimble-footed winger frequently able to isolate an overwhelmed Nikola Petkovic.
When the Sky Blues began to tire and leave spaces in front of him, Milligan shuttled the ball forward himself, and even managed to fire off a couple of shots from dangerous positions.
Milligan himself preferred to focus on the collective effort.
"The most satisfying thing about tonight is we set out to do something a long time ago," he said.
"I asked the boys to dig deep tonight and to start the game well, to give everything they had and have no regrets.
"We worked extremely hard together and after a long season we got what we deserved.
"That's the most satisfying thing."
Sydney FC coach Graham Arnold was full of praise for his former charger.
"I had him in the Olympic team, when his career really could have gone two ways," he said.
"He was getting some bad advice at the time.
"When I took him to the Olympics he didn't even have a club.
"He was brave enough and bold enough to come back to Australia and get in the A-League again.
"His career has gone really strong and he's an outstanding player and international quality."
It was a unique combination of grit, technique and boundless energy which made Milligan so effective, and will rightly earn his name a mention among the great individual A-League grand final performances.