Mutko says no link between violence, World Cup
PARIS (AP) — The Latest from soccer's European Championship (all times local):
Russian Sports Minister Vitaly Mutko spoke to The Associated Press as he left the stadium in Marseille, saying there were no comparisons between the violence in southern France and the 2018 World Cup.
Mutko says "what's the 2018 World Cup got to do with it?"
Russian fans clashed with England supporters and the police before and after Saturday's match at the Stade Velodrome.
Mutko is also the head of the Russian Football Union and has senior roles in FIFA and with World Cup organization.
World Cup organizing committee CEO Alexei Sorokin told reporters "the World Cup is in two years, this is a different tournament."
Fighting broke out in the southern city of Nice the night before the European Championship match between Poland and Northern Ireland.
It was not immediately clear who was involved in the fighting, but internet footage showed several fans wearing the dark green jersey of Northern Ireland trading punches with other fans.
The footage also showed riot police intervening quickly to stop the fighting, which appeared to involve about 20 people.
Nice Mayor Christian Estrosi condemned the fighting on his Twitter page, saying "the behavior of these hooligans is unacceptable and must be severely punished."
Estrosi added at about 11:30 p.m. that one person had been arrested in Nice's old town and that "the situation is calmer now." He then thanked the police force.
The teams play at 6 p.m. local time on Sunday.
The English Football Association has called on England fans "to act in a respectful manner and support England the right way" after a third day of violence in Marseille.
English and Russian fans clashed with each other and the French police, who deployed tear gas and water cannons both in the city's Old Port and near the Stade Velodrome ahead of England's game with Russia, which finished 1-1.
FA spokesman Mark Whittle says "the FA is very disappointed by the terrible scenes that we saw there and of course condemns such behavior." He called on French authorities "to identify those involved in the troubles and deal with them appropriately and quickly."
England coach Roy Hodgson refused to comment in detail on the incidents, but said the players "weren't particularly aware (of what happened) and it certainly had no effect on our preparation for the game and our performance in the game."
Eric Dier says England's emotions took a dive after Russia scored a late equalizer in Saturday's 1-1 draw.
Dier gave England the lead with a 73rd-minute curling free kick but says "our emotions went from a high to a low pretty quickly" when Vasily Berezutsky scored for Russia.
Asked if his free kick echoed those of David Beckham, Dier said "he was one of the best at it, and I've seen lots of his free kicks."
UEFA will open disciplinary proceedings over the violence in Marseille, with Russia facing the stronger sanctions after its fans attacked England supporters in the stadium.
After a third straight day of fighting in the Mediterranean port city, violence spread to the Stade Velodrome at Saturday's game.
After the 1-1 draw, a large group of Russian fans in one of the stands behind the goal advanced on England supporters in the neighboring area, throwing objects and breaking through a line of stewards. England fans fled for the exits.
When UEFA's disciplinary panel judges the latest incident in Marseille, it could take Russian fans' track record of violence into account, including at Euro 2012 when stadium security staff were attacked in Poland.
UEFA has changed the scorer of Russia's equalizer against England from Denis Glushakov to Vasily Berezutsky.
The match finished 1-1 after Berezutsky's header in injury time was judged by UEFA to have crossed the line before Glushakov provided the final touch.
Fans in the stadium starting fighting just as the final whistle blew after Russia came back to earn a 1-1 draw with England at the European Championship.
Before the game, England and Russia fans rioted at the nearby Old Port district and briefly outside the stadium in Marseille in a third straight day of violence. Police in the Mediterranean port city fired tear gas and water cannons at rioters.
Eric Dier scored to give England a 1-0 lead in the 73rd minute, but Denis Glushakov equalized in injury time.
GOAL: Denis Glushakov scores for Russia in injury time. Russia is now even with England at 1-1.
Eric Dier curled a free kick past the outstretched right hand of goalkeeper Igor Akinfeev to give England a 1-0 lead over Russia at the European Championship.
The Tottenham midfielder sent the ball high and to the left in the 73rd minute of a match played in Marseille after violent clashes in the city involving fans from both countries.
GOAL: Eric Dier scores from a free kick for England in the 73rd minute. England leads Russia 1-0.
French Interior Minister Bernard Cazeneuve says one British citizen has been "seriously injured" in clashes on Saturday in Marseille.
In a statement, Cazeneuve says "once again, as over the last 30 years, an international football competition has been the scene of clashes between violent people claiming to be supporters of their national team."
England and Russia won't receive UEFA sanctions because the disorder among fans at the European Championship has unfolded away from the stadium in Marseille.
European soccer's governing body tells The Associated Press "UEFA can only take disciplinary action for incidents which happen within the stadium perimeter."
Article 6 of the tournament regulations say national "associations are responsible for the behavior of their players, officials, members, supporters and any person carrying out a function at a match on their behalf."
Here are the lineups for Saturday's Group B match between England and Russia in Marseille:
English and Russian briefly fans clashed with each other and police near the Stade Velodrome in Marseille.
Police fired more tear gas and used a water cannon to disperse hundreds of fans within sight of the stadium about an hour before England was to face Russia at the European Championship.
The English fans soon retreated toward the stadium.
Hal Robson-Kanu scored the winning goal in the 81st minute as Wales beat Slovakia 2-1 at the European Championship.
The defender's scuffed shot from 12 meters came 10 minutes after he had come on as substitute.
Gareth Bale had given Wales the lead in the 10th minute when he curled in a free kick. Ondrej Duda equalized for Slovakia in the 61st, a minute after he came on as a substitute.
Wales' victory came in its first match at a major championship since the 1958 World Cup.
Police have fired more tear gas at fans about an hour before England was to play Russia at the European Championship.
Police were closely monitoring a group of about 200 people heading from the Old Port area to the stadium in Marseille when they fired several canisters of tear gas.
It was unclear where the fans were from.
Disorder has started outside the Stade Velodrome in Marseille, where England is to play Russia at the European Championship.
After fighting at the Old Port in Marseille, England fans on a road to the stadium were hanging off trees, swinging plastic chairs and throwing plastic cups.
Two fans stopped a passing convertible car and climbed into the back seats. Police were not intervening.
Substitute Hal Robson-Kanu put Wales back in front against Slovakia, scoring in the 81st minute to make it 2-1.
Aaron Ramsey stumbled as he raced toward the goal and the ball fell kindly to Robson-Kanu, who wrong-footed the goalkeeper and scored into the bottom left corner.
GOAL: Hal Robson-Kanu scores for Wales in the 81st minute. Wales leads Slovakia 2-1.
UEFA says it "firmly condemns the incidents in Marseille," where soccer fans have been fighting and clashing with police ahead of Saturday's game between England and Russia at the European Championship.
European soccer's governing body adds that "people engaging in such violent acts have no place in football."
Saturday was the third day in a row that French police used tear gas on fans in Marseille.
Ondrej Duda, who had only come off the Slovakia bench a minute earlier, scored from Robert Mak's low cross in the 61st minute.
GOAL: Ondrej Duda scores an equalizer for Slovakia in the 61st minute. The Slovaks are even with Wales at 1-1.
Police have used a water cannon to disperse soccer fans at the Old Port in Marseille.
Fans have been fighting in the area on Saturday, hours before England is to face Russia at the European Championship.
Although things seemed to calm down after earlier rioting, police used the water cannon on some fans about two hours before kickoff.
After turning off the water, a line of police marched toward the fans with the water cannon.
Regional police chief Laurent Nunez had told French media that five people have been wounded and six people arrested during fighting in Marseille.
Two television stations have reported that one of those wounded had suffered a heart attack during one of the melees, although they gave no further details.
Calls to the local prefecture were unanswered.
Nunez says supporters were now headed toward the stadium "in perfect calm."
Gareth Bale has curled in a free kick to give Wales an early 1-0 lead over Slovakia at the European Championship.
The Wales forward, who won the Champions League with Real Madrid two weeks ago, is playing at a major championship for the first time.
Bale scored in the 10th minute of the match in Bordeaux.
GOAL: Gareth Bale scores for Wales from a free kick in the 10th minute. Wales leads Slovakia 1-0.
Wales goalkeeper Wayne Hennessey has been ruled out of the European Championship match against Slovakia with a back injury.
Hennessey, who conceded only four goals in qualifying, has been replaced by Liverpool goalkeeper Danny Ward. The 22-year-old Ward has made two appearances for Wales, both as a halftime substitute during friendlies.
As expected, Wales midfielder Joe Ledley is on the bench. Ledley broke his leg about a month ago while playing for Crystal Palace.
While Gareth Bale will be the main man for Wales, the key player for Slovakia will be Napoli midfielder Marek Hamsik.
Here are the lineups for Saturday's match between Wales and Slovakia in Bordeaux:
Fabian Schaer scored an early goal to give Switzerland a 1-0 win over Albania in the second Group A match of the European Championship.
Schaer jumped to meet a corner by Xherdan Shaqiri and headed home in the fifth minute. Albania goalkeeper Etrit Berisha had left his goal to intercept the ball but was too late.
The Swiss dominated the early exchanges and regained the initiative after Albania lost captain Lorik Cana in the 37th minute. The defender was sent off after picking up a second yellow card at Stade Bollaert-Delelis in Lens.
Switzerland missed a handful of opportunities as Berisha denied striker Haris Seferovic on four occasions, while Blerim Dzemaili hit the post from a free kick.
Riot police have thrown tear gas canisters at soccer fans at Marseille's Old Port in a third straight day of violence in the city ahead of England's match against Russia at the European Championship.
The clashes Saturday afternoon were outside a bar where French police fired tear gas at drunken England fans on Friday night.
Tear gas was drifting across a near deserted street that minutes earlier had been packed with chanting fans.
It was not immediately clear what triggered the latest police action.
RED CARD: Albania defender Lorik Cana gets sent off for a second yellow card in the 37th minute.
Fabian Schaer jumped highest to meet a corner by Xherdan Shaqiri and headed home to give Switzerland a 1-0 lead over Albania at the European Championship.
Albania goalkeeper Etrit Berisha had left his goal to intercept the ball, but was beaten to the cross by the Switzerland defender.
GOAL: Fabian Schaer scores for Switzerland in the fifth minute. The Swiss lead Albania 1-0.
The brotherly duel between Albania's Taulant Xhaka and Switzerland's Granit Xhaka is on.
Both midfielders will start in the second match of the European Championship at Stade Bollaert-Delelis in Lens.
Taulant Xhaka recovered in time from a leg injury to feature in Albania's first ever appearance at a major tournament. It's the first time in the history of the competition that siblings are playing each other in a match.
One of the top scoring teams in qualifying, Switzerland will rely on strikers Xherdan Shakiri and Haris Seferovic to crack the Albanian defense.
Here are the lineups for Saturday's match between Albania and Switzerland in Lens: