Dominican Republic win World Baseball Classic - as it happened!
Seventeen days after the World Baseball Classic began in Fukuoka, Japan, and some 37 games later, we're finally ready to crown a new champion at San Francisco's AT&T Park.
A tournament with no shortage of storylines brought us a new one on Monday - plantain power. Fernando Rodney's new good luck charm was out and about vs the Netherlands in their WBC semi-final game, helping to propel his Dominican Republic to the brink of their first ever title in the tournament - not a bad night for a starchy banana. 
The D.R.'s beefy lineup, loaded with lumber (three players with a 1.000+ OPS), didn't break through until the fourth inning, putting up a crooked number after falling behind by a run in the first. There would be no additional theatrics by the valiant Kingdom, which provided viewers with plenty of drama during a competition littered with upsets. Hensley Meulens' Dutch were finally dead, ousted by the team they sent home early in 2009. 
The underdog theme continues however, with Puerto Rico fresh off their win over two-time champions Japan, carrying momentum into the final. They'll need it, having failed to beat their regional rivals, the Dominican Republic, twice in this tournament. Puerto Rico look to the San Francisco Giants' Angel Pagan, carrying a .941 OPS in the tournament, to drive their lineup, with Giancarlo Alvarado, who plays his pro-ball in Japan, getting the ball for his Puerto Rico. He's put up a 2.16 ERA in 8.1 innings of WBC work. 
It ain't exactly Koufax vs Gibson tonight, with the D.R. entrusting Samuel Deduno and all 21 of his big league starts in the final. It's worth mentioning however that the 27-year-old, hardly a household name, held the USA to one run in four innings his last time out, so don't be fooled by that lack of experience, as the American's seemed to be.
In a World Baseball Classic filled with intrigue, I'm wondering if any surprises are left in store. One thing we do know is that whichever team wins tonight's game, it will be the greatest sporting victory in that nation's history, which is quite a testament to the tournament.
We'll have first pitch for you shortly - there's still a few moments to cook up some La Bendera, plantains, crack open an Estrella and prepare yourself for an evening of béisbol latinoamericano as we get set for the third WBC final. Oh, and do tweet your thoughts to @lengeldavid or email david.lengel.freelance@guardiannews.com