Kiplagat of Kenya Surges to Women’s Title; Flanagan Is 2nd
Mary Keitany of Kenya, the 2009 world half-marathon champion, who also made her marathon debut, finished third in 2:29:01.
Kiplagat, 31, is the first Kenyan to win the women’s race since 2003. She used patience to propel herself to victory, staying tucked at the back of a lead pack of about a dozen runners through most of the race, which started at a plodding 5:48-per-mile pace through 10 kilometers, or 6.2 miles. She shared the lead along with Flanagan and Keitany at Mile 22.
Flanagan, 29, led by a forearm’s length as they entered Central Park and gained momentum with a 4:48-per-mile pace. Keitany then started to create a step of distance. As Flanagan strode down a slight hill approaching 24 miles, her pained face foretold the last two miles. Kiplagat then led Keitany on a breakaway and the two Africans staged what was presumed to be a shoulder-to-shoulder battle to the finish.
But as she passed Mile 25, Kiplagat created a five-second gap of ahead of Keitany, and Flanagan and finished well.
“When we started, my body did not respond,” Kiplagat said of the beginning of the race. “I had to wait until 24 miles; that’s when I had to feel how my body was going to react. I was happy because I tried to pull away when it was a little flat. I was excited at 25 miles.”
Kiplagat earned $130,000 for her victory, which represents a slight pay cut from the $145,000 she won in Los Angeles in March. That amount included a bonus for a special challenge as the first man or woman to finish the race. She crossed the line first after starting 18:47 ahead of the men’s field.
Kiplagat trained with Koech, the 2009 San Antonio Marathon champion, in Boulder, Colo., for a few months earlier this year away from their children: Carlos, 6, and Wendy, 2. Wendy’s birth was one reason Kiplagat had not run a marathon since 2005. When Kiplagat and Koech joined the Boulder Wave management company in the fall of 2009, they started planning Kiplagat’s return.
Her strong reputation as a road runner helped Kiplagat gain entry in Los Angeles earlier this year, and her victory there, coupled with a second-place finish at the Freihofer’s Run for Women five-kilometer race in Albany in June, convinced the New York Road Runners to invite her to this marathon, Reilly said.
Kiplagat had planned to run in the Philadelphia Half Marathon in September, but Koech killed the idea, figuring she had raced enough this year. Kiplagat completed nine road races entering New York, winning three.
Now Kiplagat hopes for an invitation to a World Marathon Majors race in the spring in either London or Boston.
Flanagan, the 2008 Olympic bronze medalist in the 10,000 meters, has wanted to run in Boston since she watched that race while growing up near the city. She has said she would like to wait until after the 2012 London Olympics to run in the race with her family, but after her performance in New York she may have to consider entering the race next spring.
Flanagan pulled away from Keitany over the last mile, and after finishing she dropped to her knees and kissed the ground, a United States flag covering her back and shoulders. Flanagan not only nearly won her first marathon, she also won her first United States women’s marathon championship, which was contended in the race.
The slow early pace helped her finish second.
“I loved it,” she said. “I loved the warm-up into it and every mile that clicked away that felt good in delaying the incredible pain and fatigue. I felt more and more confident from it. I felt great.”
Flanagan won $65,000 for her finish and $40,000 for winning the United States championship. Asked what is next, she said, “A nice trip to Hawaii and a burger and a beer.”
Katie McGregor was 11th over all and second in the United States women’s championships and has qualified with Flanagan to represent the United States women at the 2011 world marathon championships in South Korea.