Manolo Preciado dies of heart attack before Villarreal unveiling
Manolo Preciado, who was due to be unveiled as new Villarreal manager on Friday, has died of a heart attack.
The 54-year-old Spaniard left relegated Sporting Gijon this summer and was due to take charge of their former La Liga rivals.
Villarreal, who were also relegated last month, only announced on Wednesday that they had reached an agreement with Preciado to take charge of the club next season. He was due to be officially unveiled to the media by the 2006 Champions League semi-finalists on Friday.
Spanish newspaper Marca report that he was suffering from a virus before he passed away in the early hours of Thursday morning.
A statement on Villarreal's website read: 'Coach Manuel Preciado died early this morning in Valencia and as a result of a heart attack.
'Villarreal wants to show its deep regret at the sad loss and wants to show their condolences to his family and all his relatives.'
A statement on the Sporting website read: 'With deepest regret, Sporting Gijon wish to express their sorrow at this sad loss, for someone who formed an integral part of this club's history, and send their deepest condolences to his family in this time of grief.'
Real Madrid coach Jose Mourinho led the tributes from the Primera Liga for Preciado, writing an open letter on the Real Madrid website.
One of Preciado's high points during his six years in charge of Sporting came against Madrid when, in April 2011, his side won 1-0 at the Bernabeu. That was the first home league defeat Mourinho had suffered in more than nine years whilst in charge of Porto, Chelsea, Inter Milan and Madrid.
Earlier that season Preciado had a well-publicised war of words with Mourinho after the Portuguese had accused Sporting of gifting Barcelona three points by fielding a weakened team in a league match.
Tensions between the two eased though, and earlier this year Preciado said during a visit to Madrid's Valdebebas training ground that he had a 'magnificent relationship' with Mourinho.
In his letter, Mourinho said: 'Manolo was always an honourable opponent, who I got to know well when he came to visit us in March.
'He had everything that I like in a person and in sportsmen: character, openness and the courage to fight against blows.
'We have been left by a football figure and above all by a very special person. My memory of him will be heartfelt and permanent.'
Barcelona also offered their sympathies, saying: 'FC Barcelona want to pass on their condolences to the family and friends of Manuel Preciado. May he rest in peace.'
Barca midfielder Cesc Fabregas tweeted: 'I can't believe the bad news i just woke up with. Hugs for the family of Manolo Preciado. RIP my friend.'
Sergio Ramos, who is with Fabregas in the Spain squad preparing for Euro 2012, also tweeted: 'Football is mourning. I got up and the first thing I heard is the news about Manolo Preciado. Life is unfair and a great person has gone.'
Gerard Pique, another member of Spain's European Championship squad, said on his Twitter account: 'A big hug to the family of Manolo Preciado. One of the greats of this sport has gone. Rest in peace.'
Preciado parted company with Gijon in January following six years in charge of the Asturian outfit.
Preciado took over Sporting in the summer of 2006 and in his second season led them into the Primera Division for the first time in 10 years.
His record of 232 official matches in charge at El Molinon is second only to Jose Manuel Diaz Novoa, who sat in the Sporting hotseat for 282 games.
Prior to his time at Sporting, Preciado was coach of the likes of Racing Santander, Levante and Murcia, while as a player he represented Racing, Real Mallorca and Alaves among others.
Sporting were relegated from the Primera Division in the recently-completed season, as were Villarreal.