Togo attack: Cabinda to remain African Cup of Nations venue
“After an extraordinary meeting at the airport of Cabinda, the (CAF) president and the members of the executive committee present have decided in perfect coordination with the Angolan authorities to maintain the matches of Group B in Cabinda,” CAF said in a statement.
The statement added that it would understand if Togo decided to leave the tournament but that the finals would kick off as planned with hosts Angola playing Mali in the opener in Luanda on Sunday.
Cabinda’s 20,000-capacity stadium was thought to be in jeopardy as a venue for the competition. The remaining teams in Togo’s group – Burkina Faso, Ghana and Ivory Coast – would probably have been moved to play their games in Angola’s capital, Luanda. Fixtures in Group A, including Sunday night’s curtain-raiser between Angola and Mali, are already due to be played in the city’s new November 11 Stadium, but the former national stadium, Estádio da Cidadela, had been placed on standby to host matches scheduled for Cabinda. That includes the quarter-final tie between the winners of Group A and runners-up in Group B on Jan 24.
Togo’s withdrawal will not overly complicate the issue of qualification from Group C, with the top two sides in the table still set to progress to the last eight, but all the remaining sides are likely to demand improved protection from the Angolan authorities.
Burkina Faso, Ghana and Ivory Coast’s players and officials are likely to be housed in military barracks in Luanda, rather than hotels, while Nigeria have already requested a military convoy to accompany them on all trips.
Angola’s Prime Minister, Paulo Kassoma, met with African football officials in Luanda to reassure them of the safety of players on the eve of the competition and his office last night moved to reassure competing nations and supporters that his country is safe. “The Prime Minister considers the incident in Cabinda as an isolated act and repeated that the security of Togo’s team and the other squads is guaranteed,” a statement read.