Yankees’ October Ends Early
“We had the guy we wanted there,” Yankes right fielder Nick Swisher said. “With all the smack he was talking, we wanted to get to him. But we didn’t get the job done, and he gets to celebrate. It’s tough, man, it’s tough.”
In fact the Tigers became the first opposing team to celebrate on the field at the new Yankee Stadium, their whoops and shouts easily heard above the sound of the fans shuffling toward the exits.
While the Yankees begin to process the disappointment, Detroit moves on to play the Texas Rangers in the A.L.C.S. beginning Saturday in Arlington, Tex. But first they had a chance to savor this victory.
“The Yankees are so good that I would be lying if I said it didn’t give me a little extra satisfaction to be able to do it here in the fifth game,” Tigers manager Jim Leyland said. “I don’t mean that disrespectfully, I mean that respectfully. It gave me a great thrill to be able to do it here in Yankee Stadium in Game 5. Unbelievable. Other than the American League pennant and that time in the World Series, this will be a game I’ll remember for the rest of my life.”
For the Yankees, who have made October baseball almost a rite, the early exit is a bitter conclusion. They easily won their division, but never established themselves as the class of the American League. And so their season ends just a week into their favorite month.
“It’s an empty feeling,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said. “It’s an empty feeling for everyone in that room. It hurts. We’ve just got to remember that feeling and be determined for next year.”
In the final game, Girardi was faced with something approaching a pitching crisis when his starter, Ivan Nova, faltered by surrendering back-to-back home runs in the first inning to Don Kelly and Delmon Young. Nova, the 24-year-old rookie who had not lost a start since June 13, left the game after the second inning with tightness in his right forearm.
That left Girardi trying to stitch together the final 21 outs by using an unusual assortment of relief pitchers beginning in the third inning with Phil Hughes.
Hughes was followed by Boone Logan and then C. C. Sabathia, who entered the game in the fifth inning for the first relief appearance of his professional career. But Sabathia, who pitched three days earlier in Game 3, gave up a leadoff broken-bat double to Austin Jackson. He struck out the next two batters, then walked Miguel Cabrera intentionally with first base open. Victor Martinez followed with a single to center, scoring Jackson to extend the Tigers’ lead to 3-0.
“It was weird,” Sabathia said. “I’ve never done that before. Everything went pretty quick, from warming up to being in the game. I felt like I was ready, but next time I’ll be even more ready.”
Aside from that one run, the bullpen did a creditable job over seven innings, including Rafael Soriano, Dave Robertson and Mariano Rivera, who were perfect over the final three and two-thirds innings.
“I don’t think it was a hard game to manage,” Girardi said of all the pitching changes. “It was a hard game to swallow.”
Trailing, 3-0, in the bottom of the fifth, Robinson Cano hit a solo home run off Tigers starter Doug Fister that landed in the second deck to narrow the deficit to two runs. Otherwise, the Yankees were unable to touch Fister, whom they had roughed up when Game 1 of the series resumed Saturday. This time around, Fister gave up only one run on five hits over his five innings of work.
The Yankees loaded the bases in the fourth after Rodriguez walked and Swisher and Jorge Posada each singled. But Fister got both Russell Martin and Brett Gardner to pop up to escape the danger. The Yankees also had an opportunity to take the lead in the seventh when they loaded the bases with one out. They scored a run when Mark Teixeira walked, but that play was sandwiched by strikeouts to Rodriguez and Swisher. Jeter’s bid for a two-run homer in the eighth fell just short.
Posada had two hits and finished the series batting .429, but this might have been his final sendoff. Playing in the 17th season of a career in which he contributed to five World Series championships, Posada, a 40-year-old former catcher, had been slowly phased out over the past two seasons.
After the game, he broke down in tears during an interview.
Another player who might have played his last game as a Yankee is Sabathia, the ace of the staff. Sabathia has the right to opt out of his contract this off-season and become a free agent. He has repeatedly expressed his love of playing baseball for the Yankees, who in turn admire his tenacity and willingness to do things like pitch on short rest and in relief if needed, as he did Thursday.
“I can’t even wrap my head around that,” he said when asked about coming back next year, but he made no promises either way.
Sabathia had another solid year, winning 19 games. The season was also highlighted by the individual achievements of Mariano Rivera, who became the all-time saves leader with 603, and Jeter, who reached 3,000 hits and recovered strongly from an early-season slump.
Collectively, the potent offense scored 867 runs, the second most in baseball, even occasionally without Rodriguez, who missed much of the second half of the season with knee and thumb injuries. Rodriguez hit only .111 in the series, and left another lasting impression by striking out to end it all, again.
“I know what I have to do in the off-season, and I have a plan,” he said. “I am going to come back with a vengeance, and this team will, too.”