Roger Federer Burnishes Legacy as the Swiss Capture a Long-Sought Title
It is also another exhibit in the still-open case concerning Federer’s precise place in tennis history. He already has a record 17 Grand Slam singles titles and has already been ranked No. 1 for a record 302 weeks. He has already won an Olympic gold medal in doubles with Wawrinka and shown a remarkable degree of consistency and durability at the highest level.
Now he has been part of winning the game’s top team trophy as well, and thus joins many of the game’s greatest champions past — Bill Tilden, Rod Laver, Bjorn Borg, Ivan Lendl, John McEnroe, Pete Sampras — and present — Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic — on the list of Davis Cup champions.
“I always said that it was very good for Federer to win the Davis Cup and very good for Davis Cup to have Federer’s name engraved on it,” said Francesco Ricci Bitti, the president of the International Tennis Federation, which organizes the Cup. “To me, it is magic. And today, though people who are not really following tennis might think Gasquet did not play a good match, I think Gasquet played a very good match. But Federer was so focused. He played like a great champion and didn’t give away anything.”
Federer first played in the Davis Cup in 1999, when he was 17 and Mezzadri was the captain.
“He had never played best-of-five sets before, but he was totally relaxed,” Mezzadri said. “And when he came off the court, he was telling me all the feelings he experienced on the court: ‘This is what it’s like to hear 3,000 or 4,000 people cheering,’ things like that. It was like he was recording it all in his mind and then playing it back for me.”
Federer was a Davis Cup regular in his early years and led Switzerland to the 2003 semifinals, where he blew a two-set, 5-3 lead in the decisive match to Lleyton Hewitt of Australia. But in recent years, with Federer focused on individual goals and often available only for relegation matches, Wawrinka has carried the biggest load for Switzerland, using precious energy to play in the competition, whose rounds are usually scheduled a week after Grand Slam events or other top-line tournaments.
This year, Wawrinka, with help from his Swedish coach, Magnus Norman, has taken his game to another level, winning his first Grand Slam singles title at the Australian Open and finishing the year at No. 4. And it was he, not Federer, who set the tone for the Swiss team in this final with his cocksure victory over the French No. 1, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, in Friday’s opening singles match.
“I’ve been dreaming of this Davis Cup for years,” Wawrinka said. “I’ve been trying everything I can to win this competition. This year, maybe, was the ideal year. It started off very well in Serbia. It ends up perfectly well here in France. We made many sacrifices during the years to be able to win it. We did it now. We are very happy.”