World-class artists 'put off coming to Britain by intrusive' points-based immigration system
Acclaimed artists such as Abbas Kiorastami, the Cannes prize-winning director, and Grigory Sokolov, one of the world’s greatest conscert pianists, have decided not to return to Britain after being “treated poorly” by immigration officials, the letter claims.
The group of 120 arts-leaders, novelists and musicians call for a new visa for artists and entertainers to make it easier for leading performers to enter the country for cultural events.
The letter is signed by the directors of the National Theatre, The Tate, The Royal Academy and the Royal Opera House as well as dozens of authors including Salman Rushdie, Howard Jacobson and Phillip Pullman.
Tom Stoppard, the playwright, Stephen Hough, the pianist, and Ziben Sedira, the artist, also added their names, along with several members of the House of Lords.
But the letter, published today, says it is hampering short term visits by artists which have “no impact on migration” and are vital to Britain’s “great tradition of cultural exchange”.
The letter claims that the system is stifling the Cultural Olympiad, the four-year drive to promote art, literature and performance across Britain in the run-up to the Olympic Games in 2012.
Signed by Lord Hall, Chair of the Cultural Olympiad, the letter says: “Writers and performers who have long been welcomed by the UK now find that they are required to undergo a visa application process that is needlessly bureaucratic and intrusive.
“Non-EU visiting artists wishing to enter the country have been treated poorly either through the process of application or at the entry points.”
It goes on: “Our great tradition of cultural exchange is being badly damaged through the points-based system, and in the long term we will doubtless suffer economically. As we approach the Cultural Olympiad’s culminating year this is a situation that must change.”
“Creative artists from across the world are welcome to come and perform in the UK. As part of our commitment to the industry, we work with organisers of international events to ensure they are aware of the application process and are able to help facilitate urgent cases. However, as with any visitors to the UK, we expect individuals to meet our entry requirements.”