Earth Times: news/337419,tanzania-sites-summary.html
Posted Wed, 20 Jun 2018 08:35:00 GMT by Dave Armstrong For several years, excitement has been building over the Atlantic presence of Manta birostris and Manta cf birostris/ this is the classification system trying to tell us of a potential new species that is related to genus Manta. Little progress has been made on this W. Atlantic species of “oceanic manta,” but it can’t be long before we can confirm new knowledge of parenting and juvenile growth in at least the main species, which seems to live alongside the potential new manta.
Posted Fri, 01 Jun 2018 12:10:00 GMT by Stefan Ranstrand Ocean plastic pollution could triple in a decade without action by the ocean economy. TOMRA CEO Stefan Ranstrand responds to the UK Government’s Foresight Future of the Sea report and explains how container deposit schemes and sensor-based recycling sorting could provide a solution.
Posted Wed, 02 May 2018 07:50:00 GMT by JW. Dowey Look at those modified wings and the bee antennae. But this is no stinger or biter. It’s a clearwing moth, and you can find similar species near your own location worldwide. It’s all about the mimic, and its model- in this case a generalised stingless bee. Trouble is, you won’t find this guy. Good luck, but he seems to be almost extinct. One of those many new species that will disappear rapidly, just like many others that have been seen just as we destroy their habitat.
Posted Wed, 04 Apr 2018 08:39:22 GMT by Dave Armstrong There is a songster we have missed. He sings far beneath the ice in the dark of a polar winter, so maybe it’s about time we listened to the incredible songs that this whale concocts every winter, every month and possibly each day!
Posted Tue, 19 Dec 2017 11:15:00 GMT by Bobbi Peterson You can deny climate change as much as you like. The evidence contradicts you. Any logical study takes account of scientific data which can be reproduced. That is the difference between media reports and the global warming reality. Here we have an up-to-date report on the state of one nation, with many others also recognising and acting on how to combat climate change in a coordinated global response.
Posted Fri, 08 Dec 2017 12:30:00 GMT by JW.Dowey IUCN must be listened to, unless you are one of those who disregards any science on the grounds that it could be fake. Acting is the opposite to disinterest, but what can we do to counter the actions of great industries or the governments of large populations of people? The answer seems bland, but it proves individuals are always important.
Posted Mon, 13 Nov 2017 10:10:01 GMT by JW. Dowey From Myanmar, through the Congo to the Atlantic forests of Brazil, we are neglecting our rainforests, but temperate forests are also suffering, often from pest influences as global warming really takes hold in certain regions. How to help prevent a treeless future - as always, take these pieces of well-informed, well-rounded and interesting advice.
Posted Tue, 26 Sep 2017 09:34:49 GMT by Dave Armstrong Where will you wander? The world may be becoming smaller but there are many spots to choose from if you love to explore. A new book reveals many possibilities for those who hanker after a getaway. Whether you imagine shivering in the Antarctic or sweltering in a swamp, this is the ideas factory for you.
Posted Wed, 06 Sep 2017 07:15:00 GMT by JW.Dowey Does the dog in your living room have any similarity to those wild species that we are losing from our savanna and forests? This new discovery of signalling a hunt could lead us to more understanding of much more than our domestic animals. The beauty of the painted dog lies in intricate behaviour and care systems which maintain a society we should envy.
Posted Mon, 04 Sep 2017 14:58:01 GMT by Dave Armstrong Zero waste organisations have been spreading to many nations over the last 10 years. Now we’ve been asking the UK population just how much they care about waste.
Posted Wed, 30 Aug 2017 09:45:00 GMT by Dave Armstrong For the first time, two otters have a comparative study on their ability to learn from others in their clan. This could lead to study of more animals in this area, providing valuable evidence of evolutionary trends in sociability.
Posted Tue, 29 Aug 2017 09:25:00 GMT by JW.Dowey How can we fight the build-up of plastic on landfill, shores and in the middle of the ocean, as well as inside the fish we eat! Fashion can provide a small part of the answer with this new crowd-funded company called Asanox. Plus, you can actually go and pick up the plastic contaminating our best shorelines, alongside sas.org.
Posted Mon, 28 Aug 2017 08:59:00 GMT by Dave Armstrong OCEANA are fishing closer to home on this occasion, hoping to catch governments and those who wish to destroy our precious, and decreasing stocks of habitats , fish and even sea grass, mud and bivalves.
Posted Wed, 23 Aug 2017 09:25:00 GMT by JW. Dowey People wonder why and how hunted animals became the quieter beasts of burden and table fodder of modern times. Here is an interesting moment in time, 14,500 years ago as “Jordanians” hunted sheep and goats with simple bone and stone weapons, prior to their domestication.
Posted Wed, 16 Aug 2017 07:45:00 GMT by Talat Green web hosting is a simple, inexpensive step businesses can take to reduce the environmental impact of their websites. This is how it works...
Posted Mon, 31 Jul 2017 08:59:00 GMT by Dave Armstrong Xmas comes very early for us this year, with a tremendous guide to all our ancestors and their evolution into modern forms. You will need a subscription to Nature to read the details but we have the lowdown on the nitty-gritty of fishies and birdies too!
Posted Fri, 21 Jul 2017 10:55:00 GMT by JW.Dowey How important are our streams and rivers to us in this age of pollution and interference with natural systems? The effect of conifer plantations is generally negative, but the positive effects on some f these streams could point to ways to improve many such forestry projects, as well as the original moorland.
Posted Tue, 04 Jul 2017 09:35:01 GMT by Dave Armstrong The extinction of small and large, plant and animal is a daily event now, as climate change increasingly joins the other anthropogenic influences on the species of our planet. Mapping the possibilities and modelling the effects is now finally helping out with the problems, but we still have to conserve, and quickly.
Posted Fri, 23 Jun 2017 10:56:47 GMT by Dave Armstrong The polyploids among the animals are the focus of the latest research, given the vast number of plant polyploids and the potential of species that have such enhanced genetic capability!
The Earth Times site and content have been updated. We do apologise, as this may mean that the article or page you were looking for has changed. The Earth Times now focuses on producing and publishing our own unique content on environmental issues, which is written by our own team of expert authors and journalists. We now publish environmental news articles and information on various environmental problems. You can use the site search at the top of each page, otherwise there are links to some of the main site categories and green blogs we publish included on this page.
Some of the environmental topics and categories that we now focus on include climate change and the effects of global warming, including their various impacts on both people and the planet as well as conservation issues and news articles relating to nature and wildlife. The site puts an emphasis on sustainability issues, including the use and technological progress made with various types of alternative or renewable energy. Earth Times runs several eco friendly blogs (environmentally friendly) on various topics such as ecotourism (sustainable travel and tourism), eco fashion, green living, green gadgets and clean technology, plus various other environment based news categories including pollution and science news.
If you have any questions or queries please contact us.