Kings Of Leon to headline Slane 2011
Lord Henry spoke to Hot Press about Kings Of Leon and Slane's 30th anniversary
Hot off the press, word has just come in that Kings Of Leon will be presiding over next year's Slane proceedings - the 30th anniversary of the event. The band will perform on the grounds of the famous castle on May 28, 2011.
The Southern rockers were firm favourites to play the mammoth Meath gig. Slane owner Lord Henry Mountcharles had stated earlier this year that they were one of the top acts on his shopping-list for 2011 and it's turned out that, with promoters MCD, he's got his men.
Tickets for Slane 2011 are priced €79 inclusive of booking fee, and will go on sale on Friday November 5 at 8am from Ticketmaster outlets nationwide and ticketmaster.ie.
From its 1981 debut with Thin Lizzy headlining (and a certain U2 3rd on the bill) Slane has been one of the Ireland's iconic venues, which has seen some of the world's leading artists perform some of their biggest ever shows.
Browse our pics from today's announcement by Lord Henry Mountcharles at the Phil Lynott statue in Dublin here.
Speaking to Hot Press, Lord Henry revealed why he chose Kings Of Leon.
"I was blown away by them when I saw them at Oxegen," said Lord Henry. "I thought their musical progression was really interesting and I liked the fact that they've been influenced by Thin Lizzy, which they've openly admitted, and The Rolling Stones, two of the great acts that have played Slane."
"This is a very, very hot act but it's a hot act in the tradition of Slane. Because it's the 30th anniversary, I wanted to find the perfect fit. Some people expected me to go for a legendary act but that just seemed a little too obvious for me. I wanted to come slightly out of left field."
Lord Henry also acknowledged the internet campaign to get the band booked for Slane.
"One couldn't be ignorant of the fact that 12000 people got on Facebook last year pleading that they be on the Slane bill. What they didn't realise was that I was always engaged in getting them but it wasn't going to happen in 2010."
The last band to play the Slane Concert were Oasis in 2009.
After several hugely successful years and the recent release of their record-breaking fifth album Come Around Sundown, (at No. 1 in this week's chart), the band will now help celebrate the 30th anniversary of the historic Slane Castle event.