Pope Francis: Throngs gather in Manila for Mass
(CNN)Pope Francis urged millions gathered in Manila on Sunday to take care of one another -- and help promote peace in the world.
Worshippers in ponchos of all colors held up flickering candles in the rain, hanging on his every word.
The Pope wore a yellow poncho over his robe as he celebrated the Mass, which was attended by 6 million people, according to the Philippine News Agency.
"May he enable all the beloved people of this country to work together, protecting one another, beginning with your families and communities," the Pope said.
His homily followed a thunderous welcome to the capital.
"In these days, throughout my visit, I have listened to you sing the song 'We are all God's children,'" he said. "All of us are God's children, members of God's family."
"We too need to protect, guide and encourage our young people, helping them to build a society worthy of their great spiritual and cultural heritage," he said.
As Francis left the venue in the capital, some jumped over barricades and ran after his vehicle.
A day earlier, the Pope cut short his trip to Tacloban as an approaching typhoon with blistering winds threatened the Philippine city about 600 kilometers (370 miles) southeast of Manila.
Tacloban is still recovering from the 2013 disaster of Super Typhoon Haiyan, described as one of the strongest storms ever recorded with 195-mph sustained winds. It killed 6,300 people nationwide.
Typhoon Mekkhala, which is called Typhoon Amang in the Philippines, made landfall Saturday afternoon just northeast of Tacloban.
Francis donned a slicker to celebrate Mass in Tacloban on Saturday for hundreds of thousands who gathered despite the stormy weather.
Mekkhala was downgraded Sunday, but was still packing winds up to 45 mph and heavy rains.
The Pope's trip began Tuesday in Sri Lanka; he landed in the Philippines on Thursday.
On Friday, he met with President Benigno Aquino, and the pontiff urged the political leader to reject corruption and promote "honesty, integrity and commitment to the common good," the Vatican said.
He also called for social justice and respect for human dignity, according to a copy of his remarks provided by the Vatican.
"Here in the Philippines, countless families are still suffering from the effects of natural disasters. The economic situation has caused families to be separated by migration and the search for employment, and financial problems strain many households," he said.
"While all too many people live in dire poverty, others are caught up in materialism and lifestyles which are destructive of family life," the pope said.
He plans to leave Manila for Rome on Monday.