Baftas 2015: Boyhood wins top honours but Grand Budapest Hotel checks out with most
No one film dominated as Richard Linklater’s 12-year labour of love collects best picture, but Wes Anderson’s comic fable wins five awards
A moving, groundbreaking film about growing up, which was shot with the same actors a few consecutive Sundays at a time over 12 years, won the top awards at the 2015 Baftas.
Boyhood won best film, best director for the absent Richard Linklater and best supporting actress for Patricia Arquette.
The film, which portrays in real time a boy growing up from six to 18, has struck a chord with almost everyone who has seen it. People are watching it and then calling their mothers to apologise for things, said Arquette before the ceremony. Accepting the Bafta, she said Linklater had made a film like no other, which had broken “the rules of cinema … you made an ordinary story extraordinary.” The film’s star Ellar Coltrane, who we see growing from a boy in to a man, said it had not felt like making a movie, it felt “like an exercise of collaboration and vulnerability”.
It was a year in which no one film dominated. The most awards, five, went to The Grand Budapest Hotel and there was success for Whiplash, Birdman, Still Alice and The Theory of Everything – and nothing for The Imitation Game and Foxcatcher.
Eddie Redmayne triumphed in the best actor category for his portrayal of Stephen Hawking in The Theory of Everything. He dedicated the award to his own family, to “his professional family”, the cast and crew, and the Hawkings, “for reminding me of the great strength that comes from the will to live a full and passionate life”. The film also won best adapted screenplay and outstanding British film.
Julianne Moore won best actress for her unbearably moving portrayal of a woman succumbing to Alzheimer’s in Still Alice.
The well-liked Whiplash, “in essence, Rocky with snare drums,” wrote the Observer’s Mark Kermode, came away with three awards including best editing, best sound and for JK Simmons as the tyrannical and ruthless music teacher Terence Fletcher, best supporting actor from an all-American shortlist. Thanking the director Damien Chazelle, his wife, children, mum and dad, Simmons said: “The whole experience has been a gift to me.”
Birdman, could probably feel disappointed with just one award: best cinematography.
Not so The Grand Budapest Hotel, which dominated the craft categories, winning best original music, makeup and hair, costume design, production design, as well as best original screenplay for its absent director Wes Anderson.
The winner of the best documentary was Laura Poitras’ gripping Citizenfour, which documents Edward Snowden’s efforts to expose the scale of NSA post-9/11 spying. It was a predicted triumph as well as the only award where there was no one to pick it up.
Other awards included writer Stephen Beresford and producer David Livingstone winning in the outstanding British debut category for Pride; Interstellar won best special visual effects; Ida won best film not in the English language; and Jack O’Connell won the EE rising star award.
Some of the evening’s loudest applause came for The Lego Movie, which won the best animated film from a shortlist that also included Big Hero 6 and The Boxtrolls. Receiving the prize were Phil Lord and Christopher Miller. Miller joked of the statuette: “It’s like a Halloween mask for a one-eyed child.”
In the two shorts categories, Boogaloo and Graham won best short film and The Bigger Picture won best short animation.
There had been many raised eyebrows that Mr Turner was only nominated in the craft sections, with nothing for its lead actor Timothy Spall or its director Mike Leigh. Leigh at least had a significant consolation prize: the Bafta Fellowship, presented by two actors who know his working methods well, Imelda Staunton and Sally Hawkins.
The 71-year-old Leigh, who won a best director Bafta 10 years ago for Vera Drake, joins an impressive list, from Alfred Hitchcock in 1971 to Helen Mirren last year, with names such as Elizabeth Taylor, Laurence Olivier and Judi Dench in between.
Leigh said he has was happy enough with the four nominations: “Your taste is your perogative,” he told Bafta voters. “Some people are expecting me to be rude this evening … you’re in for a disappointment.”
He thanked everyone he had ever worked with as well as “the boneheads, philistines and skinflints who said no” when asked for money. The films were better off without them, he said, then adding: “May you all rot in hell.”
BBC Films received the evening’s other special award: outstanding British contribution to cinema. It was presented by Julie Walters and Ralph Fiennes and collected by Christine Langan, representing a company responsible for more than 250 films over 25 years, from Truly Madly Deeply to Billy Elliot to Philomena.
It was a typically fun and jovial evening, leavened by poignant special tributes to Richard Attenborough from Prince William and Robert Downey Jr.
Ultimately, no one film dominated – Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid’s record of nine Baftas was never troubled – and it could be a similar pattern in a fortnight’s time. Seasoned awards observers believe the Bafta results can have a real impact on the Oscars, with voting for those not due to finish until 17 February.
Unusually for the Baftas, it was a lovely evening, weather wise, the red carpet bathed in a fading winter sunshine although, as host Stephen Fry joked, inside the Royal Opera House it was “simply pissing down with stars”.
It was Fry’s 10th year as host, first as a newlywed. In previous years he has demanded kisses be blown from the likes of Brad Pitt. This year he went one step further by walking into the audience to get a kiss from Michael Keaton and Edward Norton.