Emmy awards 2011: as they happened
6.30pm ET: Can last year's Emmy's be topped? Now there's a phrase you don't hear about the US TV industry's annual gong-a-thon very often. In fact, mostly never. But in 2010, after years of shambolic broadcasts, badly briefed presenters, over-runs and idiosyncratic awards choices, the organisers finally got it together.
In an article headlined "Were these the best Emmy's ever?" New York magazine described last year's event as the "least excruciating televised awards show since the 2009 Oscars". Which is quite something for New York magazine.
But it wasn't just that new shows like Modern Family and Glee finally knocked the tired favourites off the podium. In fact it wasn't that at all. It was mostly the best Emmy's ever because of this:
– an intro of unparalleled genius topped only by the reaction of Susan Sarandon, who summed up the feelings of the room when she wolf-whistled enthusiastically at Jimmy Fallon, the cast of Glee, Jon Hamm, Tina Fey and Randy Jackson, who performed Born to Run in a contagiously full-on show choir style.
This year, Glee star Jane Lynch is hosting the show, which is being broadcast in the US on Fox. Can we expect another classic year? It's a pretty strong nominations field. (Here's the full list.) Or can we just expect still to be here at midnight?
On the live blog sofa for you tonight are Guardian fashion guru Hadley Freeman, TV blogger Sarah Hughes, and me, an Emmys newbie, for live coverage of the show. I know what you're thinking: what do that lot know about anything. Fortunately we have a real expert on board: co-creator of the Daily Show, Lizz Winstead, is standing by to provide the sharp and snark that is the hallmark of Guardian live blogs. Well, except the ones about the Middle East.
6.50pm: Lizz Winstead is raring to go already. You can follow her on Twitter if you can't get enough of her here. She notes there are more black people running for the Republican presidential nomination than up for awards tonight.
7.08pm: Sarah Hughes is next to me on the live blog sofa, and here's her opening take.
SH: Growing up in a gambling family awards shows were generally seen as just another forum to bet on so I thought we'd kick off with a quick guide to this year's runners and riders.
In the comedy category Modern Family looks almost certain to win for the second time, Downton Abbey is expected to see off Mildred Pierce in the best miniseries category (aka the compulsory HBO award), while the main drama category looks like a straight fight between Boardwalk Empire and Mad Men.
That said I'm always a fan of a risky bet and would be very happy if football drama, Friday Night Lights was finally recognised for four outstanding seasons (we'll just pretend that season two never happened).
As for the rest while I'd love to see awards go to Connie Britton (Friday Night Lights), Amy Poehler (Parks & Recreation), Louis CK (Louie) and either Jon Hamm (Mad Men) or Steve Buscemi (Boardwalk Empire) but the problem with the Emmys is that you never know exactly which way the voters will swing.
Thus logic (and the bookies) might say that Jon Hamm is the favourite to win the outstanding actor, drama category but given that this is the event which awarded James Spader over James Gandolfini in 2007 it's equally possible that Hugh Laurie will get the nod after six years of nominations and no win.
As for the rest if I was placing my money where my words are then I'd say that in addition to Laurie, Laura Linney will take best actress, comedy, Julianna Margulies will win best actress, drama and Steve Carell will get the outstanding actor, comedy award as acknowledgement for his time on The Office, even though the season itself was pretty poor.
Of course all those predictions will probably be completely incorrect so feel free to mock me all over the internet when I turn out to be wrong.
7.10pm: Sharp questions from the Red Carpet on E! Entertainment. Presenter to Melissa McCarthy: "Do you own anything you wear?"
7.13pm: Glee star Lea Michelle (left) has arrived on the red carpet, dressed, appropriately, in a red capret.
7.19pm: We're playing the compulsory awards ceremony red-carpet drinking game. One for "I love your dress", two for "my jewels are from Bulgari". Sobriety will be a struggle tonight, I can tell this already.
7.27pm: This wouldn't be a Guardian live blog without a phone hacking angle. Murdoch-owned Fox, which is broadcasting the Emmys live, confirmed this afternoon that the actor Alec Baldwin had pulled out of a pre-recorded sketch because it had edited a joke that referenced the hacking scandal.
According to the New York Times, Fox said the reference was removed because parent company News Corporation was "taking the hacking allegations seriously and did not want to appear to be making jokes about them".
Baldwin criticised the move on Twitter. He said:"I think it would have made them look better. A little."
7.32pm: Mad Men star Christina Hendricks has arrived, to the delight of the photographers.
Unfortunately the view of the live blog sofa is that she won't win her category (supporting actress, drama). It won't stop the tabloids running pictures of her, though,
7.33pm: Hadley Freeman has arrived just in time to pass comment on Gwyneth Paltrow.
7.43pm: Sarah Hughes notes that The Office's Mindy Kaling makes the first Game of Thrones joke of the night, tweeting that if she were Dothraki she'd kidnap Amy Poehler. We have a feeling that there will be more GoT jokes to come tonight.
7.45pm: HF: Hey look, it's Seal, on E! His wife, Heidi Klum, is being asked to justify why she is wearing appears to be a wave of vomit on her body. Tough question, but not as tough as whether or not we're gonna survive unless we get a little bit crazy, you know.
Also, Seal now has a truly ridiculous trans-Atlantic accent.
7.55pm: HF: slkNADVLKNDVA Sorry, my head just the keyboard in despair: it's Kate Winsome, I mean, Kate Winslet. "I hear you have a red carpet phobia," says Ryan Seacrest.
Not only does that seem improbable, but it does raise the question why she is wearing the red carpet to this event.
TREND ALERT! Red dresses tare THE trend so far. Lea Michele, Sofia Vergara, Rob Lowe's wife and now Kate Winslet are all wearing red dresses tonight. So while I can't promise of these ladies that the curtains match the carpet, I can say that their dresses match the carpet.
8.02pm: Here we go: the 63rd Emmy awards are under way, with the compulsory cheesey opening number featuring the nominees – this year fronted up by host Jane Lynch. And I'm afraid that from where I'm sitting, it's falling pretty flat. Sorry Jane.
8.09pm: As we decide whether the opening montage is hit or miss – and let's face it, there's plenty of time to ponder this question – Hadley Freeman has her opening thoughts on the ceremony and the awards.
HF: As someone who spends an amazing amount of time sitting on my butt and watching TV – truly, I'm embedded in this field – I have incredibly, some might say inappropriately strong feelings about who should win tonight. So if at any point in the evening you notice that there are suddenly no updates from me, that is probably because I have thrown my laptop out the window because a particularly deserving candidate (Amy Poehler Amy Poehler Amy Poehler) hasn't won.
So, Best Drama. It infuriates me that Boardwalk Empire is nominated, not just because Paz de la Huerta is in it and therefore is inherently awful, but because it proves that if you throw enough money at something and slap Scorcese's name on it, it will get nominated, even if it is UNBELIEVABLY BORING.
But let's stay positive and focus on the good, not the bad. I'd love Friday Night Lights to win this, because it's ace. But I'd be happy if The Good Wife won, which is probably a more likely winner. That is consistently solid with great acting and – not something to take for granted in this category – a joy to watch.
Best comedy should go to Parks and Recreation. This show has completely revamped itself from its nervy first season when it was too dependent on The Office as a template and is now completely original and consistently hilarious. Purely for the time the health-obsessed boss, played by Rob Lowe, announces that his "all time favourite food is lettuce", this show should walk home laden.
For best actor in a drama, I will be gutted if Hugh Laurie doesn't get it, and this is not just me, cheering on the token Brit. It is thanks to him that this show, which has literally the same plot EVERY SINGLE WEEK IN EVERY SINGLE EPISODE, is such a joy to watch. Plus, it just makes me happy that he is the successful one out of the old Fry & Laurie duo. You remember Stephen Fry, right? He's the one who kept telling us what a genius he is, a modern day Oscar Wilde, etc etc. Anyway, I think he's writing press releases for Apple these days.
I love Kathy Bates but I will be incredibly cross if she wins best actress in a drama for Harry's Law, David E Kelly's latest legal schlock. It manages to be even dumber than Ally McBeal, which is almost impressive. Instead, I hope Elisabeth Moss wins for Mad Men. Failing that, Juliana Marguiles for The Good Wife.
If they don't give Steve Carrell the best actor in a comedy award for The Office, I'll eat my laptop.
8.16pm: GONG! The award for outstanding supporting actress in a comedy series goes to Julie Bowen, of Modern Family. Bit of an upset there. Sofia Vergara or Betty White were the favourites here. But Bowen's win is not such a surprise for my colleague Sarah Hughes, who tipped her to win her prescient Emmys preview.
8.20pm: GONG! Ty Burrell of Modern Family gets the award for best supporting actor in a comedy. Which makes it a lovely husband-and-wife thing, as he plays Bowen's on-screen partner. Very much the favourite in this category.
8.22pm: SH: Ty Burrell almost goes for the Sally Field weepy award but manages to pull it back, giving an emotional but still funny speech.
8.28pm: After his questionable hosting of the Golden Globes, Ricky Gervais has been allowed back on to an awards show. But only in a pre-recorded segment – cleverly edited, though, to play on the reaction to his last peformance.
8.30pm: GONG! The award for directing in a comedy series goes to Michael Spiller of Modern Family. It's clearly shaping up to be a big night once again for this series, which took the best comedy award last year. Will it be a double? It looks increasingly likely.
8.32pm: GONG! The award for best writing in a comedy goes to Modern Family. Again. Specifically to Steve Levitan and Jeffery Richman.
8.34pm: HF: Why is Will Arnett paired up with Zooey Deschanel to give an award? She can't even read a teleprompter, for God's sake. He looks so embarrassed. Poor Will. He needs me. I should be there with him.
8.39pm: Let's pause to pass judgement on that opening number. "It might not have been as good as last year but the Mad Men segment was great," says Sarah Hughes. That was certainly the best bit – some clever gay and time-travel jokes – but that was about it.
8.41pm: "Welcome back to the Modern Family awards," says Lynch. It is MF's night – here's Sarah's take on the show:
SH: It looks set to dominate the awards and must now be the clear favourite to take the big comedy award, which is probably unsurprising given that its the biggest sitcom in the US not to have lost its star to crack-fuelled insanity.
If it does it'll be a pretty deserving winner – last year the talk was all about a Glee/ Modern Family face-off but after Glee's patchy second season there was only going to be one outcome this time round. If I have a complaint it's that some of these awards weren't given to Parks & Recreation, which has had a great season and is arguably funnier. Then again Modern Family's strength is that it makes it look effortless so no real complaints here.
8.43pm: Troubled star Charlie Sheen comes on stage to present the best comedy award, with an attempt at contrition. It doesn't go down well here: "And the winner for least sincere apology goes to Charlie Sheen," says Sarah.
8.43pm: GONG!: The award for lead actor in a comedy goes to Jim Parsons of Big Bang Theory. Wow. That's an upset. Steve Carrell of The Office was the hot favourite.
8.46pm: All the nominees for outstanding lead actress in a comedy leap up on stage as Rob Lowe and Sofia Vergara read out their names, in one of those "not-scripted-but-scripted" moments.
8.47pm: GONG! The award for outstanding lead actress in a comedy goes to Melissa McCarthy of Mike and Molly. Another Sarah Hughes pick. She's on fire. Take that, New York Times. Amy Poehler, pah.
HF: Nooooooooooooo!!!!!!!! It should have been Amy Poehler! I am genuinely cross. Cross, I tell you. Cross.
8.48pm: Will McCarthy regret her high-pitched, stream of consciousness acceptance speech? Yes, we think so. If this was the Oscars, the band would have struck up by now.
8.50pm: HF: I liked Louis CK before but now I love him for refusing to applaud the man who beat him in his category, best lead actor in a comedy series, and for looking genuinely disappointed at the (totally wrong) outcome.
8.58pm: Richard Lawson of Gawker is cynical of the academy's decision to award the gong for Melissa McCarthy for best actress in a comedy series for Mike and Molly.
The show hasn't exactly been critically lauded – but is notable for having a star in McCarthy who doesn't conform to the size zero stereotype. Lawson says on Twitter: "Now Hollywood can go back to rewarding skinny women for another ten years. Phew!"
9.02pm: An hour down and here's Lizz Winstead's take.
9.04pm: GONG! The award for best reality competition show goes to The Amazing Race. There's nothing remotely interesting to say about that.
9.05pm: GONG! Outstanding writing for a variety, music, or comedy series goes to the Daily Show. That makes co-creator Lizz Winstead very happy. And drunker.
9.10pm: While we were busy live blogging, there was a costume change. Over to you, Hadley.
AND IT'S STILL TERRIBLE!!!!
Oh, Jane! I know you've said you're not a dress-person, but NO ONE is a full length shiny metallic dress with a weird circular neck thing. So why are you working this look tonight? I didn't even know you could buy dresses like this.
Is this what you think dresses are like? No wonder you think they're not for you. Give me a call, Jane, and the two of us can go to Zara and get you a lovely smart LBD. Trust me. And call me, Jane. Call me.
9.14pm: HF: So Daily Show wins. Again. And that's all well and good but it is a shame that the often underrated (compared to The Daily Show) always gets overshadowed by its better known sibling. I wish Stephen had pulled a Kanye on Jon Stewart's Taylor Swift: "Imma let you finish, Jon!"
9.18pm: Time for a musical interlude, and this may be the best moment of the show so far. Which, I'm afraid to say, isn't putting things too highly. It's a medley from The Lonely Island, the Saturday Night Live trio who put out a recording of hiphop spoofs this summer.
There's a random Michael Bolton moment, and a takeaway line: "It's okay, when you're in a threeway." Sadly, Fox censored the line: "I just had sex, a woman let me put my penis in side of her." Boo.
9.18pm: GONG! The award for directing for variety, musical or comedy goes to Saturday Night Live.
9.19pm: GONG! The award for best variety, comedy or music series goes to the Daily Show. That's nine years in a row for this show. Another drink for Lizz Winstead.
9.22pm: Host Jon Stewart pays tribute to the other nominees in his category, including fellow Comedy Central star Stephen Colbert. He obviously read Hadley's post at 9.14pm.
9.26pm: From the comments, and a forthright view from @magnetiq:
9.31pm: GONG! And the award for outstanding writing in a drama series goes to Jason Katims for Friday Night Lights. Which elicits a squeal from Sarah Hughes. "This show never got any love from the Emmys. But finally this year – its fifth and final year – it has got what it deserved. It's a brilliant show with great writing."
9.34pm: GONG! Best supporting actress in a drama goes to Margo Martindale of Justified. That was another one of Sarah Hughes's tips. This show is on Channel Five at the moment. Sarah wrote a big feature on it for the Independent newspaper in London last year. So that would be a big article about a show on a channel that no-one watches for a paper that no-one reads. Nice one, Sarah!
9.38pm: Let's bring that Independent articleto a wider audience, shall we? Sarah described the lead character Raylan Givens, played by Timothy Olyphant, as the "coolest character on television". Sarah goes on:
9.41pm: GONG! The award for best director goes to Martin Scorsese for Boardwalk Empire. Of course it does.
9.44pm: Lizz Winstead's point earlier about the lack of black nominees is striking. Memo to the academy: no, you can't make up for it by having plenty of black awards presenters.
9.46pm: GONG! The award for supporting actor in a drama goes to Peter Dinklage for Game of Thrones. An actor could rarely be more appropriately named. He's not very tall.
He thanks his dog sitter, whose name is Kitty.
9.50pm: SH: While Modern Family swept the comedy awards, in the drama nominations, it's not looking great for front-runner Mad Men. It could be because it's been off the air for so long that voters have just decided to spread the love and reward other shows. That said I'll probably be proved completely wrong when they give it best drama at the end of the night.
9.57pm: GONG! The award for lead actress in a drama goes to Julianna Margulies for The Good Wife. She thanks her husband, who appears to be particularly hot. "I'm happy to be your good wife," she says. Which is not surprising, given his hotness.
9.58pm: GONG! The Emmy for best actor in a drama series goes to Kyle Chandler, for Friday Night Lights. This is a very big upset – in a field of Steve Buscemi, Jon Hamm and Hugh Laurie, none of the critics had him in their sights.
10.00pm: HF: Another trend spot - weird strap things. After Jane Lynch's circular neck things on BOTH of her dressses, we now have Katie Holmes, wearing a baggy blue dress with weird wiggly straps. And hey! Guess what! It looks totally pants!
10.01pm: Lizz Winstead, who had at least one hand in the multi-award-winning Daily Show, is not impressed with Jane Lynch's script. "Who wrote this show? Mitt Romney's speech writers? Seriously, there is better writing on eharmony."
10.02pm: SH: This is a great night for Friday Night Lights, which has been so often overlooked and which only survived after DirectTV did a deal with NBC to continue showing it. The resolutely unfashionable story of a high school football team in Texas, it's one of the best-written and acted shows on television and thoroughly deserves the belated recognition.
10.03pm: We're into a commercial break, so time, if you will permit it, for Hadley to ruminate on Ashton Kutcher.
HF: Kutcher attempted to convince people that he will be good on Two and a Half Men by kicking off his presentation job by saying, "I am not Charlie Sheen." Not only does he completely flub the line but it's not the line he should have said which is OBVIOUSLY "I am that guy who's shacked up with Demi Moore."
But presumably his ego couldn't take it.
And because he's not willing to make fun of himself properly, he will not work on TV comedy. For all of Sheen's faults, and Two and a Helf Men's faults, at least he was willing to indulge in self-parody.
10.10pm: GONG! The award for best writer for a miniseries, movie or drama special goes to Julian Fellowes. A Brit. With a fabulously posh accent. It's going down well.
Great timing – the second season started in Britain tonight.
10.13pm: GONG! Maggie Smith takes the award for best supporting actress in a miniseries or movie. It's the second one in a row for Downton Abbey, in categories normally dominated by HBO.
10.20pm: GONG! Barry Pepper wins best actor in a miniseries or movie for playing Bobby Kennedy. With teeth like that, how could he not have won?
10.21pm: GONG! The award for best director in a miniseries goes to Brian Percival for Downton Abbey. Speak up, Brian!
10.29pm: HF: Oh great, it's my guilty pleasure moment of the night: the dead montage, when they show clips of all the people who have died in the industry that year. Well, the vaguely famous ones anyway, and, as tradition dictates, this will be followed the next day by outrage over all the people they forgot. And, at the risk of sounding insensitive, there was a good crop this year: Liz Taylor, Leslie Nielsen, Peter Falk, High Tower from Police Academy...
But what the hell is this? They've got actual people to sing sodding Halleluja while the montage plays. Of all the times not to have *live* singers would surely be during a *dead* montage, no? And if you're going to have live singers, how about getting Leonard Cohen, Emmys, instead of these rent-a-tuxes, The Four Tenors? What is this, a wedding in Jersey?
And how on earth could Elizabeth Taylor not get top billing in the montage? Well done, Emmys. You managed to screw up the easiest part of the evening.
10.33pm: GONG! For best supporting actor in a miniseries or movie, the award goes to Guy Pearce for Mildred Pierce. No relation.
10.37pm: The award for most inappropriate acceptance speech goes to Pearce, who says: "I got to have sex with Kate Winslet many many times." The live blog sofa cringes. He thanks Winslet for "allowing me to insert myself into your world". The live blog sofa goes into foetal position. "I don't know what else to say." Don't say anything, you creep.
10.38pm: GONG! The Emmy for best actress in a minseries goes to Kate Winslet for Mildred Pierce. Stand by for the luvvie embarassment.
10.42pm: SH: There are many people who love Mildred Pierce, but I am not one of them. It could have been great: writer and director Todd Haynes understands lush, frankly insane melodrama as Far From Heaven proved. But this remake was stripped of all the over-the-top things that made the original Joan Crawford version such fun and treated us instead into six hours of abject misery.
10.45pm: Sarah points out that Kate Winslet has now won an Oscar, a Grammy, and now an Emmy. To get a rare full house, she needs a Tony. (It's called an EGOT.) Expect to see her on Broadway soon, then. And (...gay New York in-joke coming up...) a starring role in Musical Mondays at Splash.
10.47pm: GONG! Downton Abbey takes the award for outstanding miniseries or movie. Creator Julian Fellowes accepts the award.
The British have come, so to speak.
10.48pm: GONG! The Emmy for outstanding drama goes to Mad Men. It's the fourth year in a row for this seminal series, which has never not won this category since its first season.
10.56pm: GONG! Modern Family takes the top comedy award, the Emmy for outstanding comedy series. It caps a triumphant night for the show.
11.02pm: And that's it. Final thoughts from Lizz Winstead:
SH: An interesting night. In drama at least the academy judges decided to spread the love, rewarding less-hyped shows such as Friday Night Lights and Justified as well as the polished The Good Wife.
Not a great night in the end for either HBO or Mad Men, yes Matthew Weiner's drama took the big award (and deservedly, although I would have liked to see voters take a risk and reward Game of Thrones) but it came up short in other categories it would usually expect to dominate with Jon Hamm and Elizabeth Moss particularly unlucky given the quality of their performances this year.
As for HBO Peter Dinklage was rightly rewarded for walking off with Game of Thrones but Mildred Pierce was largely trumped by the Yankee-bait combination of aristocracy and sneered putdowns of Downton Abbey. The only awards for Mildred Pierce went to Kate Winslet and Guy Pearce. Meanwhile the much-hyped Boardwalk Empire, dominant in last week's creative Emmys, failed to make an impression tonight.
If drama was all about the unexpected, comedy was exactly the opposite with Modern Family sweeping just about every award – Melissa McCarthy and Jim Parsons were the only two actors not associated with the show to win. In some ways Modern Family's sweep was understandable, it's a very funny show but it would be great if next year the Emmy voters could look at the clever Parks & Recreations and the wonderful, sadly overlooked Community.
As for the night's biggest shock – that has to be Barry Pepper's win for The Kennedys. Nothing against Pepper, who struggled gamely through the twin problems of an unbelievably poor script and the worst false teeth in the world, but its incredible that the year's most silly series will now be able to include the word's Emmy-winning in the publicity.
11.15pm: We've published a story on Alec Balwin's decision to boycott the Emmysafter broadcaster Fox decided to cut a joke he made about the phone-hacking scandal.
But from the blog, that's it. Thanks for the great comments. From live blog headquarters here in New York, good night!