World's last WWI combat veteran farewelled
During his eulogy, Mr Choules' son Adrian paid tribute to his father and mother Ethel, who died in 2006, for their great ''partnership'' in raising three children and making sure they were all educated and loved. ''The last time I spoke at a funeral I was sad, very sad, we were all very said,'' he said. ''But today it is different ... today is a celebration.'' Adrian said there was no room for sadness because his father had lived ''a very long and very wonderful life.'' ''He now belongs to the rest of world,'' he said, making reference to the international headlines about his father's death in countries including Brazil, China, Switzerland and the Middle East.
He joked about his father's ''sailor mouth'' but said he never heard his father swear until he was a teenager. ''Our father certainly knew all the words and how to use them,'' Adrian said. When his father got angry, his mother would remind him not to swear in front of the children, to which Mr Choules would reply: ''Send the children outside.'' Adrian finished his eulogy address by thanking his sisters and the Gracewood aged-care hostel where his father spent his final years. Turning to his father's casket Adrian choked back tears and uttered the words: ''Goodbye old man and thanks for everything.''
British-born Mr Choules, nicknamed ''Chuckles'' by comrades, joined the British Navy at age 14. He served on the battleship HMS Revenge in 1917 and watched the 1918 surrender of the German High Seas Fleet. He moved to Australia in 1926 as an instructor on loan from the British navy but never returned and later transferred to the RAN. He was a commissioning crew member of HMAS Canberra and served with the vessel until 1931, when he was discharged from the Royal Australian Navy, before rejoining as a torpedo and anti-submarine instructor in 1932. As the acting torpedo officer at Fremantle, Mr Choules disposed of the first German mine to wash up on Australian soil during World War II, near Esperance on WA's south coast.
He was also tasked with destroying harbour and oil storage tanks at the Fremantle port in the event of a Japanese invasion. Mr Choules remained in the RAN after the war, spending his final working years in the Naval Dockyard Police before joining the crayfishing industry, at Safety Bay south of Perth. In all, he served for more than 40 years. Mr Choules released an autobiography in 2009 entitled The Last of the Last, depicting his childhood and move to Australia, as well as his times at war. He and his wife Ethel, to whom he was married for more than 70 years and who died at the age of 98, had two daughters and a son. Mr Choules had 11 grandchildren, 26 great-grandchildren and two great-great-grandchildren.