Grammys 2014: Queen Latifah officiates 33 marriages
Though the Grammys ceremony featured a reunion performance by surviving Beatles Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr, one of the most dramatic moments of the night was the mass live wedding during Macklemore and Ryan Lewis's performance.
Thirty-three couples were married live on stage during a performance of Macklemore and Ryan Lewis's single about equality, Same Love.
The marriages included a mixture of gay and straight couples and were officiated by the rapper and actress Queen Latifah. She was joined on stage by a surprise appearance from Madonna, who was dressed in a white suit accessorised with cowboy hat and cane, and singer Mary Lambert.
The performance took place on a set reminiscent of a cathedral, in a homage to broadening marriage equality legislation across the United States.
"This song is not a love song for some of us but for all of us", said Latifah during the performance. Backstage, she said: "I hope this is inspiration to all the rappers out there and hip hop artists out there that they can continue to tackle any subjects you want".
Latifah officiated using a temporarily granted legal power to marry in California, a licence which expired at midnight.
A casting service had been employed to find the real-life couples, some of whom were same-sex partners, who would be willing to be married on stage on stage during a hip-hop song.
The song Same Love contains lyrics that explicity support equal rights for gay couples and condemn right-wing opposition to gay marriage: "The right-wing conservatives think it's a decision / And you can be cured with some treatment and religion... It's human rights for everybody, there is no difference".
The song ends with the "love is patient, love is kind" quotation from 1 Corinthians, a Bible passage popular at Christian weddings.
Macklemore and Ryan Lewis won four awards at the Grammys, the same number as Daft Punk.
The most significant Grammys win for the duo, whose single Thrift Shop reached number one and went platinum in the UK in 2013, was Best New Artist.
The category was contested by Mercury award winner James Blake and controversial inclusion Ed Sheeran.
Thrift Shop has sold over seven million copies in the US, and its video is the 13th most watched of all time on YouTube. It earned Macklemore and Ryan Lewis the Grammy for Best Rap Performance and Best Rap song, while their album The Heist won Best Rap Album.