Pope Francis preaches compassion to divided Congress
Washington (CNN)Pope Francis challenged America Thursday to embrace millions of undocumented immigrants and join a global campaign against climate change and poverty, wading undaunted into the nation's volatile politics in a historic address to Congress.
Francis also called for a fairer world economy, the abolition of the death penalty, the protection of ethnic and religious minorities, the outlawing of the global "blood" trade in arms and the protection of the family in a speech sure to please liberals.
The speech underscored the emergence of Pope Francis as a global political leader -- rather than a moral or spiritual voice alone. His boldness in staking out positions on the nation's most pressing issues could reverberate through Capitol Hill and the 2016 presidential race in the months to come.
Practicing what he preached, the wildly popular pontiff, who has drawn thousands onto the streets along with blanket media coverage during his U.S. visit, then headed to pray and eat with homeless people and to pose for selfies with his adoring flock.
The Pope, who was greeted by cheers as he stepped onto the floor of the House of Representatives and received several standing ovations and sustained applause during his address, did not scold lawmakers -- his tone was more akin to that of a sermon or a pep talk. But he did not shirk from delivering blunt political messages.
"On this continent, too, thousands of persons are led to travel north in search of a better life for themselves and for their loved ones, in search of greater opportunities," he said of migrants from Central and South America, indicating they needed to be treated as people seeking refuge rather than as exploiting the United States' porous borders.
In an apparent rebuke to politicians who have criticized the tide of undocumented immigrants, he continued, "We must not be taken aback by their numbers, but rather view them as persons, seeing their faces and listening to their stories, trying to respond as best we can to their situation."
"I cannot hide my concern for the family, which is threatened, perhaps as never before, from within and without," Francis said. "Fundamental relationships are being called into question, as is the very basis of marriage and the family."
But he earned only a smattering of applause when he said that reverence for life also means supporting the global abolition of the death penalty. Francis threw his weight behind efforts to pass criminal justice reform, saying society "can only benefit from the rehabilitation of those convicted of crimes."
After his speech, Francis appeared on the Speaker's balcony along with bipartisan leaders of Congress and smiled broadly at the thousands of people gathered below on the National Mall. He singled out children for special mention, and asked even those who had no faith and could not pray to send him good wishes.
Francis later flew out of Joint Base Andrews outside Washington and headed to New York, where he will ride his popemobile through Manhattan and lead evening prayers at St Patrick's Cathedral before speaking at the United Nations on Friday. He will conclude his six-day visit to the United States in Philadelphia on Sunday.