Independent Foreign Fiction prize goes to Gerbrand Bakker
Dutch author Gerbrand Bakker's "haunting" story of a Dutch scholar who retreats to a Welsh farmhouse after an affair has won the Independent Foreign Fiction prize.
Bakker, who took the €100,000 Impac prize for his debut novel The Twin, narrowly beat Argentinian author Andrés Neuman to win the Independent award for The Detour. The award goes to the best work of contemporary fiction in translation and has been won in the past by José Saramago and Orhan Pamuk. Judges including the novelists Elif Shafak and Gabriel Josipovici were won over by its themes of "infidelity, exile and isolation", they said.
Bakker, who works as a gardener as well as writing fiction, said that "to win so unexpectedly was so wonderful". He also beat Man Booker International prize winner Ismail Kadare to take this year's award. "The prize is good because it means sales, and sales mean money for plants for my garden," he said.
The Detour is the story of Emilie, an Emily Dickinson scholar who flees to Wales after an affair. A young man ends up staying with her to help out in her remote farmhouse, while in Amsterdam her husband enlists a detective to find her. John Burnside's review in the Guardian called it "even more powerful" than its "accomplished" predecessor, The Twin. "The Detour is a beautiful, oddly moving work of fiction, a quiet read that lingers long in the mind, like the ghosts that linger in our homes, and in the land around us," he wrote.
Independent literary editor and judge of the prize Boyd Tonkin said the novel was "swift-moving and apparently straightforward, but with mysterious hidden depths". "The Detour is a novel that grips its reader tight and never lets go," he said. "Gerbrand Bakker's tale of a Dutch woman who goes missing from her own troubled life and seeks refuge in rural Wales combines mesmeric storytelling with an uncanny sense of place, and an atmosphere of brooding, irresistible menace. In David Colmer's pitch-perfect and immersive translation, this book will both linger in your imagination and, quite possibly, haunt your dreams as well."
"I've been to North Wales often, I know the land, and I'd always thought I would like to write something about it," said Bakker. "But you need more. And then the three things came together – the Emily Dickinson poem, "Ample Make This Bed", which is the motto, and this Dutchwoman, sitting in a completely strange landscape. That was the moment I realised I could write it. I like quiet environments – then things start to happen. If I set a novel in a big city, maybe nothing would happen – it doesn't inspire me."
Bakker will share his £10,000 prize money with the novel's translator, David Colmer. "It's only fitting, that a narrative centred on a Dutch woman in a foreign country, around language and translation, is honoured by the Independent Foreign Fiction prize," said Antonia Byatt, director of Arts Council England, which funds the prize. "It lingers in the mind and the emotions long after reading it, like all compelling and complex stories. The sensitive translation from the original Dutch by David Colmer complements a deeply moving novel."