TV films to be interrupted by 12 minutes of adverts
The increase from the current maximum of seven minutes per hour comes into play on Monday and applies to ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5. The new rules will be introduced for a year-long trial period but could be made permanent if audiences do not object.
Many viewers who settle down to watch a feature film on a commercial channel already find it frustrating that the action is regularly interrupted by breaks. The revised guidelines will allow two six-minute breaks per hour.
They also cover single dramas, examples of which include ITV's Christmas Day adaptation of Agatha Christie's Murder on the Orient Express and Channel 4's award-winning Mo, in which Julie Walters played Mo Mowlam.
The decision on whether or not to extend the breaks to the full 12 minutes is at the broadcasters' discretion. An Ofcom spokesman said: "This does not necessarily mean that these channels will increase the amount of ads that they show during feature films. It is not clear whether broadcasters will necessarily choose to increase break lengths in films as better advertising opportunities may exist elsewhere in the schedules."
A source added: "We don't think broadcasters will immediately push breaks to the limit because they are worried that viewers will switch off if the adverts drag on for too long."
The rules bring films and single dramas into line with soap operas, which show up to 12 minutes of advertising per hour.
Last week, the House of Lords called for fewer adverts across television, criticising satellite and cable channels which have the 12 minute limite. Lord Clement-Jones, the Lib Dem spokesman for Culture, Media and Sport in the Lords, said: "It is time to put the television viewers' interests first."
The trial period begins on the same day that product placement is introduced to British television programmes.
Commercial broadcasters will be allowed to accept payment for promoting branded goods in films, dramas, documentaries, series, soaps, entertainment and sports shows - bringing it closer to the US, where the judges on American Idol have Coca Cola drinks prominently displayed in front of them.
Product placement will be banned in children's shows, news programmes, UK-produced current affairs, consumer affairs and religious programming. Ben Bradshaw, the former culture secretary, said that maintaining the ban on product placement would damage broadcasters "at a time when this crucial part of our creative industries needs all the support we can give it".
Denmark is now the only country in the European Union that does not allow product placement or have plans to allow its introduction.The practice is already widespread in films, from James Bond to Sex and the City.