CNN fires Kathy Griffin over offensive Donald Trump photo
A day after Griffin released a picture holding a mock "decapitated" head of President Trump shot by self-proclaimed "provocateur" photographer Tyler Shields, CNN announced Wednesday that they have terminated their decade-long contract with the comedian to appear with Anderson Cooper on New Year's Eve.
"CNN has terminated our agreement with Kathy Griffin to appear on our New Year's Eve program," spokesman Shimrit Sheetrit confirmed to USA TODAY in a statement Wednesday.
The network used even stronger language a day earlier: "We found what she did disgusting and offensive," read a statement sent to USA TODAY Tuesday night by Sheetrit. "We are pleased to see she has apologized and asked that the photos be taken down."
Although he's ushered in many a new year alongside the comedian, Cooper would not defend his co-host's actions. "For the record, I am appalled by the photo shoot Kathy Griffin took part in," he tweeted Tuesday night. "It is clearly disgusting and completely inappropriate."
Griffin also lost two more gigs Wednesday: A casino in New Mexico scrapped the comedian's scheduled July 22 performance and Squatty Potty, a family-owned Utah company, fired her from a recently announced endorsement gig promoting their toilet stools.
Squatty Potty CEO Bobby Edwards  said Wednesday the company was "shocked and disappointed" by Griffin's actions. “In response, Squatty Potty has suspended its ad campaign featuring Ms. Griffin. We have acted swiftly and decisively to demonstrate our commitment to a culture of decency, civility, and tolerance."
Social media erupted over the bloody photo, steering attention away from Trump's expected announcement of plans to withdraw the U.S. from the Paris climate agreement, which went into effect in November.
The president said the image particularly upset his youngest son. "Kathy Griffin should be ashamed of herself. My children, especially my 11-year-old son, Barron, are having a hard time with this. Sick!" Trump tweeted.
The first lady also chimed in. "As a mother, a wife, and a human being, that photo is very disturbing," Melania Trump said in a statement issued by her press secretary, Stephanie Grisham.  "When you consider some of the atrocities happening in the world today, a photo opportunity like this is simply wrong and makes you wonder about the mental health of the person who did it."
Late Tuesday night, Griffin took to Twitter to profusely apologize for the image. "I crossed the line," she said. "I went way too far. The image is too disturbing, I understand how it offends people. It wasn’t funny. I get it. I've made a lot of mistakes in my career, I will continue to. I ask for your forgiveness."
Prior to CNN officially removing Griffin from its New Year's Eve lineup, the president's eldest child, Donald Trump Jr., had used his Twitter account to remark, "Squatty Potty pulls the plug on #KathyGriffin but @CNN still 'evaluating' and weighing their options. Insane what's going on there!!!”
Later, he clarified his statement: “Apologies for my last tweet. I didn't mean to group Squatty Potty (with) @CNN. Obviously, one of them has moral/ethical standards.”