Academy Award nods: 'True Grit' a small surprise
Nominations for the 83rd Academy Awards were announced early Tuesday morning, and it was the usual mix of "Of course," "That was expected" and "Oh, come on." The one surprise - not a big one - was the strength of "True Grit," a big box-office success that has been coming on in recent weeks as an alternative to "The Social Network" for best picture.
Best picture, like last year, has 10 nominees, but if you want to know what's really going on in that category, just look at best director: Darren Aronofsky ("Black Swan"), David O. Russell ("The Fighter"), Tom Hooper ("The King's Speech"), David Fincher ("The Social Network") and Joel and Ethan Coen ("True Grit"). Their films are the real contenders.
The other five nominees - "Inception," "The Kids Are All Right," "127 Hours," "Toy Story 3" and "Winter's Bone" - are the also-rans, even though a couple of those ("Kids" and "Toy Story 3") are better than most of the films nominated. And Pixar's "Toy Story 3" is the obvious favorite, and the most worthy, for best animated feature. (The two other nominees are "How to Train Your Dragon" and the French film "The Illusionist.")
In 1969, John Wayne's performance in the original "True Grit" was like a bulwark against modernity, a respectable place for Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences members to park their vote against a wave of innovation represented by films such as "Midnight Cowboy" and "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid." It would be an amazing irony if the Coens, who have been on the cutting edge for most of their career, become the safe harbor for artistic conservatism this time around. Interestingly, Jeff Bridges was also nominated as best actor Tuesday for playing Rooster Cogburn, the role that won John Wayne his Oscar, which only goes to show that if you put on an eye patch and walk around looking flatulent, you can't miss.
The other nominees for best actor are Javier Bardem (amazing in the Spanish-language film "Biutiful"), Jesse Eisenberg ("The Social Network"), Colin Firth ("The King's Speech") and James Franco (for cutting off his arm in "127 Hours"). The Franco nomination seems to be a concession to the fact that it was impossible to walk 10 feet without reading an article about him in 2010. Still, Firth looks like the man to beat.
There were no surprises for best actress, which for weeks has looked like a contest between Annette Bening ("The Kids Are All Right") and Natalie Portman ("Black Swan"). The other nominees are Michelle Williams (brilliant in "Blue Valentine"), Jennifer Lawrence ("Winter's Bone") and Nicole Kidman ("Rabbit Hole"), who seems to have been nominated under the unwritten rule that once you win an Oscar, everything you do must be considered Oscar-worthy. The one bit of news in this category is there is no news.
What would have been news? Well, for example, had Julianne Moore also been nominated for "The Kids Are All Right," there would have been a lot of smiles this morning at Natalie Portman's house.
In the supporting categories, both Golden Globe winners from "The Fighter" were acknowledged by the academy: Christian Bale for his complete transformation as a former boxer turned drug addict (a role for which he lost 30 pounds) and Melissa Leo, as his tough-as-nails mother, a real departure from her usual persona. They're going to be formidable contenders, though Bale faces real opposition: John Hawkes ("Winter's Bone"), Jeremy Renner ("The Town"), Mark Ruffalo ("The Kids Are All Right") and Geoffrey Rush ("The King's Speech").
Also nominated in the supporting actress category, we find Amy Adams ("The Fighter"), Helena Bonham Carter ("The King's Speech"), Hailee Steinfeld (who was really the lead performance in "True Grit") and Jacki Weaver ("The Animal Kingdom").
In the writing categories, Aaron Sorkin's screenplay for "The Social Network" is the 800-pound gorilla. Best original screenplay is a better category this year, with "The Kids Are All Right" going up against "The King's Speech."
Among the documentaries nominated is "Inside Job," an expose directed by the Bay Area's Charles Ferguson of the corporate cupidity and stupidity that led to the 2008 financial crisis. The movie is expected to be the one to beat at the Oscars on Feb. 27.
One has to figure "The King's Speech" has broad support, as it has 12 nominations, the most of any film this year. It's bound to win more than just best actor. "True Grit" has 10, and "The Social Network" has nine.
For a complete list of the 83rd Annual Academy Award nominations, go to www.sfgate.com.