Rev. Moon, religious and political figure, dies in South Korea at 92
His church officially started in the 1950s, with missionaries being dispatched around the world by the end of that decade. His was one of several religious movements that emerged after World War II and the Korean War in South Korea and Japan, drawing from "a tremendous pool of people ... looking for answers as to why the world had turned (against them)," said Virginia Commonwealth University professor David Bromley.
Arranged matches are a common practice for members of the Unification Church. Howard Self, a spokesman for organizers of a 1997 mass ceremony at Washington's Robert F. Kennedy Stadium, said after that event that those blessed by Moon could then be legally married later "in their own countries."
"Even before you're matched, you know that you're going to base your relationship on internal aspects because you don't know what the person's going to look like," said a man before his 1997 union to a woman he had met less than a week earlier.
Moon has had influence in other ways as well. He grew a massive, diverse business empire -- including holdings in industries such as chemicals, arms manufacturing, mining and pharmaceuticals -- at the same as his church grew, providing him with wealth "that allowed him to ... pursue his religious agenda," said Bromley.
He was also known for being "virulently anti-communist," having been imprisoned in North Korea during the Korean War before being freed by the allies, she said.
Moon softened his hard line on North Korea, though, over time -- even meeting North Korea's founder (and grandfather of its current leader), the late Kim Il Sung, and investing money in the north. He also took pride in talking with Mikhail Gorbachev before the Soviet Union's collapse, calling such meetings a part of the unification movement that connects with the "messiah" and therefore was part of "the restoration," according to Bromley.
In the sermon from August 19 posted online, the Rev. Hyung Jin Moon talked about his father's illness and praised his efforts over the years, as well as stating some of the family's political positions as regards China, Russia and others.