Murakami and Houellebecq lead 2013 Impac award shortlist
Titans of international literature Haruki Murakami and Michel Houellebecq are going head-to-head on the shortlist for the €100,000 Impac award.
The Japanese and French favourites are two of 10 novelists in the final running for the International Impac Dublin award, with Murakami picked for surreal love story 1Q84, and Houellebecq for The Map and the Territory, which features the "celebrated novelist Michel Houellebecq" as a fictional character. The Impac is unique in that its longlist is voted for by libraries from around the world – Houellebecq received nominations from Barcelona and Berlin, and Murakami from South Africa, Ireland, the US and Germany – with a panel of judges selecting the shortlist and final winner.
This year's line-up features the highest ever number of translated works, with Murakami and Houellebecq up against Icelandic star Sjón's From the Mouth of the Whale, about an exiled poet, Dutch author Tommy Wieringa's tale of a lonely musical prodigy Caesarion, and Norwegian debut novelist Kjersti Skomsvold's The Faster I Walk, the Smaller I Am, in which a lonely old woman tries to make her mark on the world.
They will be competing with the Costa-winning UK author Andrew Miller's Pure, set in 18th-century Paris, Irish writer Kevin Barry's dystopian City of Bohane, which takes place 40 years in the future, and three American novelists: Julie Otsuka's The Buddha in the Attic, about Japanese mail -order brides in the early 1900s, Arthur Phillips' The Tragedy of Arthur, starring the novelist Arthur Phillips, and Karen Russell's alligator-wrestling theme park-set Swamplandia!
"This is the highest number of books in translation on the shortlist since the award began," said Dublin city librarian Margaret Hayes, "and it is wonderful to have novels from Japan and Iceland as well as France, the Netherlands and Norway. The list also includes novels from the USA, the UK and Ireland. There is something here for everyone and I urge readers to get stuck in and enjoy the humour and sadness, history and fantasy, teenage and elderly angst on this year's shortlist."
The winner, chosen by a judging panel including novelists Kamila Shamsie and Patrick McCabe, will be announced on 6 June. Both Miller and Houellebecq have won the €100,000 prize in the past, alongside Colm Tóibín, Orhan Pamuk and Herta Müller. If the winning book is in translation, the author receives €75,000 and the translator €25,000.