Bruce Springsteen, Paul McCartney silently duet in London
As we learn constantly in this country, politicians have an incredible ability to fuss over nonsense and avoid the big issues.
And then there's what happened Saturday night in London.
Authorities enforced a 10:30 p.m. curfew on Bruce Springsteen's Hyde Park concert just when the Boss called to the stage some old bass player named Paul McCartney.
But Springsteen had already exceeded the curfew by half an hour when he welcomed Sir Paul for a legendary duet of "I Saw Her Standing There" and "Twist and Shout." The microphones, however, were turned off before they could thank the crowd, forcing them to leave the stage in silence.
Concert organizer Live Nation said it was unfortunate that Springsteen's three-hour-plus performance was stopped "right at the very end," but it said that the curfew had been laid down by the authorities "in the interest of the public's health and safety."
Hyde Park concerts have increasingly caused friction between fans and the park's wealthy, whiny neighbors.
Little Steven Van Zandt, who plays guitar in Springsteen's E-Street Band, criticized Saturday's decision as heavy-handed.
"English cops may be the only individuals left on earth that wouldn't want to hear one more from Bruce Springsteen and Paul McCartney!" he wrote on Twitter. "On a Saturday night! Who were we disturbing?" Finally he added: "There's no grudges to be held. Just feel bad for our great fans. ... It's some City Council stupid rule."
London Mayor Boris Johnson said Sunday that the show should have gone on.
"It sounds to me like an excessively efficacious decision," he told London radio — and when's the last time you heard an American mayor use the word "efficacious"?
Just fix this curfew nonsense before the Olympics. We don't want the lights to go out on the 1,500-meter run after only 1,200 meters.
After Robert Downey Jr. showed footage from next summer's "Iron Man 3," Marvel Studios chief Kevin Feige announced other upcoming Marvel movies, including "Thor: The Dark World," "Captain America: The Winter Soldier," the anticipated "Guardians of the Galaxy" and "Ant Man."
"Ant Man" director Edgar Wright made a surprise appearance at the panel and showed his test shots for the big-screen adaptation.
"I can reveal that Ant Man has been here the whole day," Wright said of the diminutive superhero. "In fact, he was here to spy on the ‘Pacific Rim' panel," where Guillermo del Toro gave a look at his giant-robot-versus-massive-monsters flick earlier Saturday.
"Man of Steel" director Zack Snyder presented new footage from the film on Saturday and introduced his Superman, Henry Cavill.
The British actor said "it's a dream come true" to play the iconic superhero, but confessed "it is pretty intense."
The footage showed Clark Kent as a boy and Cavill in his super-suit, along with glimpses of co-stars Amy Adams and Russell Crowe.
Snyder said the film will make Superman more relatable than previous depictions that showed him as "a big blue Boy Scout up on the throne and you can't really touch him."
"The big challenge, of course, is if you can make people feel, ‘What would you do if you were Superman? How would you feel?'" Snyder said.
Quentin Tarantino showed footage from "Django Unchained" and said that he has been wanting to do a Western for ages.
"Django" stars Jamie Foxx as a man on a mission of vengeance as he tries to rescue his wife (Kerry Washington). Christoph Waltz plays a dentist-turned-gunslinger who takes Django under his wing as they take on the owner of a plantation (Leonardo DiCaprio) where slaves are trained for bloody sport. Samuel L. Jackson co-stars as DiCaprio's trusted house slave.
New York City clothing designer Dwayne Walker says Jay-Z and his former Roc-A-Fella record label partners owe him $7 million in unpaid royalties for designing their label logo.
Walker's lawsuit says he came up with the logo in 1995 when Roc-A-Fella was just starting out. The label is now a subsidiary of Universal Music Group.
The logo features the letter R, a record and a champagne bottle.
Producers of the new James Bond movie "Skyfall" have confirmed that Q, the MI6 expert in high-tech trickery, will return in the upcoming film.
EON productions said that British actor Ben Whishaw will play the role made famous by the late Desmond Llewellyn, who played Q in 17 Bond films between 1963 and 1999.
John Cleese played Q in two films during Pierce Brosnan's stint as 007, but Q was absent from Daniel Craig's first two Bond adventures.
Directed by Sam Mendes, "Skyfall" is due for release around the world in the fall. Daniel Craig will be joined by a cast that includes Javier Bardem, Albert Finney, Ralph Fiennes and Naomie Harris.
Numerous online sources are reporting that Charlie Sheen is quitting Twitter. Only one source, this one, is reporting that Tattle is joining Twitter. @DNTattle. Everything you love (and hate) about Tattle but in 140 characters or less.