End of the world – as it didn't happen
Since we seem to have survived the apocalypse so far, maybe this is a good chance to look at some scientifically interesting end-of-the-world scenarios. I’ll pick a few that get the imagination going.
There are dangers out there in space. If the Earth were hit by the intense radiation from a gamma-ray burst (GRB), for example, our atmosphere would be ruined and the surface would be sterilised of life.
GRBs are the violent aftermath of a star exploding. When a big star (many times the size of our sun) runs out of fuel, its core will collapse while its outer layers explode outwards into a supernova, an event so bright that it can briefly outshine all the other stars in an entire galaxy.
The biggest supernovas, known as hypernovas, can release as much energy in just a few seconds as a typical star (our sun, say) might release in its entire 10-bn-year lifetime.
During a hypernova explosion, the star will send two jets of gamma-ray photons shooting off in opposite directions from its poles. This burst of gamma rays, the most energetic electromagnetic radiation there is, can last for anything from a few milliseconds to several minutes. In that time, it will shine about a million trillion times as bright as the sun, making it temporarily the brightest source of gamma rays in the observable universe.
If the Earth happened to be in the direct path of one of these jets of gamma rays, the first thing we would notice is a blinding flash in the sky, as our upper atmosphere began to cook. The ozone layer would be ruined and the surface would become a dangerous place to live for at least a decade. Without the protective ozone, UV rays from the sun would penetrate to the surface of our planet and start tearing through DNA in living things.
Physicist Larissa M. Ejzak examined the effects of a nearby GRB on the Earth in a research paper published in the Astrophysical Journal in 2006. “The primary chemical effect of the incident radiation is to break the strong chemical bonds of [molecular] oxygen and nitrogen, making possible the formation of molecules that are normally present in very low abundances in the atmosphere. Nitrogen monoxide and nitrogen dioxide are in this class; they also catalyse the destruction of ozone.”
She said it would take nearly a decade for the atmosphere to recover from such a burst.
According to Nasa, which looks for GRBs with its Swift satellite, the longest-duration bursts originate near the farthest edges of the observable universe and the stars linked to the explosions are typically on the order of several billion light years away. That means that any gamma-ray photons coming from them would take billions of years to reach us at the speed of light (186,000 miles per second).
Given that the Earth is just over 4bn years old, it is entirely feasible that some of the GRBs scientists see in the sky today actually happened when our planet was still in its earliest stages of formation, well before life even started to evolve.