Brit Awards 2013: Emeli Sandé wins best album and best British female
Sandé, who enjoyed worldwide recognition after performing at the London 2012 ceremonies, picked up the Brit Awards accolades at the live show in London, topping off the evening with a performance of Next to Me.
Her album, Our Version of Events, beat off competition from Alt J, Mumford and Sons, Paloma Faith and Plan B to win the most coveted award of the evening.
She also emerged victorious in the best British female category, with rivals Bat for Lashes, Jessie Ware, Paloma Faith and the late Amy Winehouse trailing in her wake.
Of her three nominations this year, she missed out only the hotly-contested award for best British single, with Adele clinching the prize for her James Bond theme Skyfall.
Adele beat 14 rivals including X Factor winner James Arthur with Impossible, Robbie Williams’ Candy and Coldplay & Rihanna for Princess of China.
The win will be something of a peace offering for the feisty singer, who was memorably cut off in last year’s acceptance speech for best album as the show threatened to overrun.
This year, she spoke only briefly via video recording from Los Angeles, where she is preparing for a performance at the Oscars on Sunday, joking she didn't want to go on too long as she gave thanks.
Later in the night she missed out on the new Global Success award for international record sales to pop band and teen favourite One Direction.
The Rolling Stones, who hoped to win their first ever Brit Award after losing out to the Beatles for best band in 1977, were beaten to best live act by Coldplay.
They had been tipped to win by fans, after celebrating their 50th anniversary with a series of sold-out live performances last year.
It is an eighth Brit Award for Coldplay, who this year beat Mumford and Sons, Muse and The Vaccines to best British Live Act.
The awards were presented by James Cordon, who battled illness to be at the 02 Arena in Greenwich.
Live performances included songs from Muse, Mumford and Sons, Robbie Williams, American country singer Taylor Swift, a comeback from singer Justin Timberlake, and a cover in aid of Comic Relief by pop band One Direction.
Rising star Ben Howard won breakthrough act and best British male, beating DJ Calvin Harris, former X Factor contestant Olly Murs, Plan B and singer-songwriter Richard Hawley.
Folk rock band Mumford and Sons clinched best British group, beating Alt J, One Direction, The XX and Muse.
The International Male award was secured by Frank Ocean, with nominee Bruce Springsteen missing out along with Gotye, Jack White and Michael Buble.
Best International Female was awarded to Lana Del Ray, leaving Rihanna, Alicia Keys, Cat Power and Taylor Swift empty-handed.
Tom Odell won the critic’s choice award, handed over from last year’s victor Emile Sandé, while War Child won the Special Prize in recognition of its charity work.