Video: Parents of Lance Corporal James Ashworth pay tribute to Victoria Cross hero
The mother of a "supremely courageous and inspiring" soldier awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross for his valour in Afghanistan said today she missed him and his smile "so much".
Lance Corporal James Ashworth, 23, will receive the medal in recognition of his "extraordinary courage" while serving with the 1st Battalion The Grenadier Guards in Helmand province last year.
L/Cpl Ashworth was a soldier for five years and came from a family with strong military links
But wiping away tears, his mother Kerry, 44, said that, although the award had made her "ecstatically happy", the announcement had brought back the pain of his death too.
"I miss his smile. He's got the best smile anyone could ever have. He always smiles.. and his hugs. I just love him so much," she said.
The Victoria Cross, the country's highest award for gallantry, has been awarded just 10 times to UK soldiers since the Second World War.
The posthumous award to L/Cpl Ashworth is just the second from the 12-year conflict in Afghanistan.
L/Cpl Ashworth, from Corby, Northamptonshire, was killed as he stormed an insurgent position in the Nahr-e-Saraj district of Helmand in June 2012.
The citation read: "Despite the ferocity of the insurgent's resistance, Ashworth refused to be beaten.
"His total disregard for his own safety in ensuring that the last grenade was posted accurately was the gallant last action of a soldier who had willingly placed himself in the line of fire on numerous occasions earlier in the attack.
"This supremely courageous and inspiring action deserves the highest recognition."
L/Cpl Ashworth and his platoon were ordered into Nahr-e-Saraj on June 13 to engage an insurgent sniper team and came under fire
A follow-up assault by Afghan police then stalled and L/Cpl Ashworth again led an advance using grenades.
Then L/Cpl Ashworth dropped to the floor and crawled to the front of the outbuilding with bullets flying over his head.
Using his last grenade he broke cover and he was preparing to throw it when he was tragically hit by enemy fire.
Mrs Ashworth, 44, a customer service manager, said: "I didn't know the full extent (of what he had done), I knew a bit about what happened and I know when we came to meet the soldiers they were saying how wonderful he was, but I never in my life expected this."