Del Kathryn Barton wins an Archibald again
The Archibald might have a reputation as the great leveller of Australian portrait art prizes, open to anyone who puts paint to paper, but it was seasoned professional and 2008 winner who walked away with the $75,000 cheque this year. took out the Wynne landscape prize for the second year in a row, with his work, Namatjira,while won the Sulman prize. Sydney-based Ms Barton said painting actor , portrayed with a wild cat to reflect facets of his personality, felt very different to the 2008 winning self-portrait that included her two children, which was a more personal experience. “The way I approach portraiture is I sit down and have a long conversation with my subject and try to tease out some symbology that might potentially give greater insight," she said.
It is the first time in 16 years an artist has won a second Archibald, the last being for his portrayal of in 1997, and his 1983 depiction of Chandler Coventry. However Ms Barton still has a way to go before topping Sir William “Bill" Dargie’s record eight wins. For Art Gallery of NSW executive director , the prevalence of established artists among the finalists isn’t cause for concern in a prize that has traditionally prided itself on being open to all. Mr Brand joined the AGNSW in June 2012 and has no plans to stamp his mark on the Archibald, dismissing suggestions the prize might be split between professional and amateur categories. “We’re trying to [create] three serious contemporary exhibitions that a regular viewer or a young artist wants to come and see," Mr Brand said.
“We must get significant artists but we also want the amateur artists to have a go. I like the democratic side of it." He agreed with AGNSW Board of Trustees president, , who said 2013 had been a stand-out year for the finalists from 1641 Archibald and Wynne submissions. “I wouldn’t suggest that’s simply because of a change of director. The Archibald has its momentum and this year is particularly good for it and the Wynne," Mr Lowy said, noting the trend for smaller works this year meant there was a a good balance among the 39 finalists. The 2013 exhibition opens amid broader criticism about a lack of preliminary funding plans for the gallery’s $400 million expansion program, which was revealed earlier this month.
Millionaire philanthropist and chair of the Museum of Contemporary Art expressed disbelief in the media this week that the masterplan had been unveiled without an indication about how it would be funded, or any commitment from wealthy gallery trustees. Mr Lowy said the vision strategy was never meant to be a funding paper. “ It’s too early for that," he said. “That’s not the issue. Simon Mordant can have his view, but we are going to run a very disciplined and proper process.