Egypt visa costs rise as replica Tutankhamun tomb opens
Tourism officials announced that a 30-day visa purchased at the airport will be two thirds more expensive from May 1.
The rise came as the country unveiled a replica of Tutankhamun’s tomb and opened an accompanying visitors’ centre in Luxor yesterday.
Officials hope that, despite the tomb being a fake and there being no immediate plans to close the original version, the latest attractions will lead to a resurgence in visitor numbers. Political unrest and explosions in Cairo contributed to a 43 per cent drop in Egyptian tourism revenues in the first quarter of 2014, according to the economic adviser to the minister of tourism.
Tutankhamun’s tomb has been painstakingly reproduced as it was at risk of damage from increased humidity levels caused by visitors. An average of 2.8g of sweat is reportedly left by each visitor, and it all affects the pigments in the paintings. As the condition of the colourfully decorated walls began to deteriorate, a plan to conserve the original site was drawn up as part of a wider initiative to safeguard more tombs of the Theban Necropolis.
Howard Carter, the British archaeologist, first discovered Tutankhamun’s burial chamber in The Valley of the Kings in 1922. The new version is a faithful copy and claims to be the most accurate, large-scale facsimilie ever made, with conservationists measuring 100 million points in every square metre.
The new visitor centre has been designed to be better equipped to accommodate visitors to the tomb who, during peak times, once numbered up to 1,000 a day.
A poll produced by Telegraph Travel last year revealed that most readers (58 per cent) said they would visit the fake tomb if it meant preserving the original.
Egypt suffered its worst September ever last year in terms of visits from international tourists, with a 90 per cent year-on-year drop in numbers compared to September 2012.
Hisham Zaazou, the country’s tourism minister, said the government’s hopes to win back tourists were focused on Luxor, the southern city that, as well as Valley of the Kings, is also home to the impressive temple of Karnak.