King Richard III's closest descendants visit Bosworth Field before reburial
King Richard III's closest known relatives have set foot on Bosworth Battlefield, where the 15th-century English monarch was killed, on the eve of his reburial.
Four relatives of the last king of the Plantagenet dynasty stood in the Leicestershire fields, imagining the brutal moment that changed the course of history.
All direct female-line descendants of Richard's eldest sister, Anne of York, they were given a tour of the battlefield by expert archaeologists, and shown artefacts that helped identify the site.
Siblings Michael, Jeff and Leslie Ibsen from Canada — nephews and nieces 16 times removed — and Australian-born Wendy Duldig, a niece 18 times removed, were told how Richard was cut down 530 years ago.
"You can allow the imagination to work and get a feel of what it was really like because the topography of the land is pretty much identical," said Mrs Duldig, a social policy researcher.
"You try and envisage the armies involved. It really does bring it to life.
"It must have been terrifying and chaotic."
University genealogists linked the four relatives to the skeleton found beneath a car park in Leicester in central England three years ago, and their positive DNA tests confirmed the bones belonged to the last English king to die in battle.
Richard's remains will be reburied at Leicester Cathedral on Thursday in a service attended by royalty and presided over by England's most senior cleric, the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Award-winning actor Benedict Cumberbatch, another distant relation of the king, will read out a poem written specially for the ceremony as the king's coffin is laid in its final resting place.
Brisbane accountant John Somerset will also be in attendance after receiving a call for a DNA sample from the University of Leicester.
Richard ruled from 1483 until his death at the Battle of Bosworth near Leicester, central England, in 1485.
It was the last major conflict in the Wars of the Roses and Richard's defeat aged 32 saw the crown pass to the Tudors, with his victorious opponent ending the day as King Henry VII.
"Some 530 years ago, he was here and cut down, with chaos raging around. History is leaping up and coming alive," Michael Ibsen said on Ambion Hill, overlooking the scene.
"It all becomes much more tangible," said the 58-year-old London-based carpenter, who, fittingly, built the oak coffin that was used in a ceremonial procession of Richard's remains earlier this week.
Richard Mackinder, the site's archaeology coordinator of 15 years, guided the relatives around the scene.
With artefacts still emerging from the ploughed fields, he said the discovery and reburial of Richard was "the end of a chapter, not the end of the book".
"We're not going to get that 'eureka' moment where it all falls into place," but, having now found the battle site and Richard's remains, "who knows what we'll find in the next few years?" he said.
Perhaps the most prized artefact discovered in the fields was a silver-gilt badge of Richard's personal symbol, a white boar, something worn only by his closest knights.