Adele's Hello smashes Miley Cyrus' Vevo record for Wrecking Ball
She just can't stop breaking records, and Adele has smashed yet another one.
The 27-year-old star's brand new music video for Hello has been named the fastest ever to become 'certified' on streaming platform Vevo.
It has been seen over 100 million times in its first five days, easily surpassing the previous record-holder Miley Cyrus, who crossed the milestone with her video Wrecking Ball in six days in 2013.
Adele, who is making her hotly-anticipated comeback with her third studio album 25 after a four-year wait, released Hello on Friday October 23.
And in the first 24 hours of it landing online, it was viewed over 27 million times which was also a new record.
That huge figure allowed her to overtake the previous record-holder for views in 24 hours, Taylor Swift, whose Bad Blood had garnered 20.1 million the day it went viral. 
The video for Hello is certainly theatrical: shot in a moody monotone, the clip for the epic new ballad sees the singer dealing with the heartbreak of a lost lover after several years.
And somewhat predictably, the epic new power ballad rocketed straight to the number one spot on the charts.
The catchy tune sold 165,00 copies in just three days and, according to the Official Charts Company, Hello had been downloaded roughly 156,000 times in that time period. 
After its worldwide premiere on The Radio 1 Breakfast Show with Nick Grimshaw, the new single topped the iTunes singles chart in 102 countries.
The Rolling In The Deep hitmaker surprised her fans with the news of new music during The X Factor less than two weeks ago with a subtle advert including nothing but a brief lyric video.
And days later, she posted a heartfelt message online, detailing her reasons behind the album, a follow-up from 2011's 21, and 2008's 19.
In an open letter posted to her Facebook page last week, Adele wrote: 'Making up for lost time. Making up for everything I ever did and never did. 
'25 is about getting to know who I've become without realising. And I'm sorry it took so long but, you know, life happened.' 
Meanwhile, Adele's turn in the moody new record-breaking video has inspired her to take up acting as an additional career. 
In a new interview with Kiss FMshe revealed how the video's director Xavier Dolan told her she could certainly be an actress.
She confessed: 'He said he was quite good. I had to cry and everything. 
'I feel like a bit of c*** after saying for all these years I'd never act, because I really enjoyed it.'
Adele added, knowingly: 'I'm sure I'll get some flak for this, but I actually would like to act after working with Xavier. I would be in a film for him, definitely.' 
'I don't like it when those singers start acting, it makes them mediocre. But I don't quite know what I'd be cast as anyway.'