Easter Rising commemoration draws thousands in Dublin
Irish president lays wreath at spot where 15 rebels were executed before taking salute at GPO building where uprising began
Thousands of people are attending the Irish government’s official commemoration in Dublin of the 1916 Easter Rising against British rule.
More than 3,500 members of Ireland’s defence forces paraded past the exact spot where a century ago the rebellion began – Dublin’s General Post Office (GPO).
In one of the first ceremonies, the Irish president, Michael Higgins, lay a wreath at the spot where 15 rebels were executed for their part in the rebellion.
In a poignant ceremony at the Stonebreakers’ Yard in Dublin’s Kilmainham gaol, the president was flanked by a military guard of honour drawn from the defence forces cadet school.
After prayers and a minute’s silence, a lone piper from the Army No 1 Band played the lament Wrap the Green Flag Around Me Boys. The Irish tricolour, which flew at half mast throughout, was then raised.
Higgins arrived by military cavalcade at the General Post Office on O’Connell Street at midday, where the Irish Proclamation was read out by the rebel leader Patrick Pearse on Easter Monday 1916.
As the army band played Reveille and the Irish national anthem, six Aer Corps aircraft flew above the capital’s main thoroughfare billowing smoke in the colours of the national flag.
The rising is one of the seminal events in modern Irish history and took place in the middle of the first world war. More than 450 people lost their lives in almost a week of fighting between republican rebels led by the poet and teacher Pearse and British armed forces in the city.
The rebellion was a military failure but the execution of Pearse alongside the other leaders of the rising, coupled later with the attempt to introduce military conscription into Ireland, turned the population in what is now the Irish Republic against the British.
But the objectives of the rebels, who wanted a 32-county Irish Republic, were arguably never realised. By 1921 Ireland was partitioned into two states – the Free State in 26 counties and unionist-dominated Northern Ireland. The Free State did not become a republic, fully independent from Britain, until 1948.
Unionists in the north, however, were and remain hostile to the goals of the rebels’ republican ideology. All the major unionist parties are boycotting Sunday’s commemoration in Dublin.
At the GPO itself an officer from the Irish defence forces will read out the same proclamation that Pearse read at the very start of the insurrection.
Meanwhile, the Northern Ireland secretary, Theresa Villiers, has praised the way the Irish government has used the centenary to promote reconciliation on the island.
Villiers said she recognised the significance of this weekend for Irish people around the world.
She added that whatever one’s perspective, she welcomed and appreciated the efforts of the Irish government to ensure the centenary was “marked in ways that are inclusive and designed to promote reconciliation”.
Sinn Féin was meanwhile organising the largest demonstration in Northern Ireland with a parade through West Belfast to the republican plot at Milltown cemetery.
Divisions within Northern Ireland about the 1916 rebellion and its legacy were evident on Sunday morning on the Falls Road in Belfast, the main route of the Sinn Féin commemoration.
A new mural was painted to recall the events of a century ago and included a portrait of the unionist leader and founder of the original Ulster Volunteer Force, Edward Carson.
The inclusion of a unionist icon in the heart of republican West Belfast was meant to send a signal that republicans understood the unionist tradition on the island.
However, overnight the Carson portrait was bombarded with paint bombs and later set alight. Hardline dissident republicans were bitterly critical of the decision to paint Carson’s image in their area.