Man Booker Prize: Paul Beatty wins accolade for The Sellout in first win for US author
Paul Beatty's The Sellout, a stinging satire of race and class in the United States, has won the Man Booker Prize, marking the first time an American has taken the prestigious fiction award.
Judges said Beatty's provocative book was a satire to rank with the classics, and as timely as the evening news.
Historian Amanda Foreman, who chaired the judging panel, said the book "plunges into the heart of contemporary American society, and with absolutely savage wit — the kind I haven't seen since [Jonathan] Swift or [Mark] Twain".
The Sellout is set in a rundown Los Angeles suburb called Dickens, where the residents include the last survivor of the Little Rascals and the book's narrator Bonbon — an African American man on trial at the US Supreme Court for attempting to reinstate slavery and racial segregation.
The book has been likened to the comedy of Richard Pryor and Chris Rock.
Foreman said The Sellout, which mixes pop culture, philosophy and politics with humour and anger, set out to "eviscerate every social taboo".
The five judges met for a marathon four hours on Tuesday to choose the winner from among six finalists, whittled down from 155 submissions. Foreman said the decision for Beatty's work was unanimous.
Beatty, 54, was awarded the 50,000 pound ($80,000) prize by Camilla, the Duchess of Cornwall, Prince Charles' wife, during a black-tie ceremony at London's medieval Guildhall.
Founded in 1969 and previously open only to writers from Britain, Ireland and the Commonwealth, the Booker expanded in 2014 to include all English-language authors.
There were fears in Britain's literary world that the change would bring US dominance to a prize whose previous winners include Salman Rushdie, Ben Okri, Margaret Atwood and Hilary Mantel.
But the 2014 and 2015 winners were Australia's Richard Flanagan and Jamaica's Marlon James.
One other American novel was among the finalists: Ottessa Moshfegh's bleak character study Eileen.
The favourite was Canada's Madeleine Thien for Do Not Say We Have Nothing, the story of two families roiled by China's tumultuous history during the 20th century.
The other contenders were Graeme Macrae Burnet's Scottish murder story His Bloody Project, Deborah Levy's tale of mother-child trauma Hot Milk, and All That Man Is — a portrait of masculinity in a fragmented Europe by Canadian-born British novelist David Szalay.
The prize, subject to intense speculation and a flurry of betting, usually brings the victor a huge boost in sales and profile.
Apart from Levy, a 2012 Booker finalist for Swimming Home, most of this year's contenders are relatively unknown, but Foreman said they were "the household names of the future".