Helen Mirren accuses Hollywood of penis worship
British actor says film industry worships at the 'altar of the 18 to 25-year-old male and his penis' as she attacks sexism
Helen Mirren used a Beverly Hills awards breakfast as her cue to lash out at Hollywood sexism, lamenting the fate of female actors and accusing the industry of worshipping "at the altar of the 18 to 25-year-oldmale and his penis". Neither, it seemed, was she much impressed with her reputation as a sixtysomething sex symbol. It was, she said, "bloody irrelevant".
The Oscar-winning actor was presented with the Sherry Lansing leadership award at a ceremony, organised by the Hollywood Reporter magazine, to honour the 100 most powerful women in entertainment. "With all due respect to you many brilliant and successful women in this room, not much has changed in Hollywood film-making that continues to worship at the altar of the 18 to 25-year-old male and his penis," Mirren said. "Quite small, I always think."
Earlier this year, Kathryn Bigelow became the first woman to win the Academy award for best director, heralding a potential sea change within the industry. But Mirren pointed out that, for female actors, the prognosis remains bleak. "I resent in my life the survival of some very mediocre male actors and the professional demise of some very brilliant female ones," she said.
Later, in an interview with the Hollywood Reporter, the actor poured scorn on her sex-symbol image. "We have to let go of this crap," she insisted. "It creates even more pressure on women and I certainly don't want to be a part of that ... I'm not beautiful. I clean up nice ... [But] the fact that I look good at the age I am is bloody irrelevant."
Mirren, now 65, won the 2006 best actress Oscar for her turn in The Queen and was nominated again this year for The Last Station. She recently appeared as a gun-toting CIA grande dame in Red, opposite Bruce Willis, and will next be seen in Rowan Joffe's 1960s-set adaptation of Brighton Rock.