The Archers and EastEnders: why are fans making such a fuss?
BBC storylines featuring Nigel Pargetter and Ronnie Branning have upset some – but don't they know it's only make believe?
There is nothing like soap when it comes to getting into a lather. And with barely a week gone, 2011 has already witnessed two foaming controversies over long-running dramas, both at the BBC.
First there was Nigel Pargetter falling to his death in The Archers, a plot twist that the BBC promised would "shake Ambridge to the core". In the event, Ambridge survived the shock with commendable stoicism, but the same could not be said for many disappointed listeners, who were shaken by the fact that they were not more shaken.
Then came the furore surrounding the cot-death story in EastEnders, with upwards of 6,000 complaints concerning the plotline in which the character Ronnie Branning, played by Samantha Womack, lost her baby James and, in her grief, swapped him for Kat and Alfie Moon's baby, Tommy.
What outraged many viewers was the idea that the EastEnders producers had used the issue of sudden infant death syndrome in a manner that was described by Anne Diamond, whose son died a cot death, as "tacky sensationalism".
At first the BBC thought it was dealing with disgruntled soap addicts who, dismayed by the plot twist, had rushed to a hasty conclusion. So it explained that the scriptwriters had approached the subject with due care and sensitivity, and that this would become obvious as the story played out.
But what the BBC was up against was a concerted campaign of the kind that can now be rapidly organised on the internet. Leading the objections was the influential website Mumsnet, whose chief executive, Justine Roberts, wrote to Mark Thompson, director general of the BBC, complaining of "a cynical ploy to make headlines by creating deliberate controversy".
Yes, he might have replied, it's a soap opera, not an educational arm of social services, and that's what soap operas do, make headlines and create controversies. Most estranged wives don't bury their cheating husbands alive, as Tanya did to Max Branning. And most women don't kill their newlywed husbands, as Janine did to Barry, or hire a hitman to do the job, like Cindy Beale. In other words, he could have pointed out that the real world and the soap world are separate entities that bear only the flimsiest resemblance to one another.
Instead reality bled into fiction with the news that Womack was quitting EastEnders – disillusioned by the plot, some said – although the BBC denied that. Now the BBC has apparently opted to truncate the cot-death story in response to the criticism. This may be seen as a triumph of interactive audience participation and a show of sensitivity to grieving mothers who, claimed Mumsnet, had been "stigmatised".
But that would be wrong. What the decision marks is another victory for a burgeoning grievance culture and a new benchmark in the promotion of victimhood. No interest group will now be satisfied until it has succeeded in rewriting a TV plot. It's also the logical conclusion of the BBC's attempts to use soap opera as a soap box, a place in which to take contentious or emotive issues, dramatise them for public consumption and "raise awareness". This is what John Yorke, the BBC controller of drama, called putting "big strong social issues" in a "traumatic wrapper".
That's all well and good, except the BBC prides itself on conveying the right message: understanding, tolerant, improving. Which means that it necessarily exposes itself to the accusation of conveying the wrong message. In trying to stitch right-thinking ideas into a popular genre, the producers have tailored their own dramatic straitjacket.
It may be that the cot-death plot is ludicrous, even offensive. But there is a perfectly sensible method of registering that opinion. It involves turning the TV over or off. Righteous campaigns are best left to the real world, where the scriptwriters could genuinely do with some help.