Tickets for Backstreet Boys concert set to go on sale 

 - Life & Style - Vietnam News
HA NOI — Tickets for a concert by the Backstreet Boys will go on sale tomorrow in Ha Noi, HCM City, Bien Hoa and Hai Phong.
Tickets can also be booked online by visiting the website www.bsb.com.vn, according to Water Buffalo Productions, the organisers.
The This Is Us concert will take place on March 24 at Military Zone 7's Stadium in HCM City, and on March 26 at My Dinh National Stadium in Ha Noi.
DA NANG — The first ever International Choir Competition will be held in the central city of Hoi An between March 15 and 18, according to Le Van Giang, chairman of the Hoi An People's Committee.
Already, 34 choirs from various countries and territories including Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Hong Kong and Estonia have registered to take part in the contest, he said.
Around 900 singers and musicians will compete in 13 categories of six different choir groups of various ages.
The opening performance will be held on March 16 on a floating stage in the Hoai River Square.
The event has been jointly organised by the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism, Quang Nam Province authorities and the Germany-based Interkultur organisation.
HCM CITY – HCM City-based tour operator Vietravel has unveiled plans to organise underwater weddings for a record nine couples in Nha Trang on Valentine's Day, February 14.
The Viet Nam Dive Centre, or Vinadive, a branch of Vietravel, said it will organise the 30-minute underwater nuptials with traditional Christian rituals like exchange of rings and kissing of the bride.
Other rituals like popping the champagne and cutting the wedding cake in front of the two families and friends will be held on board the Vinadive off Mun Islet off the central city.
The day before the wedding, Vinadive instructors will teach the couples to dive.
For Valentine's Day this year, Vinadive is offering the package at VND8 million per couple, a discount of VND2 million.
The centre organised Viet Nam's first underwater wedding in 2007.
Further information is available at Vinadive, Biet Thu Street, Nha Trang and www.vietnamdive.com.
HCM CITY — Illegal copies of the award-winning film Bi, Don't Be Afraid are flooding shops in Ha Noi and HCM City a month ahead of its release around the country.
"Many people have bought the bootleg DVDs but they have hazy pictures and awful sound," Chu Tat Khang, a representative of Galaxy, the distributor of Bi, Don't Be Afraid, said.
"I believe buyers of the pirated DVD will buy tickets to see the film at cinemas to enjoy its picture and sound quality," he added.
Bi, Don't Be Afraid, directed by Phan Dang Di, tells the story of a family in Ha Noi as seen through the eyes of Bi, a six-year-old boy.
It won several international prizes last year, including the Best Screenplay Award at the Cannes International Critic's Week and the New Talent Award at the 54th Hong Kong Asian Film Festival.
The film is scheduled to hit the screen on March 13. — VNS