Enid Blyton manuscript found
Unpublished novel by late children's writer called Mr Tumpy's Caravan believed to have been discovered in archive
Book lovers who have long thirsted for more "lashings of ginger beer" or further "jolly japes" could be in for an unexpected treat – more than 40 years after the death of Enid Blyton.
To the delight of her fans of all ages, an unpublished novel by the late children's writer is believed to have been discovered in an archive of her work.
Mr Tumpy's Caravan, a 180-page fantasy story thought to have been unknown previously, was found among a collection of manuscripts auctioned in September.
A charity, the Seven Stories children's book centre in Newcastle, paid around £40,000 at the time for the haul, which included Malory Towers and Secret Seven books.
However, it took archivist Hannah Green to discover the unpublished work, which follows the adventures of a caravan with feet and mind of its own. "It's really exciting. It's not a short story. It's around 200 A4 pages, all written with a typewriter," said a spokeswoman for the centre.
"It's a very clean manuscript with no spelling mistakes. Hannah read it and really enjoyed the story."
The manuscript was initially believed to be a version of a picture book called Mr Tumpy and His Caravan, which was compiled using comic strips, but the Enid Blyton Society confirmed it appeared to be a completely different book.
Imogen Smallwood, Blyton's youngest daughter, told BBC News: "It's a whole book, written with words, about a completely different Mr Tumpy and indeed a completely different caravan.
"There's always excitement when an unknown typescript is found of anybody's who is well known.
"Because this wasn't even known about, it has to rank quite high."
The creator of an internationally renowned series which included mystery and adventure stories such as the The Famous Five andThe Secret Seven, Blyton wrote nearly 800 books which have been translated into more than 40 languages and sold more than 500m copies worldwide.
The typescript of the newly discovered novel is not dated but carries the address Old Thatch, Bourne End, Buckinghamshire, where the author lived until 1938. The collection of original typescripts was auctioned following the death of Blyton's eldest daughter, Gillian Baverstock, in 2007. Seven Stories, which aims to save and celebrate great British children's works, plans to hold an Enid Blyton exhibition in 2014.
Chorion, the company that controls Blyton's estate, said it could not be totally sure about the differences between the picture book and the novel because they pre-dated its acquisition of the estate but said it had "every confidence" in the Enid Blyton Society's views.