Sathya Sai Baba critical, stays on ventilator
BANGALORE: Doctors treating Sri Sathya Sai Baba (85) on Monday said the spiritual guru's condition had turned critical. "The vital systems are not adequately responding. His condition is critical," said ex-AIIMS cardiologist Dr A N Safaya, among the doctors attending on him. "Sai Baba continues on ventilator support for helping his respiration and suction of secretions from the lungs," said Dr Safaya, who is the director of Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Medical Sciences at Puttaparthy. He said the Baba is on continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) to help kidney function. "The panel of doctors treating him is doing its best," Dr Safaya said. Sai Baba was admitted to Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Medical Sciences at Prashanti Gram in Andra Pradesh's Anantapur district on March 28 following pneumonia and respiratory problems. A team of experts is constantly monitoring his health condition. The doctors had also implanted a pacemaker because of his irregular heart beat. Government-appointed Dr Ravi Raj earlier allayed fears of Sai Baba's devotees from India and abroad saying his health was improving and there is no immediate threat to his life. His blood pressure was said to be normal but urea count in urine was high necessitating dialysis. "We all believe that he will be fine," said Arvind Sharma, an alumni of Sri Sathya Higher Secondary Sai School, Puttapurthy. "After all, there are instances in Shirdi Sai Baba's life when he left his body for a while and then came back," said Sharma. Sathya Sai Baba has called himself Shirdi Baba's reincarnation. Dr Ravi Raj-led four-member expert team is in Prashanti Gram to coordinate with the doctors of the super-speciality hospital treating Sai Baba on chief minister N Kiran Kumar Reddy and governor E S L Narasimhan's directions. Andhra Pradesh minister and another ardent devotee J Geeta Reddy is camping in the area and she told reporters on Sunday that Sai Baba's condition was stable and urged the devotees to maintain peace and cooperate with the Sai Seva Trust and police. "The devotees should not gatecrash into the hospital," she said. The area around the hospital is under heavy security blanket and Around 5,000 cops are deployed. DGP Aravinda Rao, who visited the hospital, said Anantapur DIG Charu Sinha is looking after security measures. Additional police checkposts have been set up at Prasanthi Nilayam and the hospital to ensure that devotees or others do not create a commotion. Apart from the hospital, the Sathya Sai Trust runs a mega hospital in White Field near Bangalore and educational institutions in Puttaparthi and Anantapur. It also runs drinking water schemes in Anantapur and Chennai. Judges, bureaucrats, ministers, MPs, MLAs and chief ministers from across the country are known to be Sai Baba's devotees.