Crucifixion recreated in Trafalgar Square as Christians mark Good Friday
Actors captivated thousands as they recreated the dramatic moment Jesus was put to death on the cross in London's Trafalgar Square.
The Passion of Jesus marked Good Friday and spectators were greeted with three full size Roman crosses at the foot of Nelson's Column as actors from the Wintershall Estate in Surrey portrayed Jesus' final hours and resurrection.
24 devout Filipinos took re-enactment a step further having nails driven into their hands and feet watched by thousands of Catholics in a graphic reconstruction of the moment Jesus was put to death.
The extreme display of devotion drew 10,000 spectators to San Fernando, near Manila.
However, the practice, which aims to re-create the Passion of Christ, is criticised by the Roman Catholic Church, which believes it is a distortion of the Easter message.
Meanwhile, in Syria, Good Friday and other Easter processions have been cancelled following violence in which a number of 'martyrs' have died, according to church officials.
Celebrations would normally see the Christian minority pour into the street for public gatherings.
Violence has erupted in the country as protesters rise up against President Bashir al-Assad and the 48-year-long state of emergency, although that has now been lifted.
Also, Pope Benedict XVI is making history today by answering viewers' questions during a TV religious programme.
The pontiff recorded the question and answer session earlier this week for a show called 'In his Image' and will be on air at 3pm - the time Christians believe Christ died on the cross
In Northumbria, dozens of pilgrims walked across a tidal causeway while carrying crosses during the final leg of the Northern Cross pilgrimage to Holy Island in Northumbria.
For more than thirty years Christians have taken part in the pilgrimage to Holy Island during Holy Week.
In Jerusalem, Christian pilgrims have been filling the alleyways of old Jerusalem to mark Good Friday, commemorating Jesus' crucifixion in the city two millennia ago.
Thousands of international visitors and local Christians retraced Jesus' last steps down the Via Dolorosa, which is Latin for 'Way of Suffering'.
The route ends at the ancient Church of the Holy Sepulcher, revered as the site of Jesus' crucifixion, burial and his resurrection two days later on Easter Sunday.
Preparing to be crucified, Alex Laranang, a 55-year-old Filipino food vendor who cannot read or write, said he hoped God would help him win the Jueteng - a popular illegal lottery in the Philippines.
At 3pm the pontiff will make history with a television broadcast answering questions from viewers about Christianity. He will tell a mother whose son has been in a coma for two years after being struck by multiple sclerosis in 1993 that 'his soul is like a guitar with broken strings'. The woman, named as Maria Teresa, was among ten people whose questions for Pope Benedict XVI were chosen after more than 3,000 were emailed to the Italian state TV show's website. The Pope told her to continue caring for her son and said her presence would be entering into the deepness of his hidden soul. One Muslim woman from the Ivory Coast wanted to know more about the life of Christ as a 'man of peace' particular as her country is 'at war'. There were also questions chosen from seven young Christians in Baghdad who explain to Pope Benedict how they risk their lives every day by simply expressing their faith.
The father-of-five said he had won three thousand pesos (£40) twice in the five years he had himself crucified on a cross.           
'The first time I was nailed to a cross, I was terrified, but I prayed to Jesus to take the pain. Now, I don't feel anything. It's like getting an injection,' he added.         
Roli Pantoja, a construction worker, said he felt much better after getting down from a wooden cross. This was his sixth crucifixion.       
'I feel very fresh, like a new-born baby. I can't feel any pain,' he said.     
The Church strongly disapproves of the practice, which took hold in northern Pampanga province about 60 years ago as a form of religious vow for Filipinos seeking forgiveness, to have illnesses cured or even to get wishes granted.
'There's only one crucifixion that saved mankind,' said Angel Lagdameo, former head of the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines and archbishop in the central city of Jaro.  
After playing Christ in the town's main re-enactment for the 25th time today, house painter Ruben Inaje said he wanted to retire in two years when he completes his third nine-year religious vow to carry the 50 kg (110 pounds) wooden cross.
The colourful street play in Cutud village has been drawing thousands of curious foreign and local tourists as well as journalists, turning what should be a solemn Good Friday religious ritual into a carnival-like atmosphere.
The town has built a hill with three crosses in the middle of an open field for the main ceremony, with crucifixions also taking place in nearby villages earlier in the day. 
Souvenir and food stalls surround the hill, with people selling ice-cream, sodas and water  among the crowd.
The Church says crucifixions done to seek something from God are not Christian acts because they are self-serving and corrupt the message of Christ's suffering for others. More than 80 per cent of the Philippines population are Catholic.            
'For us, it is enough for Catholics to observe the church activities from Palm Sunday to Easter Sunday and comply with the discipline of Lent,' Monsignor Pedro Quitorio, spokesman for the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines, said.    