Who's going to the royal wedding? Check out the guest list!
Are you watching the wedding? Share your photos and footage of the pomp and preparation surrounding the wedding of the century with CNN iReport.
London (CNN) -- Buckingham Palace on Saturday released an edited guest list for Prince William's marriage to Kate Middleton.
A glittering list? Not quite -- this royal wedding is no Oscars red carpet. But for celebrity spotters, there will be a few famous names or, as the Palace prefers to call them, people "who may be recognizable to television viewers," to look out for on April 29.
As expected, top of the list is singer and musician Elton John, who sang a moving rendition of "Candle in the Wind" at Diana, Princess of Wales's funeral in 1997.
Likely to be accompanied by his civil partner, David Furnish, the couple are less likely to sport the gnome glasses they wore to the "Gnomeo and Juliet" premiere in Los Angeles in January this year.
Footballing star David Beckham, who worked with the Prince on England's 2018 World Cup bid, is invited, along with his popstar-turned-fashion-designer wife, Victoria. The former Spice Girl will be one to watch in the style stakes, known for her love of sharp, directional tailoring.
"Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels" director Guy Ritchie, described as a friend of the couple, is also invited. As the former husband of Madonna, he's perhaps less likely than some to feel intimidated by the Queen.
Comedian Rowan Atkinson, more famously known as Mr Bean, is described as a close friend of the Prince of Wales. No doubt the prince and his bride will be hoping he doesn't initiate any Bean-style pratfalls in the Abbey.
The Prince's passion for sport is represented by Australian Olympic swimmer Ian "Thorpedo" Thorpe, Welsh rugby player Gareth Thomas, former West Ham and England footballer Trevor Brooking, and jockey and friend of the prince, Sam Waley-Cohen.
England rugby star Mike Tindall will arrive on the arm of his fiancee, the prince's cousin Zara Phillips. The couple plan to marry later in the year.
Soul singer Joss Stone, who performed at the Concert for Diana at Wembley in 2007, also gets the nod, as does photographer Mario Testino, who took the couple's official engagement portrait.
Canadian billionaire Galen Weston, socialite and reality television star Tara Palmer-Tomkinson, journalist Tom Bradby, who conducted the couple's first interview, and television presenter Ben Fogle also make the cut.
Six movies to get you in the mood for the royal wedding
Military guests include the Prince's colleagues from RAF Valley, his Commanding Officer in the Household Regiment and military mentor Brigadier Smyth-Osbourne, and Holly Dyer, sister of William's Sandhurst friend Joanna, who was killed by a bomb in Iraq in 2007, and the widow of his Platoon Commander at Sandhurst, who was killed in Afghanistan in the same year.
Royal guests include the Greek royal family, the Queen of Denmark and representatives from Belgium, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Norway. Also included are royals from Spain, Sweden and Romania. Prince Albert of Monaco is invited with his fiancee, Charlene Wittstock, the former South African Olympic swimmer. Also coming is Princess Elizabeth of Yugoslavia, mother of "Dynasty" star Catherine Oxenburg.
The Sultan of Brunei will attend, along with the Sheikh of Kuwait. Representatives from Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi will also attend.
From Africa, royals from Lesotho, Morocco and Swaziland, and from Asia and the Pacific, Malaysia, Thailand and Tonga will all be represented.
Britain's Prime Minister, David Cameron, and deputy Prime Minister, Nick Clegg, are on the list, along with other leading figures from government and the opposition. Offbeat London mayor Boris Johnson will also attend.
Governors general and prime ministers from across the Commonwealth are strongly represented, including Australia's Prime Minister, Julia Gillard and New Zealand premiere John Key.
The royal wedding, as a semi-state occasion, does not include world leaders outside the Commonwealth -- so Presidents Obama and Sarkozy will have to find alternative diversions for April 29.
Other guests include Kate Middleton's former headmaster, William's Eton housemaster and Sir John Major, the former British prime minister who was appointed guardian of Prince William after his mother's death.