Get Your Royal Wedding Fix on TV
According to a recent New York Times/CBS News poll, only 28 percent of Americans are either somewhat or very closely following the news about the Friday nuptials of Prince William and Kate Middleton. Royal watchers, this day is for you. (For the remaining 72 percent of the country, it’s a good time for Netflix streaming.)
The pandemonium begins in the wee hours as the networks converge on Westminster Abbey, where Kate is scheduled to embark on her four-minute walk up the aisle to the coronation anthem “I Was Glad,” by Charles Hubert Hastings Parry, at 11 a.m. local time (6 a.m. in New York), after celebrities like David and Victoria Beckham and foreign royalty, including the sultans of Oman and Brunei, have filed into the pews. The ceremony will be led by the Rev. Dr. John Hall, the dean of Westminster; the couple will be married by the Most Rev. Rowan Williams, the archbishop of Canterbury. The Right Rev. Richard Chartres, the bishop of London, will present the address; music will be provided by the Chapel Royal Choir and the Choir of Westminster Abbey, the London Chamber Orchestra and the fanfare trumpets from the Central Band of the Royal Air Force, in honor of William’s service as a pilot.
After uttering their “I do’s,” the newlyweds will travel to Buckingham Palace for the traditional kiss on the balcony in the 1902 State Landau coach (rain gear: the Glass Coach), accompanied by nine gray horses. BBC America, MSNBC, WE and Channels 13 and 49 will begin their broadcasts at 3 a.m.; TLC at 3:30; ABC, CBS, CNN, E!, Fox News, NBC and Univision at 4; Fox and Reelz at 5; and HLN at 6.
Then the analysis and back-biting will begin!
Joan Collins, Lisa Rinna, Lisa Vanderpump, Nate Berkus, Jay Manuel and Colin Quinn will dish on the details in “Joy Behar’s Royal Wedding After Party,” at 7 on HLN. London is the setting for “The Fox Report With Shepard Smith,” at 7, and “The Royal Wedding,” a recap of the day’s finer points, at 10, both on Fox News Channel. Perez Hilton and NeNe Leakes will let the snark flow with highlights from the wedding in “Will + Kate Forever,” at 7 on the Wedding Channel and at 9 on WE. You can be sure that no stone will be left unturned, and possibly unflung, in “Kathy Griffin’s Insightful and Hilarious Take on the Royal Wedding,” at 8 on TV Guide. And on E!, Ryan Seacrest will travel the gossip route in “Will and Kate: Road to the Altar,” at 9, before Joan Rivers, Kelly Osbourne, George Kotsiopoulos, Giuliana Rancic and Tori Spelling tear apart the guests’ attire, the headdresses and – officially catapulting Ms. Middleton to the top of the sartorial hit list — the gown to end all gowns in “Fashion Police Royal Wedding,” at 10.
Royal skewering not your cup of tea? Then turn to the major networks for a touch of straight-faced authority, like Katie Couric’s examination of the significance of the marriage and the future of the British monarchy in “The Royal Wedding: Modern Majesty,” at 8 on CBS, and Ann Curry’s backstage adventure to discover what happens after the pomp and circumstance in a two-hour version of “Dateline NBC,” at 9. The sentimental may choose to align themselves with Barbara Walters, who will reminisce about the day — and no doubt prompt a tear or two as she contemplates endings both happy and not so — in “A Special Edition of 20/20: A Modern Fairytale,” at 9 on ABC.