John Paul II to be beatified in Rome
Heads of state and several hundred thousand pilgrims in Rome for beatification of the late pope John Paul II
The late pope John Paul II is to be beatified in St Peter's Square in Rome amid much pomp and against a background of persistent controversy.
Several hundred thousand pilgrims, many from the late pontiff's native Poland, are in Rome for the occasion and will cram the square, the broad avenue that leads to the river Tiber, and surrounding streets.
Representatives of five royal houses, including the Duke of Gloucester, are expected to attend. So too are at least six heads of government and 16 heads of state, including Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, who flew into Rome on Saturday.
As part of an elaborate security operation, the area around St Peter's Square had been cordoned off for more than 16 hours before the first pilgrims were given access early this morning.
Beatification is the last step on the road to sainthood, although not all those who are beatified are finally canonised. Before conferring the title of "Blessed", the Roman Catholic church requires evidence of at least one miracle. John Paul, who died in 2005, is deemed to have been responsible for the inexplicable cure of a French nun, Sister Marie Simon-Pierre.
On Saturday, she was among the speakers at the inauguration of an all-night prayer vigil in the Circus Maximus, a long, open space in the centre of Rome that was once a stadium for chariot races. Pilgrims from around the world listened to eulogies of the late pontiff from his former secretary Cardinal Stanislaw Dziwisz and press officer Joaquin Navarro-Valls.
The charismatic John Paul is widely credited with having hastened the collapse of communism in Europe. But some in his chuch have questioned the speed with which such a controversial figure has been fast-tracked towards sainthood.
John Paul is accused by victims' groups of having turned a blind eye to sex abuse by his clergyman. Catholic traditionalists believe he made unacceptable compromises with other religions; progressives argue he fatally undermined the innovative legacy of the Second Vatican Council.