Birdman competition halted after BBC presenter Holly Walsh breaks arm and dislocates shoulder
The aim was to raise money for a good cause while leaping  from a pier in a comedy flying  machine.
But the seaside stunt by former children’s TV presenter Holly Walsh ended in disaster yesterday.
The 30-year-old plunged awkwardly into the water, fracturing her elbow and dislocating her shoulder.
Worried crowds at the annual International Worthing Birdman contest looked on as she was taken from the sea by a lifeboat crew, strapped to a spinal board and driven to hospital in an ambulance.
Miss Walsh, a one-time Children’s BBC host turned comedian who has appeared on Never Mind The Buzzcocks, had been taking part in the competition with world gravy wrestling champion Jonathan Hicks.
The pair, who were raising money for the Rainbow Children’s Hospice, jumped off the West Sussex town’s pier in a bright green mock helicopter with the slogan ‘Always With A Smile’ emblazoned on one side.
But after they crash-landed in the sea it quickly became apparent that Miss Walsh was in trouble.
The competition had to be stopped for around 20 minutes while the lifeboat crew went to the rescue.
Shoreham lifeboat spokesman Dave Cassan said: ‘It appears she entered the water wrongly.
It is thought she has a serious fracture above her elbow and a dislocated shoulder.
‘The inshore lifeboat brought her to the shore at Worthing and she was transferred to hospital by ambulance.’
Around 10,000 spectators had been attending the second day of the event yesterday, where fun flyers dress up in elaborate costumes and try to fly the furthest off the pier. Many raise money for charity while others design complex machines to aim for the distance prizes – £30,000 for the furthest flight over 100 metres. On Saturday, former Olympic skier Eddie the Eagle Edwards took part in the more serious side of the competition, where entrants launch themselves off the pier in gliders and other makeshift flying contraptions.
He managed only a few yards before ending up in the sea.