Ed Miliband wedding day – a very private affair
Obviously something is happening at Langar Hall – there is a small huddle of hacks and cameras on the pavement at the entrance. Ah, the Labour leader and his partner are finally tying the knot.
Ed Miliband and his bride, Justine Thornton, certainly didn't make it easy for Fleet Street to stake out Friday's wedding. Langar is a very small village south-east of Nottingham where, locals admit, not a lot happens. It's a long drive for the wedding party and they have put up screens to keep long lenses at bay.
The Milibands have stressed how much this is a private, family event so no celebs have been driving past, political or otherwise. Well, only brother David Miliband – he's still family despite everything – who arrived with wife, Louise, and their kids an hour before the bash. Gordon Brown and David Cameron have sent their best wishes. About 50 guests are inside and the sun has been shining – until a few minutes ago. Ed Miliband's press officer has been down to tell the press pack – we also got coffee – a few details. The bride's dress is by Alice Temperley – she also makes stuff for Coleen Rooney, another reporter tells me.
In the morning the groom took time out from preparing to walk up the aisle to send a message on Twitter to followers who had wished him well for the day.
"Thanks for all the good wishes," wrote Miliband. "Really looking forward to the day. Feel like the luckiest guy in the world to be marrying Justine."
As the first leader of a major political party to live with his family out of wedlock, Miliband had faced criticism about his unmarried status but insisted he would not be forced into it.
"We'll get married because we want to get married and love each other very much, no other reason," he told one interviewer.
But a wedding's also an excuse for a rather nice meal: Friday's was due to consist of asparagus, followed by lamb and pavlova. And bride and groom were both due to make speeches. Then they will take five days off – without the kids – for a honeymoon in Europe. No, they're not telling us where, but they may pop down the lane for pics if it doesn't rain.