Convict claims he shot Tupac Shakur in 1994 at talent agent’s direction
A killer serving life claims he shot Tupac Shakur in 1994, fueling the bloody East-West war that defined hip-hop culture — and New York cops want to talk to him.
In a statement posted on AllHipHop.com today, Dexter Isaac apologized for the infamous near-fatal attack and detailed how he shot Tupac at the direction of talent mogul James “Jimmy Henchman” Rosemond.
“I want to apologize to his family [Tupac Shakur] and for the mistake I did for that sucker [Jimmy Henchman],” according Isaac’s statement, written from the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn.
Within hours of the statement, a top NYPD official said detectives will be knocking on Isaac’s cell door.
“NYPD detectives plan to interview the prisoner,” said NYPD spokesman Paul Browne.
Isaac, 46, said he was paid $2,500 for the attempted hit on Nov. 30, 1994, at Quad Studios in Manhattan.
Rosemond’s lawyer Jeffrey Lichtman trashed Isaac’s statement: “He’s a convicted killer who was brought back by the US Attorney, solely to cooperate against Jimmy Rosemond, and wouldn’t you know it, he spins this tale.”
Tupac — who was born in East Harlem but made his career in Northern California — miraculously survived this attack, only to be cut down on Sept. 13, 1996 in Las Vegas.
The East-West war reached its climax when Brooklyn native Christopher Wallace — The Notorious B.I.G. — was fatally shot outside a music-industry event in Los Angeles on March 9, 1997.
Rosemond has long been suspected of organizing the Quad Studios attack on Tupac, but was never charged.
Isaac said he’s singing now to ease his conscience and because he believes Rosemond called him a snitch.
Rosemond is on the run from feds, who are chasing him for a drug trafficking rap.
“Jimmy, I say to you: I have kept your secrets for years,” Isaac said. “You have never been arrested because of me or any of our friends because of me. How dare you call me an informant. I have stayed silent in prison for the past 13 years doing a life sentence like a real soldier should.”
Lichtman said Isaac can’t be trusted.
“Where was he the last 17 years [with this version of events],” he said. “He’s a loyal soldier? Yeah right. Why does everyone he talks about is an informant. Everyone but him.”
“I don’t know where he [Rosemond] is,” Lichtman added. “You can understand why he feels he can’t get a fair trial when convicted killers like Dexter Isaac are saying this kind of crap.”
Isaac is in prison for a 1997 murder-for-hire in Brooklyn.