Beyonce's debut brings curtain down on Glastonbury
US singer Beyonce made her debut at Glastonbury, bringing the three-day festival to a close.
She headlined the main Pyramid Stage, making her one of a handful of women to do so over the past 40 years.
Beyonce played all her biggest hits and a medley of Destiny's Child songs and got a great reception from the crowd.
The 29-year-old opened her set with Crazy In Love and afterwards told the audience: "I want you all to know right now you're witnessing my dream."
"I always wanted to be a rock star and tonight we are all rock stars," she added.
But there was no appearance on stage from her husband Jay-Z, who headlined Glastonbury in 2008.
The couple were spotted watching Coldplay perform on Saturday and there were rumours Jay-Z may join her on stage.
It is believed Beyonce has spent the last three weeks in the UK, at a rehearsal studio in London. She is supported on stage by backing singers The Mamas.
Beyonce arrived on stage to a burst of fireworks and her first words to the crowd were: "Glastonbury, are you ready?"
Her 90-minute set included all her signature songs, including Single Ladies, Independent Women, Halo and If I Was A Boy.
But she also paid homage to several other artists, with her own versions of Alanis Morissette's You Oughta Know, the Eurythmics' Sweet Dreams and Kings of Leon's Sex On Fire.
She was joined on stage by Bristolian artist Tricky for Baby Boy.
"The best performance she has ever done in her life, she is my idol," Lucy Horton from Bath told the BBC.
Pete Andrew, from Devon, watched the last 20 minutes of the gig having watched US rock band Queens of the Stone Age on another stage.
"If it didn't clash with anything then we would have turned up to see it earlier," he said.
Beyonce was something of a controversial headline choice for some fans who think it's further indication that Glastonbury is becoming more mainstream.
But Mr Andrew countered: "If it's what people want to hear, then that's what should be on."
Jay Z's announcement as a headliner at a predominantly rock music festival two years ago, sparked a debate over rap music's place at Glastonbury - spearheaded by Oasis guitarist Noel Gallagher.
Suzanne Vega, who was the first woman to headline at Glastonbury in 1989, headlined on the acoustic stage at the same time as Beyonce.
Elsewhere on the site, artists like Plan B, Paul Simon and Brit winner Laura Marling played to crowd basking in some hot sunshine.
After a wet start to the weekend, it's estimated temperatures reached up to 25C on Sunday.
Meanwhile, Christopher Shale, chairman of West Oxfordshire Conservative Association and a friend of David Cameron, was found dead at the festival on Worthy Farm, Somerset.
The 56-year-old was found in a portable toilet in one of the inter-stage hospitality areas.