Betty Ford remembered for her candor and advocacy
Former first lady Betty Ford, who died this evening, is being remembered for her candor and strength in dealing with personal adversity.
Ford, 93, died with her family by her side, according to CNN. Her death was confirmed by Elaine Didier, director of the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library and Museum in Grand Rapids, Mich.
President Obama hailed Ford for her "courage and compassion," and her advocacy on behalf of women's health and women's rights. He praised her for helping to reduce "the social stigma surrounding addiction."
"While her death is a cause for sadness, we know that organizations such as the Betty Ford Center will honor her legacy by giving countless Americans a new lease on life," Obama said. "Today, we take comfort in the knowledge that Betty and her husband, former President Gerald Ford, are together once more."
Former first lady Nancy Reagan called Ford "an inspiration" for her efforts to educate women about breast cancer and for her work at the Betty Ford Center, which was born in 1982 after Ford's own battle with alcohol and prescription drugs. Ford had confronted her addiction when her family staged an intervention in 1978.
"She was Jerry Ford's strength through some very difficult days in our country's history, and I admired her courage in facing and sharing her personal struggles with all of us," Reagan said.
Former president George H.W. Bush called Ford a "courageous first lady." His son, former president George W. Bush, noted that "many lives were saved" through Ford's leadership on health and addiction issues, as he praised her for her "countless contributions to our country."
"No one confronted life's struggles with more fortitude or honesty, and as a result, we all learned from the challenges she faced," the elder Bush said in a statement.
Betty Ford, a former dancer and model before she married Gerald Ford, was notable for being outspoken about issues such as abortion, pre-marital sex and equal rights for women.
Early in her husband's presidency, Ford was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy, leading her to become a noted advocate for research and early detection of the disease.
In an interview on CBS' 60 Minutes, she candidly discussed topics such as abortion and the equal rights amendment.
Gerald Ford died in 2006, at the age of 93. A statueof him was recently dedicated at the U.S. Capitol, but Betty Ford did not attend the ceremony. She had not made many public appearances since his death.