Notting Hill carnival gets off to a peaceful start
Despite fears of disorder, a heavy police presence and showery weather help keep the streets of west London calm
With a police helicopter hovering overhead and 5,500 officers drafted in to preserve order, an ebullient Notting Hill carnival got under way peacefully as showers and bleak bank holiday weather conspired to lower temperatures all round.
More than 1 million people are expected to attend what is billed as the second biggest street festival in the world, after the Rio carnival.
Three weeks after the biggest riots in the capital for a generation, with fears beforehand that the carnival could act as a catalyst for renewed outbreaks of disorder, police reported that the event got off to a quiet start, with just 14 arrests by late-afternoon, seven for drug offences. One dangerous dog had been corralled. An extra 1,000 officers will be on duty at the carnival on Monday – and an additional 4,000 will be policing the rest of London in case of trouble elsewhere.
Despite bleak weather, Boris Johnson, London's mayor, issued a call to "let the true spirit of London shine through," in the hope that the carnival would help heal wounds left by the riots.
"It's right that carnival goes ahead so we can show the world that the overwhelming majority of London's people are decent, law-abiding citizens who respect the law, love their city and want to celebrate our vibrant, diverse and historical culture," he said.
Fifty-one floats took part on the first day of the festival, with organisers saying that "babes in arms" took part in the costumed parades through west London on children's day. Over half a million people are expected to attend on Monday, with the forecast for fine and dry weather. The carnival will begin as early as 9am, with the music due to be turned down early on both evenings.
There was a small element of subversion – some more serious than others. Sunday saw 50 dancers and brass-band members from the Yaa arts group trouping through the streets in red, black and yellow camouflage, symbolising, organisers said, "hooded youth".
Spraypaint taggers, meanwhile, struck shops on the fashionable Ledbury Road. They covered fences and plywood hoardings, erected to protect premises, with graffiti.
The Metropolitan Police put in place a section 60 order, giving extra stop-and-search powers, across London as part of the ongoing security operation. There was a heavy police presence on the streets and officers staffed checkpoints at underground stations. A statement said the order had been based on "the unprecedented scale and unpredictable locations of the disorder that was seen in London during 6-8 August". The force said the powers would be kept under review "day by day" during the festival.
Plainclothes officers with radios mingled with the crowds to try to spot potential trouble.
The festival began with J'ouvert, in which festivalgoers covered themselves in white paint and chocolate – which has become a tradition at the carnival in the last three years.
Simon Halls, 31, from Southend, said: "We got bombarded after lunch and everyone was getting hugged by people covered in chocolate." Off the main parade route, dozens of stalls were selling food favourites such as jerk chicken, curried goat, corn dumplings and fresh coconut juice, although a brief lunchtime storm sent revellers scurrying for shelter.
Festival co-organiser Chris Boothman said the riots had helped bring the carnival community together. "If today is anything to go by, Monday is going to be a really great day because it has been one of the best Sundays we've had in a really long time, maybe five years," he said.
"Carnival goers have been saying they've been reassured by the heavier police presence, which I found surprising. Young people are saying that as well."
Another organiser, Franka Philip, added: "The police have been very cooperative and the bands have been fast moving. It feels good and the vibe has been brilliant."
Liz Hone, from Hitchin, Hertfordshire, who is getting married in seven weeks, had brought a dozen friends along. She said, "We've been in London for the whole weekend. We'll eat lots and drinks lots and just party all day and all night. It's amazing. I'm having the best time of my life."
"There's loads of police around and everyone's really happy. It's the best atmosphere."