R.E.M. announce split
The band was formed in Athens, Georgia in 1980 and went on to release two hugely successful albums Out of Time and Automatic for the People in the early 1990s.
In a statement singer Michael Stipe, guitarist Peter Buck, and bassist Mike Mills said: "As R.E.M., and as lifelong friends and co-conspirators, we have decided to call it a day as a band.
"We walk away with a great sense of gratitude, of finality, and of astonishment at all we have accomplished. To anyone who ever felt touched by our music, our deepest thanks for listening."
Stipe added: "A wise man once said 'The skill in attending a party is knowing when it's time to leave.'
"We built something extraordinary together. We did this thing. And now we're going to walk away from it. I hope our fans realise this wasn't an easy decision; but all things must end, and we wanted to do it right, to do it our way."
The band released its 15th studio album Collapse into Now earlier this year.
Mills said: "There's no disharmony here, no falling-outs, no lawyers squaring-off. We've made this decision together, amicably and with each other's best interests at heart. The time just feels right."
In 1991 “Out of Time” topped both the US and UK album charts. It sold 4.2 million copies in the US alone and spawned the hit singles “Losing My Religion” and “Shiny Happy People.” The band won three awards at the 1992 Grammy awards.
In 1996 the band signed an $80 million deal with Warner Bros, which was then a record for a music contract.
The fourth original member of the band, drummer Bill Berry, retired in 1997 to his farm in Georgia.
Over the years R.E.M. supported numerous causes including environmentalism, human rights and voter registration.
Buck said: “One of the things that was always so great about being in R.E.M. was the fact that the records and the songs we wrote meant as much to our fans as they did to us.” He said the band members would leave as “great friends.” He added: “I know I will be seeing them in the future, just as I know I will be seeing everyone who has followed us and supported us through the years.
“Even if it’s only in the vinyl aisle of your local record store, or standing at the back of the club watching a group of 19-year-olds trying to change the world.”