Jaipur Literature Festival: Even a virtual Rushdie is unwelcome for Rajasthan govt
JAIPUR: Salman Rushdie isn’t welcome at the Jaipur Literature Festival (JLF) in any form, not even virtually. The proposed session with Rushdie at the festival via video link on January 24 ran into trouble on Monday with the Rajasthan government coming up with “intimidating” riders which has made the organizers develop cold feet about hosting the author via video link. The government, it is learnt, wishes to vet what the Booker Prize winning author says in his video link address. Political observers here say the government’s stubborn stance is only reinforcing the impression that it isn’t only law and order fear which has made it determined to prevent Rushdie — real or virtual — from making an appearance in Jaipur. Rather, it’s the Congress’s determination not to upset the Muslim community in the run-up to the polls in Uttar Pradesh. Jaipur Literature Festival producer Sanjoy Roy on Monday morning announced that Salman Rushdie would talk about his book “Midnight’s Children” (not the banned “Satanic Verses”) at 3.45pm on Tuesday. Within a few hours, the organizers made a U-turn, reportedly after they received a virual dressing down from the state government for not consulting them before making the announcement. “We aren’t sure about the Rushdie video session… nothing is certain now. We shall update tomorrow,” Roy said in the evening. Roy read out a statement: “We have not received any official information from the state government whether we can hold the video conferencing or not. Hopefully, we will be able to do it tomorrow. This will be about Midnight’s Children and Rushdie’s works, his journey from childhood and the life thereafter.” Roy said they were not sure whether permission was required to organize the video session, still “we sent a letter to the police, which had sought some more details. Those too have been dispatched,” he said. He added, “We are trying to ensure that this happens in a manner in which Jaipurites or anybody else is hurt. We expect the police to revert.” Rajasthan home secretary G S Sandhu confirmed that they had not given permission for the Rushdie video link session so far. “Organizers have submitted some papers along with a request application. The papers are being scrutinized at present… a decision will happen tomorrow only,” he added. Government officials maintained that they were walking a tightrope and didn’t want to take any chances. “We told the organizers to give in writing that Rushdie will not speak anything inflammatory, provocative and unlawful … If he does so, then the police will book the organizers and the Diggi Palace owners for breaking the law of land,” said a senior Rajasthan police officer, on assurance of anonymity.
Jaipur police commissioner Bhagwan Lal Soni said that they will also initiate legal action against organizers as well as Rushdie if he spoke anything unlawful. “Just because he’s sitting away, it doesn’t mean he (Rushdie) can speak anything. We shall initiate action against him too,” Soni added. Government insiders said the establishment was upset with Rushdie’s Sunday remark terming Rajasthan police “liars”. Rushdie had on Tuesday tweeted: “I've investigated, & believe that I was indeed lied to. I am outraged and very angry.” On Friday, he had said that the Maharashtra and Rajasthan police had informed him that some paid assassins were on their way to Jaipur to eliminate him. Rajasthan CM Ashok Gehlot had said that Rushdie’s Sunday statement was unwarranted as there was a threat to his life in view of protests by Muslim organizations. Government sources said they didn’t want any further embarrassment as the author has already sullied their image and he might go ahead with the state police bashing. “We can’t take any chances… and what if he too reads out from banned book ‘The Satanic Verses’?” asked an official. He was referring to four authors reading out passages from ‘The Satanic Verses’ at the festival. Muslim groups are also keeping a close watch. Jamaat-e-Islami Hind national secretary, Mohammed Salim “Engineer”, said that they were watching closely and protests will happen if Rushdie spoke anything against Islam.