Oscar nominations 2012: Hugo leads the way
The Artist ran second with 10 nominations, among them writing and directing nominations for French filmmaker Michel Hazanavicius, a best-actor nod for Jean Dujardin and a supporting-actress slot for Berenice Bejo.
The film could become the first silent movie to win best picture since the first Oscars, when Wings took top honors for 1927-28.
The other nominations for Best Picture are The Descendants, The Help, Midnight in Paris, Moneyball, The Tree of Life, War Horse and Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close.
Elsewhere, Meryl Streep was nominated for her performance as Margaret Thatcher in The Iron Lady.
Britons Gary Oldman - for his role in Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy - Kenneth Branagh and Janet McTeer are also in the running for Academy Awards. Oldman, 53, is up for best actor for his role as George Smiley in Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy.
Branagh, 51, is in the running for best supporting actor for his performance as Sir Laurence Olivier in Marilyn Monroe biopic My Week With Marilyn.
He said: "It was a rare honour to play Sir Laurence Olivier. To be recognised by the Academy for doing so is overwhelming. I'm absolutely thrilled."
Newcastle-born McTeer, 50, is up for best supporting actress for her role in gender-bending drama Albert Nobbs.
Streep, 62, the winner of two previous Academy Awards, has received critical acclaim for her role as the former British prime minister.
War Horse, based on the National Theatre play inspired by Michael Morpurgo's novel, is up for six gongs, and is also among the movies vying for best film.
Cold War thriller Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy has been nominated for best adapted screenplay.
London-born film maker Lucy Walker was nominated for the best short subject documentary with Kira Carstensen for The Tsunami and the Cherry Blossom.
The film was made in Japan following the devastating tsunami which hit the country last year.
Also nominated in the same category was Saving Face which follows London-based surgeon Mohammad Ali Jawad as he treats the victims of acid attacks in Pakistan.
Dr Jawad also treated the former model Katie Piper who was left scarred after an acid attack in north London.
Nominations for the 84th Academy Awards were announced from 5.30am Pacific time (1.30pm in the UK) at the Samuel Goldwyn Theater in Beverly Hills. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences President Tom Sherak revealed the nominees along with Jennifer Lawrence, who received her own award last year for her role in Winter’s Bone.
The nominations for this year's Oscars are:
Owen Wilson (R) and French First Lady Carla Bruni Sarkozy in a scene of 'Midnight in Paris'.
In this film image released by Disney, Jeremy Irvine is shown in a scene from "War Horse."
Rooney Mara - The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo
Rooney Mara is shown in a scene from "The Girl With The Dragon Tattoo."
George Clooney, left, and Shailene Woodley are shown in a scene from "The Descendants."
Michelle Williams portrays Marilyn Monroe in a scene from "My Week with Marilyn." in a film that earned Kenneth Branagh, 51, a best supporting actor for his performance as Sir Laurence Olivier.
Melissa McCarthy, Ellie Kemper, Rose Byrne, Wendi McLendon-Covey, Maya Rudolph and Kristen Wiig are shown in a scene from "Bridesmaids".
The 84th Academy Awards take place on Sunday 26 February at the Kodak Theatre, Hollywood. They will be presented by actor and comedian Billy Crystal. See the Telegraph's Oscar pagefor full information.