Zsa Zsa Gabor's husband Prince Frederic throws 95th birthday party for her
Zsa Zsa Gabor had a 'wonderful time' at her 95th birthday party last night, according to her husband, Prince Frederic von Anhalt, despite being kept 'behind closed doors' during the celebration.
'My wife was happy. Everything was fine. We had a good time,' he told ABCNews.com.
However, according to the New York Daily News: 'Gabor was nowhere to be seen' as von Anhalt and guests drank and enjoyed a sumptuous buffet.
The 68-year-old said that over 130 guests showed up at the Beverly Hills home he shares with the former Hollywood siren, including some of Gabor’s high profile friends friends - Lou Diamond Phillips, Connie Stevens, Angie Dickinson, and Larry King.
'Larry King talked to her,' Anhalt told ABC. He touched her hand, and she looked at him and was happy and smiled. Larry King was singing happy birthday - it doesn’t get better than that. Larry King singing happy birthday!'
The New York Daily News reported that food was abundent for Prince's guests, all of it reflecting his German heritage rather than his wife's Hungarian provenance.
They observed that there were German dishes like 'warm pretzels and schnitzel - and plenty of drink.' Von Anhalt was keen to steer conversation away from the outrageous stories that circulate about him, according to guests at the party, despite wholly encouraging them with his eccentric behaviour. One observer recalls: 'After emerging from the kitchen with his arms filled with bottles of pink wine, the endlessly eccentric von Anhalt scoffed at questions about unloading the mansion, having a baby or running for mayor of Los Angeles'
'This night is only a celebration of my wife’s life,' he proclaimed.
They added that : 'In the dining room, there was a towering white cake for guests topped with strawberries and decorated with hearts and the letters ZZ on each tier.'
And her home country remember the icon with a letter from the Consulate General of Hungary.
Gabor has been in and out of the hospital since 2010 suffering from life-threatening health problems.
She was confined to a wheelchair after a 2002 car accident and suffered a massive stroke in 2005.
Gabor has been bedridden for months, and since her last stroke, has lost much of her ability to communicate.
'She’s hanging in, she’s enjoying the flowers and the presents,' von Anhalt said, however.
'She’s smiling, she doesn’t talk very much, but she knows what’s going on.'
Before adding: 'You don’t get better,” he said. “As long as she stays the way she is, that’s OK.'
Von Anhalt, who is 26 years the Moulin Rouge star's junior, is Gabor's eighth husband and once stated that he had a ten year affair with the late Anna Nicole Smith and could potentially be the father of her daughter Dannielynn, five , which has been utterly discredited.
Then in 2007, he claimed that he was approached by three women in southern California who robbed him at gunpoint and stripped him naked, but authorities couldn’t find any evidence of this.
And in 2010, he entered the California governor’s race as an independent, but withdrew six months later citing Gabor’s health problems.