World Press Photo winner 2011
Spanish photographer Samuel Aranda has won the 2011 World Press Photo of the Year award for the New York Times with an image of a veiled woman holding a wounded relative in her arms after a demonstration in Yemen. Jurors said the photo captured multiple facets of the "Arab Spring" uprisings across the Middle East.
Yuri Kozyrev of Russia has won the first prize in the Spot News Singles category with this picture of rebels in Ras Lanuf, Libya.
Ray McManus from Ireland has won the second prize Sports Singles with this action picture from a rugby match between Old Belvedere and Blackrock played in heavy rain in Dublin last winter.
Damir Sagolj has won the first prize Daily Life Singles with this photograph of a picture of North Korea's founder, Kim Il-sung, decorating a building in the capital Pyongyang.
Brent Stirton from South Africa, a Getty Images photographer working for Kiev Independent, has won the first prize Contemporary Issues Singles with this picture of Maria, a drug addict and sex worker.
Rob Hornstra from the Netherlands has won first prize Arts and Entertainment Stories with the series "The Sochi Project: Sochi Singers".
Vincent Boisot of France, a Riva Press photographer working for Le Figaro Magazine, has won the second prize Arts and Entertainment Singles with this picture of a model posing in front of tailors' stalls in the centre of Dakar, Senegal.
Jenny E. Ross of the U.S. has won the first prize Nature Singles with this picture of a male polar bear climbing on the face of a cliff in northern Novaya Zemlya in Russia.
Stephanie Sinclair of the U.S. has won the first prize Contemporary Issues Stories with the series "Child brides: Too young to wed", with pictures taken in the mountains of Yemen.
Alex Majoli of Italy has won the first prize General News Singles with this picture of protesters crying, chanting and screaming in Tahrir Square in Cairo, Egypt.
Alejandro Kirchuk of Argentina has won the first prize Daily Life Stories, with the series "Never Let You Go". The picture shows a husband looking after his wife, who has Alzheimer's disease.
Brent Stirton of South Africa has won first prize Nature Stories for the "Rhino Wars" series. The picture, from a game reserve in Natal, shows a rhino which had had its horn cut off by poachers using a chainsaw.
Tomasz Lazar of Poland has won the second prize People in the News Singles with this picture of an arrest of protesters in Harlem, New York City.
Laerke Posselt of Denmark has won the first Prize Portraits Singles with this picture of Iranian-born Danish actress Mellica Mehraban, in Copenhagen.
Yasuyoshi Chiba of Japan has won the first prize People in the News Stories with the "Aftermath of the tsunami" series. A Japanese mother finds her daughter's graduation certificate in the debris of Higashimatsushima city.
Niclas Hammerstrom of Sweden, a photographer working for Aftonbladet, has won the second prize Spot News Stories with the series "Utoya". This island was the scene of a massacre in Norway in July 2011.