Mary Poppins songwriter Robert Sherman dies
Songwriter Robert Sherman, who composed classic Disney tunes including It’s a Small World (After All) and Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious, died in London yesterday at the age of 86.
Robert Bernard Sherman, who was born in New York on 19 December 1925, won two Oscars, a Grammy and was honoured with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1976.
He co-wrote for most of his life with brother Richard, 83. They were the sons of Russian-Jewish immigrants and their father, Al, was a Tin Pan Alley songwriter who wrote hits for Tommy Dorsey, Billie Holiday and Louis Armstrong. Their grandfather had been a court musician to Emperor Franz Joseph.
The Sherman Brothers were challenged to write songs by their father, who told the two former students of Bard College in New York: "Look at you two college graduates. I'll bet you can't write a song that kids would be willing to spend their lunch money on."
They took up the gauntlet and had a first top 10 hit in 1958 with Tall Paul (He's My All).
Robert later joked: "If it weren't for our father's challenge, we would have had a great big hole in the ground!"
After forming the Wonderland Music Company, they took a stream of commissions to write for Disney and other film companies and among their famous compositions, from more than 200 in all, are Chim Chim Cher-ee (which won an Oscar), Feed The Birds, and Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious.
They wrote major scores for the films Mary Poppins, The Sword In The Stone, The Jungle Book, Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, The Aristocrats, Bednobs and Broomsticks, Charlotte's Web, The Slipper And The Rose, Winnie The Pooh And A Day For Eeyore and Little Nemo. The brothers also co-wrote the music for Disney Parks.
The brothers won two Oscars and were nominated a further seven times. President George Bush presented them with the National Medal Of Arts in 2008.
Their autobiography, called Walt's Time: From Before To Beyond was published in 1998.
Robert Sherman's son Jeff - along with cousin Gregory - produced a documentary film about the father/uncle and their unfortunate estrangement in later life.
Robert was once asked the secret of his songwriting and replied simply: "Your sensitivity is based on your experiences. When you're writing a song, your sensitivity and your experiences dictate how you think and how you write."
His son Jeff posted a note on Facebook last night saying: "Hello to family and friends, I have very sad news to convey. My Dad, Robert B. Sherman, passed away tonight in London. He went peacefully after months of truly valiantly fending off death. He loved life and his dear heart finally slowed to a stop when he could fight no more. He wanted to bring happiness to the world and, unquestionably, he succeeded. His love and his prayers, his philosophy and his poetry will live on forever. Forever his songs and his genius will bring hope, joy and love to this small, small world."
