Sydney shooting: Gunman dead after triple-shooting, siege
A siege at a southwest Sydney industrial estate, which began with the fatal shooting of one man and the wounding of two others, has come to an end with three hostages released unharmed but the gunman dead.
Shortly after 7pm [NZtime], armed tactical response police stormed the building, emerging a short time after with three hostages who it's understood had been in the premises of a signage business for many hours.
The drama had begun at 12.45pm [NZ time] on Monday, with shots being fired at Inline National Signage on the corner of Heald and Stennett roads in Ingleburn. 
Police arrived to find one man, aged 43, dead, and two other men injured.
Detective Inspector Mark Brett, the crime manager of Macquarie Fields Local Area Command, said one of the injured men was rushed into emergency surgery at Liverpool Hospital, while the other was being treated for superficial wounds to his lower body.
But shortly after 5pm, it's understood heavily armed tactical response entered the premises, freeing three hostages. 
Negotiators from the tactical operations unit had been working to establish a peaceful resolution to the situation.
At a press conference at 4.30pm [NZ time], Detective Inspector Brett had told reporters: "It's at a delicate stage and I can't give you any more information than that."
Several security officers were seen keeping guard outside the hospital. 
A group of people, believed to be friends of the families, were escorted in by security and were seen crying outside the emergency department entrance.
In the late afternoon, what is believed to be the body of the 43-year-old remained under a sheet on the kerb in the sun.
Members of the public were advised to avoid the area, police said, and a large exclusion zone remained in place around the scene in the early evening.
Nearby businesses stayed open throughout the day but the area is largely deserted.
Shaun Cooper, who works at  supplier Fred Tapping, a business across the road, said two of his colleagues heard five shots fired shortly after 10am.
"The cops were there within three or four minutes," he said.
Cooper said he saw police remove one body from the building, while another two people were dragged out.
One person was helped to an awaiting ambulance while the other was able to get in unaided.
"You couldn't see any visible signs of blood," he said of the two injured.  His office is directly across the road from Inline Signs, and staff could see the police SWAT team surround the building from their top floor.
An employee of Konecranes Australia, which is opposite Inline, said police had told them to stay inside their building while an operation was under way across the street.
"We heard five shots. There have been plenty of police and ambulances," said the woman, who wanted to remain anonymous.
"We have been told to stay indoors and away from the windows." At least three ambulances are at the scene.
A worker at another business in Heald Rd said staff had also been told to stay indoors.
"We are in lockdown so no one can leave the building or come in," she said.
"We are just sitting quiet waiting for it all to quieten down out there."
A NSW Police spokeswoman confirmed police were responding to reports of shots being fired at a factory in Heald Rd about 10.45am on Monday.
A NSW Ambulance spokesman said paramedics were called to an address in Ingleburn about 10.45am on Monday.
Police earlier led a man away from the scene in handcuffs but confirmed it was not the gunman.
A NSW Ambulance spokesman said paramedics were called to the Ingleburn address about 10.45am on Monday.
As many as 10 ambulances were at the scene.