Bomb scare sparks Tigerair delays at Melbourne Airport
DISRUPTIONS on TigerAir flights will continue today after a bomb scare led parts of Melbourne Airport — including a Tiger plane — to be evacuated last night.
The airport was declared safe just after 5am — eight hours after the security scare started about 9pm and after a police search shut down the airline’s Terminal 4 for six hours.
At least one planeload of passengers on board a Tiger flight were last night moved from the plane on to buses.
Victoria Police spokeswoman Belle Nolan said the search did not turn up anything hazardous and concluded just after 5am.
Ms Nolan said officers took over the incident from the Australian Federal Police just after 11pm.
She would not reveal what sparked the lengthy scare.
Airport spokeswoman Anna Gillett said the airport did not release details on security issues.
She said TigerAir flights would continue to be delayed today, and urged passengers to check the airline’s websiteand Twitter feed.
Other airport operations had not been affected, Ms Gillett said.
TigerAir tweeted this morning that all but two of its flights would be taking off today, but there would be delays to its services.
Passengers were advised to “check for SMS updates”.
The airline last night posted on social media that a “security alert” had caused flight cancellations from Melbourne Airport.
“Safety is #1 priority — Tigerair working with emergency services to resolve ASAP. Apologies to affected passengers,” the airline wrote.
Passenger Scott Marquardt tweeted while on-board TigerAir flight 539 that flight crew warned of a “possible bomb threat”.
“So my plane is sitting on the tarmac at Melbourne Airport due to a possible bomb threat,” he tweeted.
“Some planes are disembarking but we’ll be on ours for a ‘lengthy amount of time’.”
The operation caused disruption to many passengers, including on other airlines.
Chryssie Lamb took to Twitter, saying: “stuck on the tarmac. Plane not allowed to approach terminal. Incident involving Federal Police but no more info at this stage.”