Paris attacks: Belgium releases Paris attacks suspects without charge a day after arrest
Three people arrested in Brussels in connection with last November's Paris attacks have been released without charge, Belgian prosecutors say.
Belgian police arrested the trio on Tuesday in the Brussels district of Uccle during a raid linked to the investigation into the attacks which left 130 people dead and hundreds wounded in the French capital.
"Within the case opened in the wake of the Paris attacks of November 13, 2015, the three persons that were arrested for questioning yesterday … have been released by the investigating judge," spokesman for Belgium's federal prosecutors spokesman Eric Van der Sypt said.
"They have not been charged."
Following the raid, a judge charged two different men, identified as Smail F, born in 1984, and Ibrahim F, born in 1988, over alleged links to the rental of a property that investigators believed was used as a "safe house" before the March 22 suicide bombings in Brussels.
Prosecutors searched a house in Uccle on Tuesday and took three people into custody.
Prosecutors did not comment on what was found in the house search.
The Belgian newspaper DH said the two men had been seen on security camera footage entering the house the day after the attacks and carrying out several bags — prosecutors were not immediately available for comment on that report.
Investigations into the attacks in Paris and Brussels, both claimed by Islamic State militant group, unveiled significant overlap between the groups that orchestrated them.
Belgian prosecutors said on Sunday they had reason to believe that those behind the Brussels attacks, which killed 32 people, had initially planned to strike again in France.
Including Smail F, and Ibrahim F, six suspects have been arrested and charged since late last week as a result of investigations into the Brussels bombings.
Hours after Belgian authorities confirmed the men would be released, Spanish police said they had detained a French national suspected of heading a weapons trafficking ring that provided arms to Amedy Coulibaly, who staged a deadly attack on a Jewish supermarket in Paris last year.
In a statement, police said Antoine Denevi, a 27-year-old originally from northern France, was detained in the southern Spanish Malaga area after Paris issued a Europe-wide arrest warrant.
He "left the neighbouring country [France] weeks after the Paris attacks to escape police action, and settled in the province of Malaga from where he continued his illegal activities using fake papers," the police said.
"It's also been determined that his activities were linked with people of Serbian origin, who may have facilitated his access to arms and munitions."
Both Spanish and French police forces participated in Tuesday's operation, during which two other people were detained — one Serb and another from Montenegro.
Coulibaly was one of three Islamic extremists who waged attacks in Paris on January 7-9 last year that left 17 dead.
He shot dead a policewoman and later took hostages in a Jewish supermarket, where he killed four people.
His accomplices, the Kouachi brothers, killed 12 in an attack on the office of satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo.