Pike River Coal Limited ordered to pay $3 million compensation over 2010 mine disaster
A New Zealand court has ordered Pike River Coal Limited to pay nearly $3 million in compensation for the 2010 mine disaster which killed 29 men.
In the Greymouth District Court today, an emotional Judge Jane Farish awarded reparations of $94,000 to each of the families of those killed in the disaster and the two survivors.
She also fined the company $600,000.
Pike River Coal Limited is in receivership, and it was revealed yesterday that it had only $130,000 remaining from a $1.7 million insurance payout.
But Judge Farish said she believed the company’s biggest secured shareholder, New Zealand Oil and Gas, was in a position to pay reparations.
Yesterday she said it seemed unjust that the company could shut up shop and walk away from the mine within a month of the explosion without providing anything for the families of the victims.
She said she hoped the fine would provide a strong deterrent.
A lawyer for the bereaved families says they will seek compensation from the government.
Relatives of those killed applauded the judge's decision and said they hoped today's sentencing will act as a deterrent to other companies.
Bernie Monk, whose son Michael died in the underground explosions, said he was impressed.
"Judge Farish put the stake in the ground for any further companies to do what the company's done to our families," he said.
Neville Rockhouse, whose son Ben died while his other son Daniel survived, said the compensation would help.
"My son, Daniel, he has to pay for counselling and he can't really afford that so it's something," he said.
Pike River Coal was found guilty in April on nine charges relating to its failure to properly manage methane levels and ventilation in the mine and failing to mitigate the risk of an explosion.
A series of blasts rocked the South Island coal mine in November 2010. 
Australians Joshua Ufer and Willie Joynson were among those who died. 
Last year, Australian-based mining supply company VLI Drilling was fined $40,000 after pleading guilty to three health and safety charges.
The chief executive of Pike River Coal at the time of the disaster, Peter Whittall, is facing 12 charges.
An independent inquiry has found there were systemic failures by the departments responsible for granting Pike River Coal a mining permit and then overseeing its operations.
The inquiry, which examined problems identified by the Pike River Royal Commission, found the actions and inaction of government officials may have contributed to the tragedy.
But it said there was no evidence of carelessness, incompetence or breach of policy by managers, so it recommended no action be taken against government staff.