Canada shooting: Suspect in killing of 3 officers captured
A Canadian town slipped out of a tense fear and into mourning overnight with the arrest of a man suspected of killing three police officers and wounding two others.
Authorities offered no explanation for the rampage in the town of Moncton, New Brunswick. Charges against him would be filed later, Snowman said.
"On Wednesday night, we lost three incredible members of our organization, and I can't dig deep enough to explain the sadness that we all feel," Brown said, his voice breaking at times.
told CTV "It's hard to imagine that we can go back and turn the page without having a sense of the great loss we've suffered," Mayor George Leblanc of Moncton told CTV
"Moncton is such a beautiful, warm community ... I know this community has a tremendous spirit, and we will get through this."
"There were trucks going by really slowly as well as cop cars surrounding my house, so we knew they were looking directly around my house," she said. "Suddenly, one of the SWAT trucks stopped and unloaded officers, and they proceeded to go to my backyard."
While there, they yelled for the suspect to surrender. He was hiding behind a row of trees, Thibodeau said.
"They were screaming for about five minutes and they had their guns loaded. And eventually Justin came out with his hands up and he yelled, 'I'm done.' And they collected him and brought him to my front yard, where he lay sprawled out. "
At the time of his arrest, the suspect was wearing the same camouflage uniform shown in the pictures, according to Thibodeau.
There is also a photo where two men pose with shotguns in the snow. It was posted on February 25, six days after the Facebook page was created, and is used as the profile picture.
In what appears to be his final post, the page's author used the words of a song by the metal group Megadeth.
In 2012, the homicide rate in Canada was 1.6 per 100,000. In the United States, it was 4.7 per 100,000, according to United Nations statistics.