Oscar Pistorius bailed: Paralympian freed pending trial over Reeva Steenkamp's death
The world's most famous Paralympian – nicknamed Blade Runner – was released from custody on Friday after Desmond Nair, the magistrate, said he was satisfied Pistorius did not pose a flight risk, nor was likely to interfere with witnesses.
He said the state had not presented a case that was "strong or watertight" enough to guarantee conviction, impelling the athlete to flee South Africa.
As he granted the 26-year-old bail, however, Mr Nair added that although he would not judge Pistorius at his eventual trial, he believed there were some serious holes in the athlete's version of how he came to shoot dead his girlfriend Reeva Steenkamp.
The athlete's sister Aimee (in black) hugs another supporter.
The magistrate's decision was greeted with shouts of "yes!" from friends of the Olympian in the public gallery but Pistorius' only reaction was to drop his head and weep as his family reached out to touch him.
On Friday night, Pistorius was reportedly driven to his uncle’s home in a wealthy suburb of Pretoria, where he asked to have his first bath in eight days.
The athlete is charged with premeditated murder, under Schedule Six of the Criminal Procedure Act, which places the onus on the defendant to show why he deserves bail. Nonetheless, the magistrate decided that Pistorius met this high requirement.
Under the bail conditions, Pistorius will be confined to Pretoria – unless granted special permission – until his murder trial, which could be at least a year away. He faces a possible life sentence if convicted.
As well as paying R1m (£73,000) in surety, he must report to a police station twice a week – Monday and Friday – surrender his passports and firearms, refrain from drinking alcohol and stay away from all airports. He is also banned from his home in Pretoria, where Miss Steenkamp died in the early hours of St Valentine's Day.
Pistorius is accused of killing girlfriend Reeva Steenkamp, above.
Around an hour after the decision was announced, Pistorius was driven away from court in the back of a silver Land Rover Discovery, sitting alongside his sister Aimee.
Emerging from the holding cell where his brother was taken after the decision was announced, Carl Pistorius said the sportsman was "relieved", but added: "It's a long road ahead."
His uncle, Arnold Pistorius, added that the athlete's family remained "in mourning" for Miss Steenkamp.
Barry Roux, the defence lawyer who earlier this week picked apart the police evidence, said he was looking forward to a "cold beer". Asked if he was happy, Mr Roux said: "I'm always happy when something good happens. I think it's a fair decision to grant bail."
Kim Myers, a friend of Miss Steenkamp who attended the hearing, said she was reserving judgment until the trial itself.
Pistorius supporters weep outside court after the decision.
"We trust and hope that justice will prevail," she said. "People must remember that someone has lost her life here and we are just very sad about that."
The result followed four days of highly-charged hearings at Pretoria magistrates' court, during which Pistorius repeatedly broke down.
He testified that he shot Miss Steenkamp, 29, by mistake, after waking in the night, and concluding that an intruder was locked in the lavatory.
He fired four shots through the locked door, believing that Miss Steenkamp was still sleeping in their bed. Only when she failed to answer his cries to call the police did Pistorius realise what he had done.
On Friday, Mr Nair gave Pistorius credit for placing a full account before the court, but added he was not entirely convinced.
"I have difficulty with the accused not appreciating the whereabouts of his girlfriend when he got off the bed," he said.
"I have difficulty with the accused not seeking to verify who was in the toilet when he could have asked. Why did the deceased not scream back from the toilet? Why did the deceased and the accused not seek to escape through the bedroom door rather than venture into the toilet? Why would he charge to a very dangerous area if he wanted to protect himself and the deceased?"
Mr Nair added: "These are improbabilities that need to be explained".
Mr Nair had harsh words for Warrant Officer Hilton Botha, the police investigating officer who gave evidence on Wednesday.
W/O Botha crumbled under cross examination by Mr Roux, admitting a series of errors. Mr Nair said he was "astounded" that the detective believed that a key witness lived "600 metres" from Pistorius' house – but could still claim to have heard the sound of arguments.
W/O Botha was removed form the case on Thursday, after it emerged he himself is facing criminal charges.
Mr Nair made clear that the policeman's evidence was "not the State's case" and that, just over a week after the offence, "all the pieces of the puzzle" may not yet have been assembled.
A spokesman for the National Prosecuting Authority said they were confident that their case would stand up to scrutiny at a full trial.
Speaking outside the court, Pistorius' uncle said they were "grateful" to the magistrate.
"We are also grateful for our legal team that has delivered extremely professional and legal statements that led to the decision of giving bail today," he said.
"As the family, we know Oscar's version of what happened that tragic night and we know that that is the truth and that will prevail in the coming court case."
Pistorius is due back in court on June 4, when a trial date may be set.