Cardiff hit-and-runs: Community's shock and sadness
Community leaders and politicians have spoken of their shock after a woman died and 12 other people were injured in a series of hit-and-runs in Cardiff.
Seven children and four adults are in hospital after they were hit by a van, which eye witnesses say was driven deliberately at them.
A 31-year-old man has been arrested on suspicion of murder.
A church in Ely, where some incidents happened, opened on Friday evening to support the local community.
The Reverend Jan Gould, of the Church of the Resurrection on Grand Avenue, said the community had been left "deeply shocked" by the events.
"This is the most traumatic event I have ever known in ministry," she said.
"I was away from the parish today and heard it on the news and came straight to open up the church.
"Often at times like this people want to come in and reflect and light a candle. Words can't often express what we feel."
She said the church was at the heart of the community in Ely and that she would keep the doors open for as long as people wanted to be there.
Meanwhile, Cardiff council's leader Councillor Heather Joyce said her "thoughts and prayers" were with all those affected by the "awful incidents".
"I have asked to be kept informed and updated about any developments and know that our local communities will rally around each other during this terrible time," she said.
Welsh Secretary David Jones tweeted that the incident was "dreadful" and that he was in contact with South Wales Police.
Cardiff West MP Kevin Brennan told BBC Wales that it sounded like a "tragic incident and my heart goes out to the victims".
Plaid Cymru leader Leanne Wood said it was a devastating incident and "we send our deepest sympathies and thoughts to those involved".
A 32-year-old woman was killed in the incident.
Eyewitnesses have said pedestrians were deliberately targeted by someone driving a van in five or six locations.
Police first received calls about an incident in Crossways Road in Ely at 15:30 BST.
There were soon reports of hit-and-run collisions in several locations in the west of the city, including Grand Avenue, Cowbridge Road West and Leckwith Retail Park.
The arrested man was detained by officers near the Merrie Harrier pub at Llandough on the outskirts of Cardiff.