Texas College Stabbing Spree Suspect Planned Attack, Police Say
A 20-year-old college student who is accused of going on a stabbing spree at a Texas campus that left 14 people injured, allegedly told police he'd "had fantasies of stabbing people to death since he was in elementary school."
Dylan Andrew Quick, 20, faces three counts of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon and was ordered held on $100,000 bond on each charge.
"According to the statement the suspect voluntarily gave investigators, he has had fantasies of stabbing people to death since he was in elementary school. He also indicated that he has been planning this incident for some time," the Harris County Sheriff's Office said in a statement.
The stabbing frenzy was at Lone Star Community College System's Cy-Fair campus in Cypress, Texas, which is about 30 miles northwest of Houston.
Twelve of the injured people were taken to the hospital and two refused treatment. Of the dozen in the hospital, two are in critical condition and four are in fair condition, according to Harris County Sheriff Adrian Garcia.
"This is a current and ongoing investigation," Garcia said at a news conference. "Buildings are still being searched to confirm the details that we have."
A representative from Memorial Hermann Texas Trauma Institute, where six victims were taken, told ABCNews.com that four were brought in by air ambulance and two were brought in by ground. Two patients at the hospital remain in critical condition, while three were upgraded to good condition and one was discharged early Tuesday evening.
The initial alarm put out by the college said, "Two armed suspects at LSC-CyFair. One suspect is at large. Stay away from the area. Seek shelter in a secure location until the incident is resolved. Be aware of your surroundings."
The sheriff said video evidence has been reviewed and the video indicated that there is only one suspect in the case.
Garcia said he could not provide any information on the type of weapon the suspect used or whether he slashed or stabbed his victims.
"We do not know exactly what type of weapon was used other than to say that at this point, it is an unknown instrument," Garcia said.
One witness, identified only as James, told ABC News affiliate KTRK-TVthat several students were stabbed in the neck and others helped tackle the suspect.
The suspect appeared to be a student, wearing all black including a cap and appeared to have hearing aids, according to James. He also said the suspect used what appeared to be an Exacto-knife to stab people.
Rand Key, the school's senior vice chancellor, said at the news conference that the school is closed for the remainder of the day, but scheduled to resume normal operations on Wednesday.
The sheriff said the school is receiving an "inordinate number of calls from concerned family members" and asked students who were evacuated from campus to please contact their family members and let them know they are safe.