Rebekah Brooks and her husband among six arrested by phone hacking police
The former editor of the News of the World and her husband Charlie, the racehorse trainer and Telegraph columnist, were arested at their home in Chipping Norton, Oxfordshire, sources said.
Ms Brooks, a former editor of The Sun, had been on bail after being questioned by detectives last summer on suspicion of phone hacking and corruption.
Mark Hanna, head of security at News International, was named by Sky News as one of those held.
Police from Operation Weeting arrested six people at addresses in London, Oxfordshire, Hampshire and Hertfordshire.
The five men, aged between 38 and 49, and one woman, aged 43, were arrested on suspicion of conspiracy to pervert the course of justice.
The co-ordinated arrests were made between 5am and 7am by officers from Operation Weeting, the Metropolitan Police's investigation into the illegal interception of voicemails.
They are being interviewed at police stations in Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, and central, east and south west London.
Officers are searching the properties where the arrests were made.
One man, 48, was arrested at a business address in east London.
The 43-year old woman and the 49-year old man were arrested at their home addresses in Oxfordshire and are being interviewed at separate police stations.
It takes the total number of arrests under Operation Weeting to 23.
The investigation was launched in January 2011 after the Metropolitan Police received new information from News International, the publishers of the News of the World, the Sun, the Times and the Sunday Times.
It is being led by deputy assistant commissioner Sue Akers and has 91 officers working on it.
She has told the inquiry into press standards that there was a "culture of illegal payments" at the Sun newspaper.
Ms Akers, who is in charge of three linked inquiries into phone hacking, illicit payments and computer hacking, told Lord Justice Leveson the payments appeared to have been authorised at a "senior level".
This week it was announced that the Attorney General is looking into concerns the policewoman could have prejudiced any potential trials.
Mrs Brooks, who resigned last year as News International chief executive amid the furore over phone-hacking allegations, "fostered" Raisa the horse after it retired from active service in 2008.
She paid food and vet bills until Raisa was rehoused with a police officer in 2010, months before fresh investigations began into illegal activities at the News of the World.
Mrs Brooks is the only suspect being questioned who had already been arrested under Weeting, a source said.
The arrest is potentially embarrassing for David Cameron, who earlier this month was forced to make further admissions about the extent of his relationship with Mr and Mrs Brooks.
After it emerged that Scotland Yard had lent an ex-police horse, Raisa, to Mrs Brooks, the Prime Minister conceded the animal had been among his mounts on rides with Mr Brooks - a friend from their Eton schooldays.
Asked whether the horse riding was emblematic of those overly close ties, Mr Cameron said: "I have known Charlie Brooks, the husband of Rebekah Brooks, for over 30 years.
"He is a good friend and he is a neighbour in the constituency. We live a few miles apart."
Asked about the arrest. a Downing Street spokeswoman said: "The Prime Minister is travelling to Washington. It is an operational matter for the police. You wouldn't expect him to comment on it."
Previous arrests under Operation Weeting include Ian Edmondson, the former News of the World assistant editor; Neville Thurlbeck, the former chief reporter; Neil Wallis, the former executive editor; Rebekah Brooks, the former News International chief executive; and Stuart Kuttner, the former managing editor.
Previous Operation Weeting arrests for conspiracy to pervert the course of justice include Cheryl Carter, the long-standing PA to Rebekah Brooks; Glenn Mulcaire, the private investigator; and Ross Hall, the former NOTW reporter.