Mexican police arrest 'drugs kingpin' Edgar Valdez Villareal
Texas-born suspect known as 'La Barbie' captured as escalating violence inches closer to capital and tourist destinations
Federal police in Mexico today said they had captured an alleged drug gang kingpin who faces drug-trafficking charges in the US and has been blamed for a vicious turf war in central Mexico.
The announcement came just hours after the government revealed that almost 10% of the federal police force had been firedthis year as part of a campaign to root out corruption.
The arrest of Texas-born Edgar Valdez Villarreal – alias "La Barbie" – was the culmination of a year-long intelligence operation, the public safety department said in a statement.
The department said Valdez had been captured in the state of Mexico, which borders the capital of Mexico City.
The statement offered no other details, but included a photograph of Valdez sporting stubble as he knelt on the ground, a police officer's hand on his shoulder.
In May, Valdez was charged by a US district court in Atlanta with distributing thousands of kilograms of cocaine from Mexico to the eastern US between 2004 and 2006.
US authorities had offered a reward of up to $2m for information leading to his capture, with the Mexican government offering a similar amount. There was no word from Mexican authorities on any extradition plans.
Mexican officials said Valdez had been battling for control of the Beltran Leyva cartel since its leader, Arturo Beltran Leyva, was killed in a December shoot-out with marines in Cuernavaca, a popular weekend resort south of the capital.
His battle with Hector Beltran Leyva, a brother of Arturo, has made a battleground of what was once a relatively peaceful pocket of the country and brought the drug war closer to Mexico City.
The capture of Valdez is the government's latest victory against the crumbling Beltran Leyva cartel.
Two other Beltran Leyva brothers have been arrested under the drugs crackdown started by the president, Felipe Calderón, who in 2006 deployed thousands of federal police and soldiers to fight drug-traffickers in their strongholds. That offensive has brought down several major traffickers.
Valdez, 37, was born in the border city of Laredo, Texas, and belonged to the Sinaloa cartel before its split from the Beltran Leyvas. Much of the most recent violence in central Mexico has been directed against his allies.
The decapitated bodies of four men were hung from a bridge in Cuernavaca last week, along with a message threatening allies of "La Barbie" and signed by the gang led by Hector Beltran Leyva.
Two more bodies later were hung from bridges near Acapulco later in the week, although no gang claimed responsibility.
US prosecutors said they used a federal wiretap of a related case in Atlanta in January 2008 to identify Valdez as the source of thousands of kilograms of cocaine that were imported into the US.
Despite the major arrests, Mexico's drug gang violence has grown bloodier, claiming more than 28,000 lives since Calderón launched his crackdown in 2006.
In the latest violence, a 12-hour battle between troops and gunmen killed seven people in the eastern town of Panuco.
The gunmen opened fire and launched grenades at a government electricity station as they tried to escape the soldiers, Salvador Mikel Rivera, the attorney general in the Gulf coast state of Veracruz, said.
He said the battle began on Sunday night when gunmen in six cars ignored orders to stop from soldiers at a checkpoint.
Soldiers, along with state and local police, started a chase that ended at two houses where the gunmen tried to hide. The shootout that enused lasted until Monday morning, and a soldier and six gunmen were killed.