2 arrested in Ohio student's shooting death
For more on this story, go to CNN affiliates WKBN and FOX8.
(CNN) -- Two men were arrested Sunday in connection with a shooting that left an Ohio university student dead and 11 other people wounded, police said.
The men, 19 and 22, were arrested without incident and with help from the FBI, Youngstown Police Chief Jimmy Hughes said. Their names were not released.
Neither has yet been charged, but Hughes said police are not looking for any other suspects.
Police said Jamail Johnson, 25, of Girard, Ohio, was killed in the shooting at a house just off the campus of Ohio's Youngstown State University. He was shot once in the back of the head and several times in the lower body, Dr. Joseph Ohr, a forensic pathologist at the Mahoning County Coroner's Office, told CNN.
Eleven people, including six students, were hurt. All but three had been treated and released by Sunday afternoon, said Tina Creighton, a spokeswoman for St. Elizabeth's Health Center in Youngstown.
One of them was critically wounded after being shot near an ear andthe others suffered nonlife-threatening injuries, Hughes said.
Ohio Governor John Kasich issued a statement saying he was "shocked and saddened" by the shooting and has offered state resources to the university and law enforcement.
"I join all Ohioans in expressing my deepest sympathy to the victims, their families and to the entire university community," Kasich said.
The shooting happened at a house where members of the Omega Psi Phi fraternity were holding a party, Hughes said.
Police, called at 3:39 a.m., said shots were fired "indiscriminately" from outside the house. Authorities found multiple shell casings from two semiautomatic handguns, one a .40-caliber and the other a .45-caliber, Hughes said.
Witnesses had identified two possible suspects, both with ties to the area, he said. They had been ejected from the party but returned and started firing, Hughes said.
Three of the victims are 17 and the oldest is 31, Hughes said. Three others are 19 and four are 20.
Youngstown is about 75 miles southeast of Cleveland.
Johnson's friends described him Sunday as a nice person who didn't get into trouble.
"He wasn't the person that you had to be worried about when you went out," said David Oliveira, who isn't a Youngstown student but knew Johnson from his hometown. "He wasn't the type of guy to get into conflicts."
James Baker, who attended Youngstown last spring, said Johnson was a "real good dude" who was going to graduate this spring.
"He had goals. He had plans to open up a business," Baker told CNN, adding Johnson was simply in the wrong place at the wrong time.
"I'm hurting for him right now," Baker said. "I'm just surprised he had to be the one in the crossfire."
Hughes said the shooting is a surprise.
"It's sad because young people here are trying to turn around a lot of things," he said. "That campus is a bright shining star."
CNN's Nick Valencia, John Branch, Susan Candiotti, and Ross Levitt contributed to this report