Three alleged Russian agents charged with spying in New York
Three alleged Russian intelligence agents who operated a spy ring in New York while posing as a banker and diplomats have been charged by the US with espionage.
The three men working with others to obtain secrets about US economic plans and proposed sanctions against Moscow at a time of rapidly deteriorating tensions between America and Russia.
The FBI investigation was launched in the wake of the arrests in 2010 of the “Insiders”, Anna Chapman and nine other spies who belonged to a gang of sleeper agents.
Among the alleged recruitment targets of the accused spies were unnamed young women “with ties to a major university” in New York and several employees of “major companies”.
Evgeny Buryakov, who was posing as a banker with a state-owned Russian financial institution, was arrested by the FBI and is expected to appear in court accused of conspiring to work as unauthorised intelligence agents for the SVR, the Russian foreign intelligence service, between 2010 and 2014
The other two men identified in the indictment, Igor Sporyshev, and Victor Podobnyy, were assigned as diplomats with the Russian consulate in New York City and the Kremlin’s mission at the United Nations. Both have already left the US and were covered by diplomatic immunity treaties.
According to the 26-page complaint, Mr Buryakov was interested in learning about high-speed Wall Street trading, automated trading algorithms, and "destabilisation of markets".
This focus for his work has prompted suspicions among US analysts that he may have been trying to learn how to trigger a Wall Street meltdown by manipulating the highly market sensitive of trading financial products via such automated algorithms.
Preet Bharara, the US attorney for the Southern District of New York who will lead the prosecution, said that the case highlighted tensions between Russia and the US.
“The arrest of Evgeny Buryakov and the charges against him and his co-defendants make clear that – more than two decades after the presumptive end of the Cold War – Russian spies continue to seek to operate in our midst under cover of secrecy,” Mr Bharara said.
In a sign of the importance attached by Washington to the indictments, the details were announced by Eric Holder, President Barack Obama’s attorney general, with senior US law enforcement officials.
The three men allegedly gathered intelligence for their spymasters at Moscow Centre, the SVR headquarters, and tried to recruit US residents as sources. “Others known and unknown" also allegedly spied, according to the indictment.
The spies had orders to gather information on potential US sanctions against Russia and American efforts to develop alternative energy resources, the FBI said.
The three men allegedly used coded language to arrange clandestine face-to-face meetings to exchange intelligence information, verbally and in hand-written, to attempt to avoid detection of phone or email interception. The code included common words such as “ticket”, “book, “list”, “umbrella” and “hat”.
“From as early as March 2012 through as recently as mid-September 2014, the FBI has conducted physical or electronic surveillance of Buryakov and Sporyshev engaging in over 48 brief meetings, several of which involved Buryakov passing a bag, magazine or slip of paper to Sporyshev,” the indictment read. “ These meetings typically took place outdoors, where the risk of effective surveillance was reduced relative to an indoor location.”
The FBI recorded allegedly incriminating conversations within a "secure office in Manhattan used by SVR agents" after plac ing microphones in the groups’ meeting places, monitoring the defendants’ phone numbers and using at least one confidential source.
Christopher Swift, a national security expert at Georgetown University, told ABC News that the high-profile nature of the bust could turn into a “real danger” for American spies in Russia.
“I would not want to be an American diplomat or CIA officer under non-official cover in Moscow right now,” he said. “Tensions with Russia are already running high over Ukraine and the Kremlin is likely to reciprocate.”
In another potentially embarrassing detail for Russian officials, the spies are said to have used a “leading Russian state-owned news organisation” for intelligence gathering by supplying it with questions for coverage of the New York Stock Exchange.
“These charges demonstrate our firm commitment to combating attempts by covert agents to illegally gather intelligence and recruit spies within the United States,” said Mr Holder. “We will use every tool at our disposal to identify and hold accountable foreign agents operating inside this country – no matter how deep their cover.”
The Russian embassy did not reply to initial requests for comment and the men have not responded to the charges.