Jat quota stir: Water supply cut, Delhi may go dry today
NEW DELHI: The capital is staring at an unprecedented water crisis after 70% of its supply was hit when Jat protesters forcibly shut down the Munak canal in Haryana and its Delhi sub-branch on Saturday morning. Unless supply resumes immediately, all of Delhi with the exception of east and parts of south, will run almost dry from Sunday night. The state government moved a petition in the Supreme Court, seeking its intervention in the matter. The SC accepted the plea and was likely to hear it on Sunday. Home minister Rajnath Singh promised urgent steps after water minister Kapil Mishra and Manish Sisodia called on him. “We have just enough water to supply till Sunday morning before tankers are pushed into service,” Mishra said. Mishra held an emergency meeting on Saturday to draw up a contingency plan. “All underground reservoirs will supply water to the tankers. From Sunday night, we will use water from Sonia Vihar and Bhagirathi plants, the only two functional ones, to supply to the rest of Delhi,” he said. The city gets most of its water from the Yamuna through Haryana, the Ganga and has some underground reserves. Protesters initially closed down the Munak canal on Friday night but supply resumed within a few hours. However, by Saturday morning, the canal had been shut down once again; this time protesters broke down the canal gate and damaged operating systems. The parallel Delhi sub-branch was also shut down. Officials said even if the protesters allowed the canals to become operational, it would take several hours to repair the damage. “The other crisis that emerged from this is that water collecting at the gates of the canals would have eventually built up so much pressure that the canals would have burst. Haryana, therefore, started diverting the water through drain no 8 which is, unfortunately, also carrying a huge amount of pollutants. It is because of this that the plants at Chandrawal and Wazirabad also had to be shut down,” said a senior DJB official. With no other sources of water and no reserves, Delhi will be dependent on tanker supply from Sunday night. Even with 760 tankers pressed into service, there is just not enough water to go around. Delhi has a demand of close to 1,200 million gallons per day of which DJB supplies an average of 900 MGD. At present, only the Ganga-fed Sonia Vihar and Bhagirathi plants with a combined treatment capacity of 240 MGD is functional. “We will be able to supply to central, north and west Delhi till Sunday morning. From Sunday evening, we will divert water from east Delhi to north and from south Delhi to west. Water tankers will be treated as emergency vehicles and will not be stopped. Traffic police is on board with us. Leaves of all DJB employees have been cancelled and our control room will be operational all 24 hours,” said Mishra. Deputy chief minister Manish Sisodia, who spoke to home minister Rajnath Singh on Saturday morning over the issue, said that Delhiites would have to conserve water since there was nothing to supply after 48 hours. CM Arvind Kejriwal also spoke to the Haryana CM and was assured that the army would be sent to Munak to ensure that supply resumed at the earliest. However, that did nothing to deter the protesters. The government finally reposed its faith in the SC which, in 2011when a similar blockade had taken place, had intervened and ensured restoration of supply to Delhi. However, it remains to be seen how soon the court will hear Delhi’s plea.