Night Stalker guilty after campaign of perverted terror
The conviction brings to a close a massive manhunt that cost tens of millions of pounds and involved hundreds of officers. Police missed a key chance to stop Grant in 1999 because of a paperwork blunder, it can now be revealed. Officers mistakenly ruled him out of their inquiry when the DNA of another suspect with the same name was confused with his. Commander Simon Foy, head of the Metropolitan Police’s homicide and serious crime command, said Grant’s conviction lifted a shadow of fear from thousands of pensioners living in south London. But he added: "We are deeply sorry for the trauma suffered by all those victims and our failure to bring Grant to justice earlier."
The police chief branded Grant a "perverted, callous and violent individual" who attacked some of the most vulnerable people in society. His crimes were "some of the most awful and disturbing in the history of the Met", he added. "He was also feared by many people living in the same communities and it is not too dramatic to say when he was caught thousands of people in the South East were able to switch out their lights and go to sleep without the dreadful thought they would be preyed upon by Grant." A jury convicted him of claiming at least 18 victims - but it is feared the total may be more than 500. Between 1992 and 2009 the masked sexual predator preyed on frail men and women in south London and violated them in their homes, sometimes for several hours.
Many of his victims - aged up to 89 - were blind, deaf or had conditions including Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Grant targeted detached and semi-detached 1930s houses in leafy suburbs, often levering out double-glazed window units with a crowbar to gain entry. He was a highly-skilled burglar who carried out daytime reconnaissance. The hallmark of many of his offences was to remove light bulbs, cut telephone lines, then grab his victims with a gloved hand. He woke terrified pensioners by shining a torch in their eyes before engaging them in conversation.
Grant then subjected his vulnerable victims to humiliating and degrading sexual assaults for a gratification described in court as impossible to understand. His "stuff of nightmares" crime spree sparked an international manhunt by police. Officers had been hunting the Night Stalker, under the codename Operation Minstead, since 1998 when two rapes were linked to the same attacker. Grant, of Brockley Mews, Honor Oak, eluded capture for years as the tally of victims linked to Minstead soared to 203. The offences took place in areas including Warlingham, Shirley, Beckenham, Bromley, Addiscombe, Orpington and West Dulwich. The sex beast’s luck finally ran out when police swooped on his car in the early hours of November 15, 2009.
More than 70 undercover officers, supported by hidden cameras and a helicopter, staked out several streets in Shirley, near Croydon, in an ambitious operation after Commissioner Sir Paul Stephenson called for a "step change" in the hunt. Grant, a father of 10 and full-time carer for his estranged wife Jennifer, who has multiple sclerosis and is paralysed, refused to discuss his crimes with police. But he stunned officers by suggesting they should instead speak to his son. By the time the case arrived in court more than a year later, he had spun a web of lies in an attempt to get off the hook. Among a string of "almost laughable" explanations at Woolwich was his claim that his ex-wife stored his semen in 1977, then waited 15 years to frame him for the crimes.