Craig Field guilty of manslaughter of Kelvin Kane outside Kingscliff Hotel in 2012
Former rugby league star Craig Field has been found not guilty of murder but guilty of the manslaughter of a man outside a hotel in northern New South Wales in 2012.
Field, 41, admitted to punching 50-year-old Kelvin Kane outside the Kingscliff Hotel but his defence team argued he did not deliver the blow that caused a fatal brain haemorrhage.
The former Rabbitohs, Manly and West Tigers half-back pleaded not guilty to murdering Mr Kane.
There was a gasp from the public gallery and member's of Field's family began weeping as the verdict was handed down.
Field bowed his head as he was found guilty of manslaughter.
Judge Elizabeth Fullerton said the defendant can expect a jail sentence.
"A period of full-time jail is an inevitable outcome of these proceedings," she said.
The judge hopes to complete a sentencing hearing next week.
During the trial Field told the court that he threw the punch because he feared he was about to be hit.
The defence and prosecution agreed the fatal blow connected with the left side of Mr Kane's jaw, but there had been conflicting evidence about where the punch thrown by Field landed.
Field told the court his punch grazed Mr Kane's right temple.
The court also heard another man, Shaun Fathers, could have thrown up to six blows towards the deceased.
But Mr Fathers told police during the investigation that none of his punches connected with Mr Kane's body.
The prosecution told the court medical evidence supported the proposition of a single punch being landed.
Field's legal team argued to have his bail continued but it was refused.
Outside the court, Field's lawyer James Fuggle said his client was weighing up his legal options.
"Mr Field is holding up fairly well," he said.
"We'll be talking to him over the next couple of days in respect of his options with respect to appeals, bail applications, pending appeals.
"But essentially the court has decided that it wants to proceed to sentencing as quickly as it can and we'll be sorting that out on Monday of next week."