Suspect in killing of 2 airmen is German Muslim
Update at 6:51 p.m. ET: Family members in Kosovo say the suspect, identified as 21-year-old Arif Uka, is a devout Muslim who was raised in Germany.
Officials say the suspect was carrying a handgun and a pistol. After shouting "Allah Akbar," meaning "God is great," he shot and killed one airman outside the bus, then killed the driver and wounded two others on the bus before being taken down by police.
Update at 4:37 p.m. ET: The suspected gunman in the killing of two U.S. airmen is a German Muslim who worked at Frankfurt airport, the man's uncle says, according to the Associated Press.
Update at 1:38 p.m. ET: President Obama says he is "saddened" and "outraged"' by the attack on U.S. airmen in Germany that left two dead and two injured. He pledged to "spare no effort" to bring those responsible to justice.
A spokesman for the Air Force at Lakenheath airfield confirms all four were from a military base in eastern England. Lakenheath is home to the 48th Fighter Wing, the United States' only F-15 fighter wing. Its says the base employs about 4,500 active-duty military members, as well as 2,000 British and U.S. civilians.
Update at 12:38 p.m. ET: The U.S. military confirmed two airmen were killed and two wounded in the Frankfurt airport shooting, the AP reports. U.S. Air Force Europe spokeswoman Maj. Beverly Mock said all four victims were airmen. She said she could not say where they were based, nor give any other details until their next of kin had been notified.
Update at 12:03 p.m. ET: German Chancellor Angela Merkel condemned the attack on a bus carrying U.S. servicemembers at a Frankfurt airport as a "terrible incident" and pledged a full investigation, the AP reports.
Update at 12:01 p.m. ET: The attack came as the bus carrying U.S. military personnel sat outside Terminal 2 at Frankfurt airport, police spokesman Manfred Fuellhardt said, according to the Associated Press. The two killed were the bus driver and a passenger, and one person suffered serious wounds and another one light injuries, Fuellhardt said. The spokesman could not confirm whether any of the casualties were U.S. military personnel.
Update at 11:58 a.m. ET: Kosovo Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi said German police have identified the suspect as Arif Uka, a Kosovo citizen from the northern town of Mitrovica, the Associated Press reports. "This is a devastating and a tragic event," Rexhepi said. "We are trying to find out was this something that was organized or what was the nature of the attack."
Update at 11:42 a.m. ET: German news agency DPA reports that police arrested a 21-year-old male suspect from Kosovo after the shooting, Spiegel Online reports. A police spokesperson said it was too early to determine whether the attack was politically motivated, Spiegel Online says.
Update at 11:19 a.m. ET: NBC News quotes a U.S. military official as saying at least one of the dead is a U.S. servicemember. The official was citing information from German police, NBC reports.
Earling posting: Frankfurt police confirmed two people were killed and two injured in an attack on a bus carrying U.S. servicemembers, the Associated Press reports.
An airport spokesman says the attack this morning occured in front of Terminal 2 at continental Europe's second-biggest airport hub.
The U.S. military has several major bases in the Frankfurt region, often used as a logistical hub for operations in Afghanistan or Iraq.