London disturbances - Sunday 7 August 2011
9.15am: Good morning, and welcome to the Guardian's live reaction to the riots in Tottenham last night.
Two police cars, a bus and ­several shops were attacked and set ablaze in north London as violence and looting erupted following a protest demanding "justice" over the fatal shooting of Mark Duggan.
Eight police officers were injured during the violence, which continued into the early hours of Sunday morning.
Duggan, 29, was killed on Thursday after police stopped the minicab he was travelling in. The IPCC are investigating the incident, which also saw a police officer shot – the bullet reportedly lodging in his radio and leaving him with minor injuries.
Several colleagues were reporting from the scene of the violence in Tottenham, here's the Guardian's main news story:
Were you in Tottenham last night? Get in touch on Twitter @AdamGabbatt or share your stories below.
9.24am: This video by MriRudi on YouTube shows a building engulfed by flames. "Apparently this is a jeweller's store," someone is heard saying on the footage. An alarm can be heard sounding in the background.
9.31am: Paul Lewis was reporting from Tottenham overnight and reports that "sustained looting spread from Tottenham to other nearby areas of Haringey".
9.42am: Some official reaction from Downing Street:
9.48am: Paramedics treated a total of 11 people, ten of whom were taken to hospital, according to the London ambulance service.
A spokeswoman added that two of the eight injured police officers needed attention from ambulance crews, but it is not yet clear whether the other officers were dealt with by the ambulance service.
9.58am: In the comments vic15, who lives opposite Tottenham police station, has given a detailed account of their experience of the rioting.
"This wasn't just about a policing, this was about mindless violence and aggression by disaffected and alienated youth," vic15 says.
I live in Tottenham - actually I live directly opposite the main police station. This is basically what I saw. I didn't know there was going to be any demonstration and heard a bit of noise but honestly, it's quite a noisy area so didn't think anything of it. Then at about 8/8.30pm things started to get quite frightening. We saw the police move into a line and [people] on the streets were throwing things at the police. It looked like stones and rocks although later became flaming wheelie bins and what looked to be shop fittings (my partner claims he saw a fridge being thrown or part of one). Then we saw the cars go up in flames, they were quite near us. That's when I realised that this was getting really out of hand and the police moved around where we are and more and more kept arriving. We saw the bus and the buildings around us go up in flames like an inferno. That was probably one of the most frightening parts. People below the flat were shouting out to the police. I can't remember their exact words but quite abusive and dismissive. We were worried that the fires on the high street were not being tackled and they were really gutwrenching. We didn't see much of the looting first hand because we didn't leave the property (of course) but at one point, early on, I called a friend of mine because I was scared and asked if we could come round. I wanted out of the area. She pointed out with much more clarity than me that the best thing we could do want not leave where we were. At least we were surrounded by police but it didn't feel that safe when the fires were raging down the streets. We heard lots of dogs barking at one point and weren't sure if they were police dogs or the dogs of the rioters because the accompanying shouting was too aggressive and angry. Then the fire engines got through and the horses and the armoured black riot vans. It seemed to quieten down nearer to us but it seemed to volatile and I didn't sleep last night. Last night I was so angry with people who choose this way to destroy my community. I live in Tottenham and I have been sick of the sneery ways that people regard us. Some of the 'twitter jokes' last night were really really sad and almost broke my heart with the way that some people thought this was a big joke or that Tottenham isn't 'worth saving'. There are a lot of very good people here. The looting wasn't a part of the demonstration. People came from all over London to 'join in' and the community I live in has been ruined. Now, beyond the anger, I'm sad, desperately sad. This wasn't just about a policing, this was about mindless violence and aggression by disaffected and alienated youth and not just in Tottenham. Meanwhile the people I know, the shops I visit, my neighbours have had their lives ripped apart and the community which is wracked by poverty and joblessness is further labeled and further disadvantaged. I don't want people to think that Tottenham is a hopeless place. It is my home and my community and I love living here but I really truly despise people who have destroyed it.
10.35am: Google map showing the scene of some of the fires and looting in the early hours of this morning. Click on the blaze icons for more information.
We'd like to carry on adding to the map throughout the day to try and get a fuller picture of what happened and where. If you witnessed something that might be worth adding get in touch on Twitter @AdamGabbatt, or email adam.gabbatt@guardian.co.uk
10.46am: Awaiting a statement from Commander Adrian Hanstock, of Metropolitan police. Will bring it as it happens.
10.50am: As the map shows, the violence and looting was not confined to Tottenham – spreading to Wood Green, some two miles west.
Paul Lewis was reporting from the scene4am:
10.57am: Here's a Storify hosting some pictures of the damage. As with the map, please get in touch if you've spotted any photographs from this morning.
11.08am: David Lammy is speaking "a community that was already hurting has now had the heart ripped out of it," he says.
The community was "smashed" by "mindless, mindless people, many of whom were not from Tottenham". Lammy says people came from miles and miles away to loot and join in the violence.
The Tottenham MP points out that "we don't know if there are fatalities" – there could have been people in the burned out buildings.
Lammy says there are questions concerning the policing that led to the protest becoming violent. He says it took many hours before we "saw the kind of policing that I think is appropriate".
Last night's events were "absolutely unacceptable" he says.
The death of Mark Duggan was "extremely regrettable". Last night's peaceful demonstration was hijacked by a "small number of criminal element".
The looting was "absolutely unacceptable". Police are working today to restore a sense of calm to the community.
That was the extent of the statement. Now Hanstock is taking questions.
11.20am: "Preparation was in place" at the peaceful protest, Hanstock says.
Police intelligence was that the protest would be peaceful. He says the violence was "extreme" and "could not be anticipated".
On the basis of the information they knew they decided not to have a large-scale police presence.
11.26am: There are 42 people in custody, Hanstock says.
Were police slow to respond, he is asked?
"No not at all," he says, but adds: "Bear in mind this was midnight on a Sunday."
Is he confident police will not find any bodies at the scene of the fires?
"The day will unfold as we go ahead," apparently.
There will be an increased police presence in the streets today.
11.37am: This video appears to show looting taking place in Wood Green in the early hours of this morning. Nzflapper, who shot the footage, says it was at around 5.40am.
At about 1 minute in it looks as if a couple of people are leaving H&M with a haul of goods, and at 1.46 a number of people are stood around JD sports.
Vikram Dodd, who was reporting from Wood Green, says if the time the video was shot is accurate then looting was ongoing in the area for three hours.
12.06pm: Blog reader Fran has emailed with her account of last night's events. She says she was told by police that they did not have the resources to send people out to Tottenham Hale retail park and quell the looting.
12.17pm: Full statement from Commander Adrian Hanstock, Met police. Two officers remain in hospital.
12.20pm: My colleague Jason Rodrigues files this report on last night's events:
12.35pm: An anonymous reader has sent this account from Tottenham last night.
Were you there and can you corroborate this account? Other reports have also suggested the violence began after a woman was involved with police. Email adam.gabbatt@guardian.co.uk
12.43pm: I've updated our Google map of the looting and violence with the help of reader Sam Wass. View it below or here.
12.51pm: Lynne Featherstone, MP for Hornsey and Wood Green and home office minister, is giving a statement.
"I want to thank those police officers and those commanders who put themselves in harm's way," she says.
Featherstone wants to send a "very clear message to anyone out there intent on causing harm".
The message is: "You will face the full force of the law."
• Looting continued in Wood Green until at least 5.30am this morning as police struggled to deal with the protests. Violence had earlier spilled out from Tottenham.
• The looting was brought under control earlier in Tottenham, with police taking control of parts of Tottenham Hale by around 1am, according to reports, although other reports have suggested some looting was continuing at the Tottenham Hale retail park much later.
• Some 42 people have been arrested, while 26 police officers were injured during the riots. Two remain in hospital. Police were unable to say whether there were fatalities overnight.
• Tottenham MP David Lammy has said the riots were "a disgrace", while the Met police said the events were "absolutely unacceptable". Downing Street also used the term "absolutely unacceptable".
• Some reports are suggesting an altercation between a female and police may have sparked wider violence.
@PaulieTandoori @AdamGabbatt here's some photos I took last night http://bit.ly/quh8BC #tottenham
2.02pm: My colleague Sandra Laville has spoken to Semone Wilson, the fiancee of Mark Duggan.
2.28pm: The Hackney One carnival has been cancelled in the wake of last night's events. Blogs editor Matt Wells has this:
2.44pm: Returning to the reports a girl was involved in an altercation with police – here an eyewitness tells the BBC that a female was "set upon" by police. It was subsequently discovered she was 16, the witness says, which provoked a surge forward in her defence by people at the scene.
3.02pm: The girl who reportedly was involved in causing the violence between police and protesters may have thrown a stone at police.
One man "holed up in a church 10 metres away from the Tottenham riot". He told the Guardian that he saw the girl "throw some card and something else, maybe a stone, at the original riot police line".
He said the girl was then "pounded by 15 riot shields". He said that the police "launched into her with startling force using both batons and shields. She went down on the floor but once she managed to get up she was hit again before being half-dragged away by her friend."
He added: "After she was removed there were a few minutes of peace and then lots of glass bottles started being thrown, we could hear them."
Bailey had been attending an event at the church, which he said is opposite the police station in Tottenham.
"I have never been so scared and intrigued," he said. "On the way out we were mere streets away from the mass fire, it was like 25 meters high and seemed to be like a mile wide."
3.37pm: Quote courtesy of PA that I missed earlier – Paul Deller from the Metropolitan Police Federation said:
4.20pm: This footage shared with the Guardian by Jason N Parkinson shows police efforts to contain violence over night.

4.41pm: The Metroplitan police have spoken of their concern over posts on social networking sites relating to potential problems in north London this evening.
Commander Adrian Hanstock said police had been monitoring social networking sites throughout the day and were conscious of "some really ill informed speculation" relating to potential further problems.
"I would encourage people to look for official Metropolitan Police websites and appeal to people who have information about crimes last night or anyone intending to commit further criminality today to let us know so we can protect the community," he said.
He said it was clear that the community "absolutely resent the intrusion into their lives and damage to their livelihoods".
Hanstock said it was an "enormous" crime scene which would take some time to work through.
"We recognise the huge disruption this has made there, we will be working closely with key people to open that scene as quickly as we can, but we need to maximise our opportunity to search the area and make it safe."
4.56pm: Separately Shaun Hall, Mark Duggan's older brother, has said the family did not condone the violence, my colleague Caroline Davies reports.
Of the allegation that a police officer was shot at, when Duggan was killed on Thursday, Hall said:
On the riots in Tottenham, he said:
Asked if he had a message for the community, Hall said:
5.11pm: Police have set up a major investigation team following last night's violence - codenamed Operation Withern.
In a statement the Met said the team is being led by Detective Superintendent John Sweeney.
5.04pm:Graphic showing where and when the clashes and looting occurred:
5.17pm: The Met have also said that the total number of arrests is now 48.
In a statement Commander Adrian Hanstock said this was not because there have been new arrests, but "the rise from 42 to 48 is because the Investigation Team has now collated the exact details from the numerous custody suites in London".
5.27pm: Sandra Laville, the Guardian's crime correspondent, reports that reinforcements from Thames Valley, Essex, Surrey, City of London and Kent police forces have been called in tonight to prevent a repeat of the violence.
5.35pm: The Guardian's Datablog has launched an online survey in a bid to understand last night's riots in greater detail. My colleague James Ball writes:
You can find the full Datablog survey here.
6.50pm: Good evening. This is Ben Quinn taking over the blog from Adam. Follow me on Twitter @BenQuinn75 or pass on stories by emailing ben.quinn@guardian.co.uk
6.52pm: London's Mayor, Boris Johnson, has been coming under pressure to end his holiday and return to London.
However, he told BBC news in a phone interview in the past hour: "I am not going to come back at the moment because I have complete confidence n the police and I think that they are doing a very very good job."
Asked about the police handling of events, he replied: "Of course people will do a big post mortem now and of course there is going to be a big examination of what police done and what they could have done but I just want to stress, and there may be indeed questions to be asked about whether the police acted swiftly enough and all that kind of thing. Those are legitimate questions.
"But never forget that the people who did this [rioting] were criminals and their behaviour was criminal behaviour and it was in no way justified by the questions that people are asking about Mark Duggan"
"The damage that is being suffered by communities, by shopkeeprs, people running businesses, is frankly the last thing that part of London, that the London economy needs now."
7.02pm: There are reports coming in of disturbances in Enfield.
Tarah Welsh, a BBC reporter visiting her family in London, has been tweeting she has seen a number of people throwing concrete slabs through shop windows.
She tweets: I can see 15 riot vans so far, police have cordoned off high rd, most residents stuck in homes.
#tottenham Police confirm shop windows smashed in #Enfield hi st, two so far and officers attending as of 6.30pm
7.27pm: My colleague Matt Taylor is on the ground in Brixton, where there was unconfirmed rumours of disturbances earlier.
He says that there are thousands of people on the streets, many of whom have been attendingf ththe Brixton 'Splash' festival.
Matt adds that police have told him there was some minor trouble earlier. There is a reasonably strong police presence.
7.35pm: Initial ballistics tests on the bullet that lodged in a police officer's radio when Mark Duggan died on Thursday night show it was a police issue bullet, the Guardian understands.
7.40pm: Scotland Yard have now said that a total of 55 arrests have been made since the start of last night's disturbances in Tottenham - 51 last night and four today.
The majority were for burglary, and other offences included violent disorder, robbery, theft and handling stolen goods.
7.41pm: Youths vandalised a police car and smashed two windows on Enfield High Street, the Press Association reports.
Police were called at 6.38pm and officers are on the scene dealing with the disturbance, Scotland Yard said.
7.49pm: Back in Enfield, Tarah Welsh has tweeted a pic of police in riot gear on the streets. Police reinforcements have been sent to the area.
7.56pm: The Guardian's Paul Lewis is on the way to Enfield. He tweets:
Caution re: #Enfield. Clearly some disturbances, but presence of riot polices does not always=riot
8.00pm: These pictures are unconfirmed also, but they are said to have come in from Enfield.
This is one of a vandalised police car: _
8.06pm: Pastor Nims Obunge, who is supporting Mark Duggan's family, has been giving a reaction to the news reported here earlier that initial ballistics tests on the bullet that lodged in a police officer's radio was a police issue bullet.
He told Vikram Dodd of the Guardian: "If it was a police issue bullet in the radio, that would instigate a lot more concerns."
Obunge said that he and Duggan's family had seen the IPCC this afternoon, and had asked about the community rumours that the bullet recovered from an officer was a police issue one, but were not told that it was.
8.20pm: Paul Lewis of the Guardian has taken this pic of police outside Enfield train station.
8.28pm: David Lammy, the Labour MP for Tottenham, has written a piece for the Guardian on the lessons from the last time that there was violent unrest in his area on the scale witnessed in Tottenham over this weekend.
He remembers the riots on the Broadwater Farm housing estate, which were triggered by the death of Cynthia Jarrett:
8.54pm: Scotland Yard said it had an operation in place across the capital tonight, with " high visibility" patrols being carried out, the Press Association reports:
8.56pm: The Guardian's Paul Lewis has been witnessing serious clashes over the past half an hour in Enfield, where it appeared to quieter earlier after some initial, minor, disturbances.
Police reacted with dogs and baton attacks after around 200 young people broke into jewellery store but were unable to intervene when a chemist was ransacked at another location.
9.03pm: IPCC Commissioner Rachel Cerfontyne was speaking earlier. She said she had spent most of today meeting Mark Duggan's relatives and members of the community. The Press Association has this:
9.14pm: The Guardian's Paul Lewis has filed this from the scene of another outbreak of disorder in Enfield:
9.40pm: Here is a snatch of tomorrow's front page Guardian story, by Sandra Laville, Paul Lewis, Vikram Dodd and Caroline Davies:
9.48pm: Here is another take from Sandra Laville, the Guardian's Crime correspondent, on her earlier report about the events surrounding the Mark Duggan's death:
9.52pm: Billy Kenber of The Times is also on the ground in Enfield. He tweets:
Group of about 25 youths have been surrounded by police officers and are being lead away 'for contd http://twitpic.com/62lxfb
10.04pm: There is mounting evidence that the rioting in north London has been part of an orchestrated plan of disturbance, according to the Guardian's Paul Lewis:
10.11pm: Here is a picture that Paul Lewis sent in earlier of police in riot gear near a vandalised police car in Enfield.
10.29pm: The weekend's violence and looting in north London is reminiscent of 1980s inner city unrest, writes Maev Kennedy:
#tottenham now clearly shaping police reform debate. cops in my timeline suggesting riots mean you cant cut manpower/pay/pensions etc now...
10.55pm: 'Police and the Riot Blunders' is the front page headline in Monday's Daily Mail.
It reports that London endured a second night of rioting as questions were raised about the shooting of Mark Duggan. It adds that a senior Met officer also flew off on holidays "hours before mayhem".
11.07pm: The leader of Enfield Council, Doug Taylor, has been telling Sky News that Enfield has its share of problems relating to urban deprivation.
"Like many boroughs we have difficulties, but this this way beyond the norm. There is no proper explanation, no mitigation for what occurred here," he added.
While adding that the police were "doing a tremendous job" he said that one of the problems was that they also had to keep an eye on Tottenham, while having "an idea" that there could be trouble in Enfield.
This is orchestrated. Teenagers on the streets saying there has long been "a plan" to be at #EdmontonGreen at midnight.
11.31pm: David Cameron was among among politicians denouncing violence in north London while local MP called riots an attack on ordinary people, writes Andrew Sparrow in a wrap-up of political reaction:
11.40pm: There have been disturbances over the course of at least the past half an hour in Brixton. Andrew Hough of the Daily Telegraph tweets from the scene:
At least 200 youths pelting stones + bottles @ police. Businesses told to shut up shop. 2 different cordons #Brixton #riots #London
11.53pm: The often-voiced hypothesis that 'outsiders' are to blame for riots such as those in Tottenham and Enfield is questioned in this blog post by Sean Carey, a specialist in social and cultural anthropology and Guardian contributor.
12.03am: Preliminary ballistics tests are understood to show that a police officer fired two bullets during the operation to arrest Mr Duggan last week, report Sean O'Neill and Fiona hamilton in The Times (paywall):
12.07am: Parallels with the Broadwater Farm riots are flawed, writes Andrew Gilligan in the Daily Telegraph:
12.13am: Looting is going on in Brixton, unhindered by the police, according to the Guardian's Matt Taylor.
At the scene, he witnessed a couple of hundred people taking goods out of Footlocker, which has now been set on fire. Some left on bicycles while others passed it to friends in waiting cars.
A police helicopter is circling overhead while police on the ground have congregated on side street close to scene but have not yet intervened.
Those taking part in the looting are aged in their teens or early twenties.
12.29am: Walthamstow can be added to the lists of areas where there have been disturbances tonight.
A resident from there has just called the Guardian to complain that the media are not focussing on trouble there. She claimed that at a Barclays cashpoint was targeted.
Local MP Stella Creasy has been out and about assessing the situation and tweeted that twitter rumours about more serious clashes were proving untrue.
She said earlier however that trouble had been breaking out, and asked local people to steer clear of the town centre.
12.39am: Matthew Holehouse from the Telegraph tweets: Confirmed from two witnesses: looting of sports shop in Kingsland Road shopping centre, Hackney. Gang of 30 pursued by cops.
12.46am: The Metropolitan Police tweets: Police have not requested a #mediablackout and are continuing to provide updates
12.48am: Paul Lewis, on the ground in Enfield, says that it has started to rain there.
Earlier, he saw a man receiving medical attention after apparently being stabbed.
1.42am: Here is some (unconfirmed) video footage of looting taking place earlier in Brixton, via Paraic O'Brien from the BBC:
1.52am: Matt Taylor in Brixon reports that the primary focus of police attention is on the Currys near Brixton centre, where a couple of hundred people have broken in and have been helping themselves to the electronic goods.
A stand-off with lines of police is taking place while the ground is littered with debris.
2.00am: Here is a summary of events over the course of today and this evening:
• A second night of street clashes and looting has taken place around London. Police in riot gear were deployed across the city to deal with trouble in Enfield, six miles north of the site of riots in Tottenham, while looters later pillaged shops in Brixton.
• There was mounting evidence on Sunday night that some of the second night of rioting in London was part of an orchestrated plan, as violent disturbances broke out sporadically across parts of the capital.
• Doubts have emerged over whether Mark Duggan, whose death at the hands of police sparked the weekend's Tottenham riots, was killed during an exchange of fire. The Guardian understands that initial ballistics tests on a bullet, found lodged in a police radio worn by an officer during Thursday's incident, suggested it was police issue – and therefore had not been fired by Duggan.
• Tottenham MP David Lammy has said the riots were "a disgrace", while the Met police said the events were "absolutely unacceptable". Downing Street also used the term "absolutely unacceptable".
• Some reports are suggesting an altercation between a female and police in Tottenham may have sparked wider violence.
This blog is being wrapped up for now but will be up and running again in a few hours.