21 hospitalized after vehicle plows into Endymion parade crowd in New Orleans
Twenty-eight people were injured Saturday night (Feb. 25) in New Orleans when a suspected drunken driver wrecked a pickup truck into spectators at the Krewe of Endymion parade in Mid-City, police said. The crash was reported at 6:42 p.m. at North Carrollton and Orleans avenues.
"He took out rows of people," witness Greg McNeely said.
Officials said 21 people, including a police officer and a child, were taken to seven hospitals. Five were in critical condition. Seven other people declined treatment. None of the injuries were life-threatening, Mayor Mitch Landrieu said.
The wreck came on the final weekend of Carnival and during one of New Orleans biggest parades. Endymion, known for its huge floats as well its delays, paused for about 10 minutes when the crash occurred, spectators said.
Police Superintendent Michael Harrison said the driver was quickly arrested. "We suspect that that subject was highly intoxicated," he said.
Landrieu said there was no evidence to suggest terrorism. Said an FBI spokesman: "We are currently coordinating with our federal, state, and local law enforcement partners to determine whether a federal violation has occurred." 
Police said the truck was lakebound on Carrollton when it hit two vehicles. "He then lost control driving over the neutral ground, striking a city dump truck and hitting multiple pedestrians," said a Police Department statement. 
"We heard tires screeching, and we looked to our left and saw a dark grey Chevy 1500 Silverado and it looked like he was swerving in between people that were walking, trying to get to the parade route," said Trey Klechak, 20, an LSU student from Covington. "It seemed like he got pissed off because all of a sudden he slammed the gas and his back tires started and it seemed like his foot never left the gas pedal."
Klechak said the truck struck a sedan and three people before mounting the neutral ground. "There were bodies flying off the hood while he was still driving," he said. "Luckily there was a dump truck parked on the other side, and luckily when he went up on neutral ground, he slammed into the dump truck." 
Scott LeBlanc, 29, said he was at outside a home a few houses down from the scene when he heard screams and then saw people running. He ran toward the intersection and came upon a female nurse who, while treating an injured man, yelled for a shirt. LeBlanc said he surrendered his. He said paramedics arrived quickly and rushed the injured person into an ambulance and drove off.
Witness L.A. Morgan of Chicago said the truck hit several vehicles and pedestrians and turned sideways before coming to a stop. She said she could hear the driver cursing through the truck's open window. Spectators began screaming and running.
"I'm disturbed," said Donielle Lawson, a friend of Morgan. "It took the spirit out of the whole event."
The injured officer was identified by police as 2nd District Lt. Michelle Woodfork.
By 9:15 p.m., the truck and two wrecked cars had been towed. The intersection of North Carrollton and Orleans was reopened to traffic.
The crash came less than five hours after a gunshot wounded a man at the Krewe of Tucks parade, on the Uptown parade route. Police said they think the gun was accidentally fired inside a portable toilet, wounding a man outside, but no immediate arrests were made.
Landrieu said some of the same officers at the Endymion crash scene had been working at the Tucks shooting. "Obviously you don't want to have a day like this," Landrieu said. "We train year round to respond to events that can't be stopped because of bad decisions."
"We tell people not to drunk drive. We tell them not to bring guns," Harrison said. "We ask people to make good decisions."
CORRECTION:An earlier version incorrectly attributed the quotation,"I'm disturbed. It took the spirit out of the whole event."