Canada murder suspect Luka Magnotta held in Berlin
Police in Berlin have arrested the Canadian porn actor wanted for the murder and dismemberment of his lover.
Luka Rocco Magnotta, aged 29, was picked up in a cybercafe in Berlin's Neukoelln district.
An Interpol notice says Mr Magnotta is suspected of killing Jun Lin, a 33-year-old Chinese student, in Montreal. Body parts were also posted to political parties in Canada.
He faces charges in Canada of murder and threatening Canadian politicians.
Before his arrest, French police said Mr Magnotta had flown to Paris from Montreal.
Investigators say a video posted online, in which a man apparently uses an ice pick to kill another man, is believed to show Jun Lin's murder.
The suspect had reportedly worked as a bisexual porn actor and model.
Earlier, police in Paris found items belonging to Mr Magnotta in a hotel room - including pornographic magazines and airline sick bags, French media say.
The German news website Spiegel reported that he was first spotted by a passenger travelling on a bus from France to Berlin.
The internet cafe owner in Berlin told the Associated Press that Mr Magnotta came into the cafe to read news reports about himself.
"A colleague recognised him from his photo, because he'd just read the newspaper," he said.
The employee ran outside to alert a police vehicle nearby.
German police said that there was no struggle when Mr Magnotta was arrested at 14:00 local time (12:00 GMT).
Confronted by seven police officers, Mr Magnotta "tried at first giving fake names", police spokesman Guido Busch was quoted as saying by the AP.
"But in the end he just said: 'You got me,'" Mr Busch added.
Jim Van Allen, an Ontario Provincial Police criminal profiler, says Mr Magnotta's "undoing was the use of the internet to construct his persona" making him very recognisable.
He is expected to appear before a judge in Germany on Tuesday.
No extradition hurdles are expected, and the BBC's Lee Carter in Toronto says Canadian authorities will be interested in the swift return of their only suspect.
In a statement, Interpol congratulated the international police forces involved in the search for Mr Magnotta for their "collaborative efforts".
Montreal police announced Mr Magnotta was their suspect in the dismemberment case shortly after a headless torso was found near his flat.
Authorities believe the foot and hand sent through the post also belonged to Jun Lin.
The foot was sent to the HQ of Prime Minister Stephen Harper's Conservative Party in Ottawa on 29 May. The hand was found later that day in a parcel addressed to the office of the Liberal Party in Canada's capital.
Mr Magnotta left Montreal on an international flight on 26 May.
The crime scene inside his flat was reported to be among the worst city police had ever seen, including a bloody mattress and pools of blood on the floor and in the refrigerator.