Seattle May Day protest turns violent; 17 arrested
A May Day protest in Seattle turned violent Wednesday night and ended with 17 arrests, eight injured police officers and several damaged Capitol Hill storefronts.
Before the melee ended about 9 p.m. police used pepper spray and flash bangs as protesters hurled metal rocks, rocks and fireworks.
Injuries to officers were minor, except for a female officer who was hit on the knee by a fist-sized rock. A woman driving by one of the protests was also hurt when a protester threw a glass bottle at her car, shattering her window. The woman was cut, and medics treated her.
It is not clear how many protesters were injured. Police said damage to businesses and cars were limited, but they did not have a damage estimate.
The violent confrontation followed a much larger – and almost entirely peaceful – march involving thousands of activists supporting immigration reform and workers’ rights. The 2013 celebration was a return to form of the large May Day march, which has historically been orderly and non-violent as marchers move through the Central District and downtown Seattle.
Wednesday evening’s violence stemmed from a second, unsanctioned protest that began at Seattle Central Community College. A crowd of protesters attempted to force their way into the downtown core but were driven back by police after protestors began hurling rocks and fireworks at officers and bystanders.   
By Thursday morning city prosecutors had charged six jailed protesters from the evening action on Capitol Hill with misdemeanor crimes. Among those charged was 27-year-old Bryanna Stander, who hobbled into court on crutches with her wrist splinted.
Stander and several other protesters were released from jail Thursday morning following hearing before Seattle Municipal Court Judge Karen Donohue. A total of nine people were held on suspicion of misdemeanor offenses; six have since been charged, while three others were released.
Five other protesters suspected of more serious crimes remain jailed pending an initial hearing expected to take place Thursday afternoon at King County Jail. 
The jailed protesters were arrested during the later demonstration, which saw a group of protesters gather at the Capitol Hill community college shortly after 6 p.m. and take to the streets in an unpermitted march toward downtown.
The violence came after a separate, peaceful immigration-reform rally that proceeded from Judkins Park in the Central District to the Jackson Federal Building in downtown Seattle. That march received city permits. (Click the following link for a complete story on Seattle's immigration reform march.)
Shortly after 6:30 p.m., protesters on Capitol Hill lit what police called "flares or smoke devices" at East Howell Street and Eleventh Avenue. Police also reported another flare at Broadway and East Pike Street.
A store window was shattered at East Pike Street and Belmont Avenue, and after 7 p.m. protesters began throwing metal bars. The crowd, which included several anarchists, yelled profanities and insults at bike officers who flanked them.
During the march west on Pine Street near the Paramount Theatre, a protester threw a glass jar at police. One of the officers jumped and shattered it with his baton, stopping a potential injury and leaving protesters temporarily stunned.
The demonstration began to intensify as angry protesters reached Niketown at 1500 Sixth Ave., the site of several shattered windows last May Day. One of the black-clad protesters who damaged Niketown last year famously did so in Nike shoes; that and other downtown businesses suffered tens of thousands of dollars damage.
Orange smoke filled the air Wednesday near Niketown, and a police car was dented by protesters. Several chanted "let's go shopping" as they approached, but police held them back, and the store was not damaged.
Police used their bikes at several places to control angry crowds.
The group continued to Westlake Park, lingering for at least 15 minutes at Fourth Avenue and Pine Street. Several yelled obscenities at officers.
The anarchists and others turned increasingly violent after moving down Fourth Avenue to Olive Way. They filled the street to Fifth Avenue, which has the Monorail tracks, and continued yelling at officers. Multiple people were arrested there, and incident commander Capt. Chris Fowler said police responded after protesters intent on creating problems became violent.
Police used "flash bangs" and pepper spray against dozens of protesters who pelted them with rocks and bottles. That was mixed with protesters lighting their own fireworks, which in some cases were pointed at officers.
About 8:15 p.m. in the 1800 block of Fifth Avenue, young women crouching in pain from pepper spray fled in fear from nearby protesters lighting fireworks in small mortar tubes.
"We're a bigger and better city than this," Seattle Mayor Mike McGinn said late Wednesday. "I look at this and I am disappointed that this is the picture the world sees of us."
As the angry mob moved back to Capitol Hill, newspaper boxes and trash cans were overturned, and storekeepers were left cleaning the mess. City crews were expected to help early Thursday.
"That first march came downtown. It was absolutely peaceful...it was almost a festive affair and they had some serious messages, too, that they wanted to express. No incidents whatsoever," McGinn said. "The second march was very different, and it wasn't just merely because it was unpermitted. I think it also had to do with the nature of the individuals in it and what they wanted to do."
Several protesters were being held Thursday on suspicion of felony crimes, including assault on a police officer. Six people associated with the protest currently face misdemeanor charges.
In addition to Stander, the following people have been charged with misdemeanor crimes in Seattle Municipal Court for incidents occurring during the evening protest:
Three others suspected of misdemeanor crimes were released after posting bail Wednesday night. Seattle City Attorney's Office spokeswoman Kimberly Mills said city prosecutors have yet to decide whether to charge those individuals.
May Day got off to a peaceful start as immigration-reform protesters completed their march without any arrests or major altercations. The march concluded peacefully in downtown Seattle around 5 p.m.
A brief clash between a group of costumed vigilantes – presumably "Phoenix Jones" and his ilk – and anarchist dressed as clowns was reported shortly after 4 p.m. Police said the clowns began lighting fireworks shortly thereafter, but the event that began in the Central District was otherwise peaceful and relaxed.
The immigration-reform march – the usual centerpiece for the historically tame May Day celebration – started Wednesday afternoon, leaving from the area near Judkins Park shortly before 3 p.m. By 2:30, at least 500 people had gathered.
Other activists had said they would be gathering at Westlake Park and marching from there throughout the day. That didn't happen, and a second rumored action at a downtown Goldman Sachs office never materialized.
At a Wednesday night press briefing, Seattle police showed several rocks, a hammer, discarded small firework mortal tubes, and other makeshift weapons confiscated from violent protesters. During daylight hours, Seattle police said they recovered rocks staged by would-be vandals from both downtown and Capitol Hill.
The heightened tension over Wednesday's events stemmed from last year's May Day protests, which saw several downtown businesses vandalized and the doors to the old federal courthouse smashed. The Seattle Police Department was faulted for its handling of the demonstrations, which were followed by an exhaustive criminal investigation that is still ongoing.
Police promised a stronger response this year should any vandalism occur, while also pledging to respect the rights of non-violent protesters.
Casey McNerthney can be reached at 206-448-8220 or at caseymcnerthney@seattlepi.com. Follow Casey on Twitter at twitter.com/mcnerthney.