Convicted Israel spy Pollard being released after 30 years
New York (CNN)As a Jewish-American teen moving to South Bend, Indiana, in the 1960s, Jonathan Pollard immediately struggled to fit in.
The family moved so his father, Morris Pollard, could take a job as a virologist at Notre Dame. But the transition to the predominantly Christian community wasn't easy on the young Pollard.
He didn't know it then, but his need to connect and a growing commitment to Israel, combined with access to top-secret information, would turn him into one of the most notable spies to be convicted for passing information to Israel.
Now, at 61, Pollard has spent nearly half of his life in prison. On Friday, he will be released in North Carolina after 30 years in a prison and given an ankle monitor while he completes five years of parole in the United States.
Pollard described his life in Indiana as an "agonizing struggle between competing values," in a CIA report meant to assess the damage of his spying activities that was finally released to the public in 2012, 25 years after it was put together.
"I suddenly found myself confronting a community in which racism and bigotry were acceptable social practices," Pollard told investigators. "I was never able to establish friendships in my neighborhoods and was compelled to spend most of my time around the city's Hebrew Day School, where I felt at least physically safe and emotionally protected."
His commitment to Israel had grown since he attended science camp as a teen. After years working in the Navy intelligence community, he felt that his colleagues had anti-Israeli attitudes. That, he told investigators, is what influenced him to spy for Israel.
Pollard interacted with high-ranking Israeli intelligence officials and gave them several suitcases worth of classified documents on Israel's Arab adversaries and military support they received from the Soviet Union in the course of a year and a half. The CIA report said Pollard's case "has few parallels among known U.S. espionage cases" and that he had "put at risk important U.S. intelligence and foreign policy interests."
The Navy intelligence unit became suspicious of his actions in the fall of 1985, because he was handling large amounts of classified information that had nothing to do with the regions he was assigned to. He was confronted after being seen taking classified materials out of the building.
In the memo, parts of which were later declassified and published in Blitzer's book, Weinberger said he sought to "dispel any presumption that disclosures to an ally are insignificant; to the contrary, substantial and irrevocable damage has been done to this nation."
"Unauthorized disclosures to friendly powers may cause as great a harm to the national security as to hostile powers because, once the information is removed from secure control systems, there is no enforceable requirement nor any incentive to provide effective controls for its safekeeping," Weinberger's memo said, according to Blitzer's book.
"Moreover, it is more probable than not that the information will be used for unintended purposes," the memo continued. "Finally, such disclosures will tend to expose a larger picture of U.S. capabilities and knowledge, or lack thereof, than would be in the U.S. interest to reveal to another power, even to a friendly one."
After learning of his release in July, Pollard said through his lawyers that he "is looking forward to being reunited with his beloved wife Esther."
"Jonathan has served his time right down to the very last day, to the very last minute," she said to reporters. "I'm relieved and I'm happy that our ordeal is finally coming to an end. I can hardly wait. I'm counting the days the hours the minutes the seconds until I can take him into my arms and we can close the door on the past behind us and begin to heal and to rebuild our lives."
"My life stopped that November day, when Jay and I were thrown out of the Israeli Embassy in Washington, D.C., into the awaiting arms of the FBI agents," she posted. "I have never forgotten the needless pain and suffering I experienced for years while I was incarcerated in U.S. prisons."