2 dead, 7 hurt after man opens fire at Pittsburgh psychiatric hospital
A man walked into a Pittsburgh psychiatric hospital with a pair of guns Thursday and began firing, leading to injuries to seven people and two deaths -- including his own as police arrived and shot back, authorities said.
City and hospital officials speaking at a Thursday evening press conference did not give the identity of the shooter, nor did they elaborate on what his motive might have been.
Like the man who is believed to be the shooter, no details were offered on the other person killed besides the fact he, too, was an adult male.
Officials said two of five hospitalized patients have undergone surgery. The conditions of the five ranged from fair to serious.
"I expect all of these patients to survive and do well," said Dr. Donald Yealy, chairman of emergency medicine at UPMC, said in a statement. "As the busiest trauma centers in the region, we prepare for this kind of multi-casualty situation."
Ravenstahl said that a University of Pittsburgh police officer "was grazed with a bullet, and I believe he is doing well."
Steven Bartholomew, a spokesman for the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, said that his agency is "working with Pittsburgh police and other authorities in the investigation."
Claudia Roth, the Western Psychiatric Institute's CEO, said five of those hurt are hospital employees. No other details were offered on the victims, including whether they had been targeted, how they got hurt and who might have shot them.
At one point Thursday, the University of Pittsburgh's official Twitter account had a message that suggested a "possible 2nd actor" was involved and called for a lockdown.
But later in the day, the medical center's own Twitter feed had a message insisting "there was no second shooter" and that there was "no hostage situation," as had been reported elsewhere.
While the crisis appeared to be over by 6 p.m., Pittsburgh's mayor stressed the hospital -- particularly its first and second floors, where the gunman may have been -- "is still an active scene." That said, authorities said they have no indication that anyone else was involved or that there is any continuing danger.
"Our crews are methodically going through the building to make sure that every floor is cleared and every room is cleared," Ravenstahl said.