Chris Brown: Singer Released From Jail on $250K Bail Following Arrest on Assault Charge
After being arrested on charges of assault with a deadly weapon, Chris Brown is a free man.
The 27-year-old singer was released from jail on Tuesday night (Aug. 30) on $250,000 bail following an hourslong standoff with police at his multi-million Tarzana residence in California. Brown was released at 11:19 p.m., according to Los Angeles County jail records. His first court appearance in the matter is scheduled for Sept. 20 at Clara Shortridge Foltz Criminal Justice Center.
On Tuesday morning, police responded to a call around 3 a.m. from a woman who needed assistance. The robbery-homicide division took over the investigation and Brown emerged from his home after police served him with a warrant. 
According to the Los Angeles Times, the woman, model Baylee Curan, said that Brown and another man became angry when she admired the man's diamond necklace. She also said that Brown threatened her with a gun before asking her to sign a nondisclosure agreement.
A short time later, Brown posted a series of (since deleted) Instagram videos in which he claimed his innocence. "When I call the police for dangerous people that are stalking my life, they don't come till the next day," he said in one clip. "Let somebody make a f--ked up allegation about me and oh yeah, the whole f--king SWAT team. My n---a. I'm innocent. I'm tired of this s--t."
The case marks yet another incident in the singer's list of legal woes. Brown served six years of probation following the 2009 assault case involving his then-girlfriend, singer Rihanna. This year, Brown was sued by his former manager Mike G (Michael Guirguis) for allegedly punching him in the face. 
Early Wednesday morning (Aug. 31) Brown's attorney, Mark Geragos, tweeted, "Thanks to everyone for their support and well wishes," Geragos tweeted. "Chris is out and well. The allegations against him are demonstrably false #TeamBreezy"
Billboard has reached out to Geragos and Brown's rep for additional comment. 