ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
At least 74 people died and around 1,000 were injured during a riot in a soccer stadium in the Egyptian city of Port Said this morning, officials said.
Fans throwing stones, fireworks and bottles invaded the pitch after the home team al-Masry scored a 3-1 win over Al Ahly, one of Egypt's biggest clubs.
The dead and injured included security officers and some players.
The military has deployed troops in Port Said to prevent further clashes, state television reported, adding that the road out of the city had been secured.
Witnesses said fighting began after Al Ahly fans unfurled banners insulting Port Said and one ran on to the pitch carrying an iron bar at the end of the match.
Al-Masry fans reacted by pouring onto the pitch and attacking Ahly players before turning to the terraces to attack rival supporters, including "ultra" Al Ahly fans who played a leading role in Egypt's revolution last year.
Most of the deaths were among people who were trampled in the crush of the panicking crowd or who fell from terraces, witnesses and health workers said.
Many fans died in a subsequent stampede, while some were flung off their seats onto the pitch and were killed by the fall. Meanwhile, rioting fans fired flares straight into the stands.
The country's deputy health minister Hesham Sheiha described the carnage as the "biggest disaster in Egypt's soccer history."
Al Ahly player Mohamed Abo Treika described the violence as war.
"This is not football," Treika said. "This is a war and people are dying in front of us.
"There is no movement and no security and no ambulances. I call for the premier league to be cancelled. This is horrible situation and today can never be forgotten."
Egypt's top Muslim cleric called the events a "massacre" that violated the words and teachings of Islam.
The head of Egypt's ruling military council, Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, said two helicopters were being sent to Port Said to fly out Al Ahly players and fans and transfer the injured to military hospitals.
Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood accused supporters of ousted president Hosni Mubarak of instigating the violence.
"The events in Port Said are planned and are a message from the remnants of the former regime," Muslim Brotherhood spokesman Essam al-Erian said.
"There are those who deliberately want to sow chaos in the country and place obstacles in front of the peaceful transfer of power."
Albadry Farghali, a member of parliament for Port Said, accused officials and security forces of allowing the disaster, saying they still had ties to the former Mubarak regime.
"The security forces did this or allowed it to happen. The men of Mubarak are still ruling. The head of the regime has fallen but all his men are still in their positions," he screamed in a telephone call to live television.
"Where is the security? Where is the government?"
Hospitals throughout the Suez Canal zone were put on a state of emergency, and dozens of ambulances rushed to Port Said from the Canal cities of Ismailia and Suez, said an official in the zone's local ambulance service.
Another match in Cairo was halted by the referee after receiving news of the violence in Port Said, prompting fans to set parts of the stadium on fire, television footage showed.
All Egyptian league games have been suspended in the wake of the violence and Egypt's parliament was holding an emergency session.
FIFA boss Sepp Blatter described the riot as a "black day for football."
"I am very shocked and saddened to learn this evening that a large number of football supporters have died or been injured," Mr Blatter said in a statement.
"Such a catastrophic situation is unimaginable and should not happen. My thoughts are with the families of those who have lost their lives this evening."
Violence at football matches across north Africa has increased significantly since political unrest swept across the region in last year's Arab uprising.