Kosovan former PM cleared of war crimes by Hague tribunal
The former prime minister of Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj, and two ex-commanders of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) have been cleared of war crimes charges for a second time at a tribunal in The Hague.
The decision to order the immediate release of Haradinaj, Idriz Balaj and Lahi Brahimaj will raise questions about why the international criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia pursued the cases for so long.
The indictment against the three men alleged that they were responsible for the "cruel treatment, torture and murder of prisoners in the KLA-run camp at Jablanica". But in its judgment, the trial chamber said the prosecution "presented no direct evidence to prove that the established crimes were committed as part of a [joint criminal enterprise] in which the three accused participated".
The judges also dismissed as "circumstantial" evidence presented by the prosecution to prove the three Kosovans were participants.
All three men were originally acquitted of the same charges in 2008. Two years later the tribunal decided to quash the acquittals and partially retry the former KLA commanders.
Haradinaj, 44, who served as prime minister for 100 days before surrendering himself to the court, has spent four years in custody. He has been praised by western politicians for his statesmanship. Senior British lawyers have criticised the tribunal for its relentless pursuit of Haradinaj.
Allegations of political deals with Serbs – to balance the ethnicity of defendants, thereby smoothing the path towards the capture of General Ratko Mladic and the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic – have overshadowed the prosecution. There will be celebrations in Pristina, but the latest acquittals are likely to anger Serb leaders in Belgrade.
Ben Emmerson QC, Haradinaj's lawyer, condemned the trial as "ill-judged". "This verdict, coming after the longest and most exhaustive criminal process ever undertaken in the history of international criminal law, is a complete vindication of Mr Haradinaj's innocence. It proves beyond the slightest doubt that he was a war hero and not a war criminal," Emmerson said.
"It is time for the enemies of a free Kosova to accept the verdict of history. This judgment should silence once and for all those senior officials at the very top of government in Belgrade who have been putting out falsehoods about this case, even in the days running up to the judgment.
"Even to suggest that there was some kind of equivalence between the genocidal policies of the Milosevic regime and the resistance of a people's army seeking liberation and self-determination for the people of Kosova was a travesty from the start. It was the equivalent of putting the leaders of the French resistance in the dock at Nuremberg alongside the henchmen of Hitler's Third Reich."
Emmerson called on the tribunal's former prosecutor, Carla del Ponte, to apologise. "There is one individual in particular who needs to answer for this and that is the former prosecutor Carla del Ponte … She must apologise today for her own entirely personal responsibility for the decision to issue this indictment without any reliable evidence to justify her decision, and contrary to the advice of senior lawyers in her office. She must apologise for abusing her position in this way.
"She must have known that her decision to indict Ramush served the political interests of the extreme nationalists in Serbia, by depriving Kosovo of its most effective political leader during this crucial period of transition to independence."