Loughner indicted on 49 charges
A federal grand jury has indicted Jared Lee Loughner on dozens of new counts for his alleged role in the Tucson shooting that injured Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D-Ariz.) and a dozen others, and killed six, including a federal judge and a congressional aide.
Indictment documents unsealed Friday show Loughner, 22, is charged with 49 counts, including some for which he could face the death penalty if convicted.
Among the charges he faces: two counts of murder of a federal employee for the deaths of U.S. District Judge John Roll and Giffords aide Gabe Zimmerman, as well as one count of attempted assassination of a member of Congress and three counts of attempted murder of a federal employee. Loughner is also charged with killing four citizens who were attending Giffords’s “Congress on Your Corner” event outside a Safeway supermarket, and injuring 13 people, including Giffords.
Loughner had previously pleaded not guilty to three charges related to wounding Giffords and two of her staffers in the Jan. 8 shooting. He had also been charged in the deaths of Roll and Zimmerman, but those charges were dropped “without prejudice to the government to seek indictment of these charges at a later date” in a procedural move.
“This was an attack on Congresswoman Giffords, her constituents, and her staff,” said U.S. Attorney Dennis K. Burke in a statement. “We will seek justice” for the two federal employees, Judge John Roll and Giffords aide Gabe Zimmerman, and for the four others whose lives “were extinguished while exercising one of the most precious rights of American citizens, the right to meet freely and openly with their member of Congress.”
“The deceased are not the only ones whose rights are being defended,” Burke said. “Those citizens who were peaceably assembled to speak to their member of Congress are also named victims in this indictment.”
Giffords’s office told POLITICO it will not be releasing a response to the charges.
Federal prosecutors haven’t yet said whether they will pursue the death penalty, but it’s considered likely, and Burke hinted at the possibility in his statement.
“This indictment involves potential death-penalty charges, and department rules require us to pursue a deliberate and thorough process. That process is ongoing, and we will continue to work diligently to see that justice is done,” he said.
Loughner’s court-appointed attorney, Judy Clarke, did not immediately respond to a request for comment. They are set to appear in federal court in Tucson on Wednesday.
Loughner is expected to also face state charges for the shooting, but he will be tried on all federal charges before the state prosecution begins.