Jimmy Savile: What George Entwistle told MPs about Panorama, #justthewomen, Newsnight and the conversation at the Hilton Hotel
Keir Starmer will look again at the Crown Prosecution Services’ decision not to go ahead with a case against Savile, as David Cameron pledged the Government will do “everything it can”.
Speaking at Prime Minister’s Questions today, Mr Cameron disclosed the Director of Public Prosecutions had instructed his principle legal advisor to review the papers relating to Savile.
He will also consider what more can be done to alert the authorities about concerns relating to dropped prosecutions, Mr Cameron said.
The Prime Minister made his comments in response to MP Bob Stewart, who asked whether he would “ensure the full panoply of Government power is used to investigate the predatory activities of the late Mr Jimmy Savile”.
Mr Cameron said: "The Director of Public Prosecutions has confirmed that his principal legal adviser will again review the papers from the time when a case was put to the CPS for prosecution.
"The Director of Public Prosecutions specifically is going to consider what more can be done to alert relevant authorities where there are concerns that a prosecution is not taken forward.
"The Government will do everything it can do, other institutions must do what they can do, to make sure that we learn the lesson of this and it can never happen again."
The Crown Prosecution Service has previously examined sexual assault claims involving four alleged victims in 2009 following an investigation by Surrey Police.
The investigation was eventually dropped because none of the victims would support the prosecution against Savile.
In a statement released today, Keir Starmer QC said: “In light of the numerous allegations made about Jimmy Savile recently, last week I asked the Chief Crown Prosecutor for the South East, Roger Coe-Salazar, to read and consider the files in relation to the four incidents referred to us.
"He has done so and he has assured me that the decisions taken at the time were the right decisions based on the information and evidence then available.
“Out of an abundance of caution I have asked for the papers in the four cases to be provided to my Principal Legal Advisor, Alison Levitt QC, forthwith so that she can consider the decisions made and advise me accordingly.
“This is not a straightforward issue but I have said to the Attorney General that I would like to discuss with him whether the CPS should adopt a policy of referring cases to other relevant agencies, such as social services, where an allegation is made but cannot be proceeded with for evidential reasons.”
Today, Mr Cameron said the emerging allegations had shocked the “entire country”, leaving institutions including the BBC facing “serious questions”.
“The allegations and what seems to have happened are completely appalling and I think are shocking the entire country,” Mr Cameron added.
“These allegations do leave many institutions, perhaps particularly the BBC, with serious questions to answer.
“I think above all the question of ‘how did he get away with this for so long?’
“The most important this is that the police operation is properly resourced and is allowed to continue.
“I don’t rule out further steps, but we do now have independent investigations by the BBC, independent investigations into the NHS.