Israeli Elias Abuelazam appears in US court accused of racist murders
Suspect was wanted in connection with five murders and a series of other apparently racially motivated stabbings
An Israeli suspected of five murders and other apparently racially motivated stabbings appeared in court in Atlanta, Georgia, today after being arrested as he allegedly tried to flee the US.
Elias Abuelazam, 33, was accused in connection with killings in and around Flint, Michigan – which spread fear in the city for almost three months – as well as non-fatal attacks with knives or a hammer as far away as Virginia and Ohio. He agreed to be transferred to Michigan for trial.
The authorities said that he drove up to his victims, pretended to ask for directions or help with his car, then repeatedly stabbed them. One was bludgeoned with the hammer. All but two of the 18 targets were black. One was Hispanic and one white. Among the victims were a 15-year-old boy out jogging and a 67- year-old man sitting on his doorstep.
Abuelazam, a Christian Arab, was arrested at Atlanta airport as he was waiting to board a flight to Tel Aviv. The Israeli press reported that his mother had sent him to the US as a youth but that he returned regularly to his home town of Ramla, a mixed Jewish-Arab working-class town.
Abuelazam had been stopped by the police in Virginia last week for a traffic offence but was released after promising to turn up in court over an outstanding arrest warrant for assault. He is alleged to have stabbed and wounded another person later in the day.
His mother, Iyam al-Azzam, told Israel radio that her son had called her as he was waiting for the plane and that "he sounded the same as usual, quiet and calm". "I do not believe these charges are true," she said. "Elias, my son, is a religious, God-fearing man who always assists anyone who needs help."
Abuelazam lived in Virginia where he married twice and once worked with children at a mental health facility. He also lived in Michigan and Florida.Although the arrested man has not so far revealed any motive for the attacks, the police chief in Leesburg, Virginia, where Abuelazam once lived and where some of the victims were attacked, Joseph Price, said he had little doubt they were racially motivated.
"My belief is he selected the victims in Leesburg based on the colour of their skin," he said.
But acquaintances said they were surprised to hear it. "I just can't see him doing this," Paul Lozinsky, who worked with Abuelazam at the mental health facility, told the Washington Post. "I can't believe he's the type of guy who would do this. He was a nice guy to me. We got along together."
According to court records, he had previously been arrested for a series of minor offences including lying on an application for a gun permit in Virginia by failing to reveal an earlier conviction for fraud in California. He was jailed for a month on the gun charge.
Yesterday's court hearing was to decide whether Abuelazam could be extradited from Georgia to Michigan.
After the judge explained to the accused man that resisting extradition meant sitting in a local jail for three months waiting for the case to be decided, Abuelazam agreed to be sent to Michigan.