Shooting At Muhammad Art Exhibit In Garland « CBS Dallas / Fort Worth
GARLAND (CBSDFW.COM) — Two suspects opened fire outside the Curtis Culwell Center during a Muhammad art exhibit in Garland. CBS 11 was there to report on the exhibit before the chaos ensued. Reporter Gabriel Roxas and a CBS 11 camera team were in the building during the gunfire. Our team, exhibit organizers and attendees were all placed in lock down.
The Garland event, called the “First Annual Muhammad Art Exhibit and Contest,” took place where the “Stand with the Prophet” conference was held in January. The event was hosted by Pamela Geller, Mideast Expert and Editor at Atlas Shrugs, and the American Freedom Defense Initiative. It featured adaptations of the Islamic prophet. There were approximately 200 attendees.
Just before midnight Sunday, Governor Greg Abbot of Texas issued the following statement:
7:45pm CT: Officers tell Gabriel Roxas that two suspects were shot dead. Pamela Geller spoke to to CBS 11 from lockdown via phone at 7:45p CT. In addition to echoing our ground team, she told a news producer, “I heard officers talking of possible explosions in backpacks and the car.” Sources told CBS 11 there was a report of a ‘grenade’ at an area Walmart but the Garland PD said none was found.
8:11pm CT: Joe Harn, spokesman for the Garland Police Department, tells CBS 11 two men pulled up in vehicle on the roadway in front of the center and began firing at a Garland ISD security guard. Garland Police returned fire and killed both suspects.
8:11pm CT: Suspects’ vehicle being checked for explosives. It is scheduled to be detonated.
8:20pm CT: Authorities tell CBS 11 that SWAT will escort 48 people at a time out of arena soon, but many are parked in a now secured area and cannot access cars.
8:30pm CT: Garland ISD spokesman Chris Moore says one of their security guards was shot. His name is Bruce Joiner.  He has been with the district for 8 years.  He has non-life threatening injuries after being shot once in the leg. He’s in stable condition at a local hospital.
9:12pm CT: No press conference until authorities have cleared the suspects’ vehicle.
9:29pm CT: Muslim Response to Dallas Shooting. Harris Zafar, Vice President of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Youth Association told CBS 11 via email: “People need to hear a strong Muslim voice condemning this insanity.”
9:29pm CT: Suspects’ bodies still at the scene.
10:16pm CT: Joe Harn of the Garland Police Department told CBS 11, “We were prepared for it.”
10:33pm CT: Harn holds a press conference. When asked about the suspects, he said, “They drove out, got out, and opened fire on the security officer.” When asked about their identities, no information was disclosed.
10:34pm CT: There were reports of a third suspect but Harn said, “I don’t have any idea about that.”
CBS 11’s Gabriel Roxas sent our newsroom this video as attendees were placed in lockdown:
(©2015 CBS Local Media, a division of CBS Radio Inc. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.)