London riots: Dozens injured after Tottenham violence
More than 40 people have been arrested after rioting saw police attacked, buildings looted and vehicles set alight in Tottenham, north London.
Twenty-six officers and three others were hurt in the violence which erupted after a protest over the fatal shooting by police of Mark Duggan on Thursday.
Residents surveyed the damage after homes were looted and shops burnt down.
The Metropolitan Police warned over "ill-informed speculation" on social networking sites of further problems.
All injured officers have now left hospital, the force said.
The people arrested remain in custody for offences including violent disorder, burglary and theft.
Meanwhile, the family of Mr Duggan said they were "not condoning" the violence that erupted.
"Please don't make this about my brother's life, he was a good man," his brother Shaun Hall said.
BBC crime reporter Ben Ando said there were rumours in the community that a teenage girl who was part of the peaceful protest had been in a kind of confrontation with police.
He said: "That appears to be the flashpoint. That was the moment at around about just after eight o'clock when it seemed that elements in the crowd decided to pick on two police cars. They were then set on fire."
Faint grey plumes of smoke still rise over Tottenham High Road some 12 hours after last night's unrest - the smouldering buildings the first visible signs of its intensity. On the ground, at the junction with Monument Way, bricks, broken glass and debris litter the roads and pavements as far as the eye can see. A burnt-out Ford Focus police car sits at one end and the shell of a double-decker bus can just be made out 150 yards up the High Road. Local residents, some angry, most just frustrated, ask a line of up to 50 officers why they can't pass and get on their way. The road has been completely sealed off. Adeyemi Adeagbo is unable to get to his church - the CAC Outreach - just yards away. He says it pains him as Sunday is the only day he gets to worship. The rioters were fighting for their rights, but should have protested in a "civilised way", he says. Another resident, who appears from the other side of the cordon, says he has seen a betting shop and post office completely gutted. "They are shells, it's like the Blitz," he says.
A police officer was also shot in the incident, which happened in what was called a "pre-planned" event, under Operation Trident, which investigates gun crime in the African and Caribbean communities.
Police had stopped a minicab which Mr Duggan had been travelling in.
Met Commander Adrian Hanstock warned people not to believe rumours.
He said: "Throughout the day we have been monitoring social networking sites and I'd like to say right from the outset, we're conscious of some really ill-informed speculation on those sites relating to potential further problems."
On Saturday night, shops and homes were raided and cash machines ripped out in Tottenham. There were also thefts from shops in nearby Wood Green.
London Fire Brigade said it had attended 49 fires in the area.
Some smoking buildings were still being dampened on Sunday, while residents surveyed the damage from behind a police cordon.
During the riot, which erupted at about 20:20 BST, people threw petrol bombs, reducing many buildings and vehicles to charred wrecks.
A double-decker bus, two police cars and a carpet shop were among the vehicles and buildings destroyed.
Crowds of looters smashed shop windows in a retail park near Tottenham Hale tube station.
The front window of Currys electrical store was smashed and the door of Argos was shattered after looters raided the stock room.
Every handset was stolen from a mobile phone store.
Teenagers and adults were said to have turned up in cars to Tottenham's retail park and filled their boots with stolen items, unimpeded by police.
Others arrived on foot and piled shopping trolleys high with looted electronic goods, a local woman, who did not want to be named, said.
Another local resident told the BBC that looting had continued beyond daybreak on Sunday.
Meanwhile, shops including Vision Express, the Body Shop and Boots, in nearby Wood Green's High Street were also raided. Two cars there were also burnt out.
The BBC's Andy Moore said that since riots in 1985, relations between the local community and police had been generally good, but last week's shooting of Mr Duggan raised tensions.
A friend of Mr Duggan, who gave her name as Niki, 53, said those who had joined Saturday's protest, which began with a march from Broadwater Farm area, wanted "justice for the family".