Kevin Douglas Addison charged in Nanaimo, B.C., sawmill shooting
Kevin Douglas Addison has been charged with two counts of first-degree murder and two counts of attempted murder with a firearm following a shooting Wednesday morning at a sawmill in Nanaimo, B.C., where he used to work.
The 47-year-old former employee of the Western Forest Products sawmill spoke in a clear voice when asked if he could hear the telephone proceedings from a cell block in Nanaimo late Wednesday night.
Addison remains in custody and is scheduled to make another court appearance in Nanaimo on Thursday.
The incident Wednesday began shortly after 7 a.m. PT, when four people were shot at the sawmill, located in an industrial waterfront area ofNanaimo, a city on the east side of Vancouver Island.
Police arrived within minutes, took Addison into custody and recovered a shotgun at the scene. Air and ground ambulances rushed the four who were shot to hospitals in Nanaimo and Victoria.
Michael John Lunn, a 61-year-old father of three and grandfather of five, and 53-year-old Fred James McEachern were pronounced dead on arrival at Nanaimo General Hospital
Two other men were also seriously wounded. Company vice-president TonySudar, was shot in the face, and is reported to be in stable condition in Nanaimo General Hospital. Earl Kelly is in critical condition at Victoria General Hospital.
The shooting shocked the community. Many residents came to lay flowers near the scene of the shootings.
Linda Bledsoe said her family was reeling from the sudden death of her brother, Michael Lunn.
"I was staying over at my sister's place when we got the phone call. Yeah it was very hard. The family haven't been the same today," Bledsoe told reporters gathered outside the sawmill.
Bledsoe described Lunn as a lovable guy who drove a forklift at the sawmill.
"He was fun. He was very lovable and he was very jolly. And he loved his family very much, so it's a shock to all of us."
Keith Starkiewicz, who worked at the mill briefly, also stopped by to lay flowers at the growing memorial outside the mill gates.
Starkiewicz said he knew victim Fred McEachern, and described all the victims as good people, trying to make a living.
Officials with Western Forest Products said all of their sawmills on Vancouver Island were closed Wednesday after the shooting.
The Nanaimo mill was still surrounded by police tape on Thursday morning as police continued their investigation.
The company is providing employees with grief counselling and support.