Miriam O'Reilly set to return to BBC after winning tribunal case
She succeeded at the tribunal on grounds of ageism and victimisation, but her claim on the grounds of sexism was not upheld.
The amount of compensation to be awarded will be decided at another hearing in the next few weeks. A figure of around £100,000, including lost earnings and an amount for injury to feelings, is likely to be awarded.
However BBC sources this morning confirmed that an approach has been made to O'Reilly to bring her back to the corporation's airwaves.
"Miriam was a valued colleague who felt she had no future at the BBC," said a BBC source. "Win or lose, we always wanted to see what opportunities were available after the tribunal."
A spokesman for Leigh Day & Co, O'Reilly's solicitors, said: "Miriam would be keen to work for the BBC again."
O'Reilly, who is 53, was one of four female presenters who were dropped from Countryfile when then-BBC One controller Jay Hunt moved it from Sunday mornings to a peak slot early on Sunday evenings. The others were Juliette Morris, Charlotte Smith and Michaela Strachan.
The main Countryfile presenters are now Matt Baker and Julia Bradbury, who are both significantly younger than O'Reilly.
O'Reilly launched proceedings in the London Central employment tribunal early last year alleging ageism, sexism and victimisation.
In its judgment, the Tribunal said: "If the claimant had been 10 to 15 years younger, she would have been given proper consideration to remain as a presenter of Countryfile. The discrimination was not justified. The wish to appeal to a primetime audience, including younger viewers, is a legitimate aim. however, we do not accept that it has been established that choosing younger presenters is required to appeal to such an audience."
The Tribunal panel, consisting of Mr J Tayler, Lady A Sedley and Mr J Carroll, rejected the BBC's suggestion that it had devised and adopted proper criteria for choosing the new Countryfile presenters. It said that the explanation of the selection process offered in evidence by Miss Hunt and the BBC's head of rural affairs, Andrew Thorman, was "complacent".
The Tribunal also found that the decision which not to give O'Reilly any further writing work on Countryfile magazine was "an act of victimisation" which resulted from "annoyance as to the allegations that [O'Reilly] was making".