Five underage Winter Springs High football players charged with gang rape
ORLANDO, Fla. — Seminole County prosecutors have charged five underage Winter Springs High football players with gang rape.
Two are now being prosecuted as adults.
Three will be prosecuted as juveniles. Those three are scheduled to be in juvenile court Tuesday for arraignment. The other two may appear in adult court.
A sixth suspect — the only adult, 18-year-old Torreano Batton — has not been charged. He's due back in adult court Tuesday for his arraignment.
In his case, prosecutors are expected to ask Circuit Judge Donna McIntosh for more time to make a charging decision.
If convicted as charged, the two juveniles being prosecuted as adults face a maximum of four years in the adult prison system, far less than the normal maximum of 30 years, because they are "youthful offenders."
The other three juveniles, if convicted, could be placed in a juvenile facility until age 19.
All six were arrested after a 16-year-old girl told police she was sexually assaulted by each of them on Nov. 13 in a patch of woods near Winter Springs High School, in Winter Springs, northeast of Orlando.
She was raped by three of them as she walked from the high school to a nearby McDonald's, she said, and was raped again on her way back when two of those boys caught up with her and pulled her into the woods, where others were waiting, according to the arrest report.
Three of the underage suspects told police the sex was consensual. Two said they did not take part. Batton told police he was not involved.
Two suspects assaulted her twice, she said.
The girl video-recorded part of what happened on her iPod. According to a police report, her recording shows the boys asking her to perform sex acts, her telling them, "No," and saying she wants to go back to school.
"The males are circling her and appear to be trying to intimidate her into performing the acts and keeping her from leaving," according to the report.
On the recording they can also be heard telling her to succumb because it was the 17th birthday of one of the suspects.
The five underage suspects were members of the Winter Springs High football team. Four of them are from Sanford. The fifth is from Winter Springs.
Batton also is from Sanford. He has been free on $35,000 bond since Dec. 12, according to court records. McIntosh ordered him to wear a GPS monitor and to stay away from Winter Springs High.