Anti-Islamic filmmaker held for probation violation
The man identified as the producer of an Internet film that sparked violent protests across the Muslim world has been arrested in Los Angeles for violating probation for a 2010 bank fraud conviction.
Update at 7:17 p.m. ET: The Los Angeles Times summarizes the terms of Nakoula's probation:
He was ordered not to own or use devices with access to the Web without approval from his probation officer -â?? and any approved computers were to be used for work only. "Defendant shall not access a computer for any other purpose," according to the terms of his probation. There were also restrictions placed on him in enlisting others to get on the Internet for him. Some speculated that Nakoula may have violated those terms after the film trailer was loaded onto YouTube, although it is unclear what exactly prompted the recent arrest. Nakoula had been arrested in 2009 after federal agents searched his home in Cerritos, Calif., on suspicion that he had engaged in a scheme to create fake identities and open credit cards in those names, then draw tens of thousands of dollars from the phony accounts. According to the court file, Nakoula operated under a dizzying array of aliases, including Kritbag Difrat. In June 2010, he was convicted on four counts, including bank fraud and identity theft, and was sentenced to 21 months in federal prison. He was also ordered to pay $794,700.57 in restitution. He was released, according to federal records, in June 2011.
Original post:Nakoula Basseley Nakoula, the alleged producer of an anti-Islamic film that sparked violent anti-U.S. protests, has been taken into custody and will make an initial court appearance this afternoon in Los Angeles, USA TODAY's William Welch reports.
Thom Mrozek, a spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office, says 55-year-old Nakola, a Coptic Christian, was arrested for alleged probation violation for his conviction of bank fraud in 2010. A bail hearing was to be held sometime after 3 p.m. PT (6 p.m. ET).
Federal investigators had been looking into whether Nakola violated terms of his probation agreement by uploading the controversial film, Innocence of Muslims, onto the Internet and YouTube. As part of his sentence he was banned from using computers or the Internet, or using false identities.
Federal probation officers interviewed him Sept. 15 but did not arrest him. The next day he said he would not return to his home after receiving threats when he was linked to the film, which Muslims have called an insult to their prophet Mohammed. He has not been charged with any crime relating to the making of the film.