Venezuelan TV: Kidnapped MLB catcher 'found alive'
On Thursday, authorities said that they had found the SUV they believe was used in the kidnapping and had created sketches of two of the gunmen.
"It's understandable that everyone wants to know what is happening with Wilson and how the investigation goes, but remember that, in these cases, patience is key," Tigers spokeswoman Kathe Vilera said on her Twitter account. She added that keeping the details sealed could help the investigation.
"It has all the earmarks as a targeted kidnapping: selected victim, selected location, selected time," said Chris Voss, a kidnapping specialist for Insite Security who has handled six cases involving Venezuela and who worked for the FBI for 26 years. "There's an outside possibility that they thought they were grabbing another member of the family, but that's extremely unlikely."
Kidnapping as an industry has crossed the border from Colombia into Venezuela, Voss said. "When criminals next door show you a model of how to make money easily -- and kidnapping is usually pretty easy money -- then other kidnappers will simply ape it."
But targeting athletes and other celebrities can be a mistake, he said. "It's going to bring too much law enforcement scrutiny down on them; too much international scrutiny. And media attention and scrutiny from law enforcement worldwide is bad for business."
As Venezuela's economy has stagnated in recent years, crimes such as kidnapping and murder have risen. According to the National Institute of Statistics, 16,917 people were kidnapped between July 2008 and July 2010, or about 23 kidnappings a day.
Baseball players who play professionally in the United States, whether in the major or minor leagues, are typically targeted for their money, though Ramos' case is the first time a player himself has been snatched. Usually, a family member is held for ransom.
"Government, please do something because Venezuela is crumbling with so much insecurity while you say that Venezuela is safe," Venezuelan baseball player Jose Castillo wrote on his Twitter account.
"Venezuela does have one of the best winter leagues, but it is one of the leagues where the Americans ask before going because of the insecurity and the dangers that one faces," he said.
When major league teams noticed the talent sitting in places like the Dominican Republic and Venezuela, they increased their investment in the region. Instead of relying on scouts to find players, they instituted the academies to find, train and sign players, Marcano said.
"The goal is to identify the players and sign the players, and if you can do it as cheaply as possible, all the better," he told CNN.
Another aspect that may have influenced the Ramos kidnapping is that players from humble backgrounds who make money in the pros often return to the rough neighborhoods where their families live. Working-class families often don't want to leave their neighborhoods and their friends; they may feel they don't belong in middle- and upper-class neighborhoods. For example, Ramos was kidnapped from the home of his relatives, who had stayed in a tough area despite his success.