Student Critical, Two Other People Injured in Shooting at South Carolina School
The firefighter who subdued the boy, Jamie Brock, a 30-year veteran of the Townville Volunteer Fire Department, was hailed as a hero for preventing him from firing more shots and for taking him down without using any weapons of his own.
At an emotional news conference Thursday, Townville fire chief Billy McAdams described how he and Brock “raced to the school to try and help” after confirming there was a shooter at the school playground.
McAdams said he went inside the school to help the injured, while Brock went down the sidewalk outside the back of the school to investigate.
Once inside, the fire chief and a school nurse attended to Jacob and the other injured boy as teacher Meghan Hollingsworth told them “to take care of Jacob and not worry about her,” McAdams said.
McAdams and the nurse continued to assist Jacob until he was flown out for immediate treatment for his injuries, he said.
As he helped the wounded, Brock was still searching outside the building, McAdams said.
When Brock made his way around the rear corner of the building, he spotted the suspect a short distance away, McAdams said.
“Feeling that it was imperative to the safety of the students, the teachers and all the responders that were onsite, he immediately confronted and subdued that shooter,” McAdams said, adding that Brock was able to keep the suspect on the ground until law enforcement took him into custody.
Scott Stoller, director of the county's Emergency Medical Services, said Brock refused to accept praise for his actions because he insisted that he'd done "nothing no other firefighter wouldn't have been done."
But "Firefighter Brock is absolutely a hero to those of us in the community," Stoller said.
The school, meanwhile, was swarmed with rescue workers and armed officers, some of whom escorted children by bus to a nearby church, where frantic parents met them, some of them fighting tears.
"I just pray for those families. I pray for those kids," Jamie Meredith told NBC affiliate WYFF of Greenville after she was reunited with her daughter, adding: "I'm just so scared. I don't even want her to go to school now."
Skipper told NBC News on Wednesday night that the shooting drove home the reality that school violence could happen anywhere, even in a small rural community like Townville, population 3,900.
"You try to make it comfortable in your community, [but] things can happen," Skipper said. "You see them across the country, but you're always thinking ... 'Well, it will never happen here.'"
"I think we see across the country that you can't say it will never happen here," he said.