May flies home after fresh riots
Home Secretary Theresa May is flying back from her summer holiday in the wake of a second night of violence and looting across the capital.
Mrs May, who has been in contact with other senior politicians and police leaders while overseas, will return to London for further talks with Metropolitan Police Acting Commissioner Tim Godwin and other officers.
More than 100 people have been arrested after a series of "copycat" riots broke out across several boroughs in north, south and east London following earlier trouble in Tottenham, north London.
Mrs May warned that those responsible "will be made to face the consequences of their actions", saying: "Londoners have made clear that there are no excuses for violence, and I call on all members of local communities to work constructively with the police to help them bring these criminals to justice."
The fresh violence came after a peaceful protest in Tottenham on Saturday, which followed the fatal shooting of Mark Duggan, 29, on Thursday. The looting across London was carried out by "small and mobile" groups, Scotland Yard said.
Deputy Assistant Commissioner Steve Kavanagh admitted on Radio 4 that there were too few officers in Tottenham on Saturday night. But he blamed Twitter for fuelling looting and violence, saying: "Social media and other methods have been used to organise these levels of greed and criminality."
Scotland Yard said at least nine officers were injured, including three who were taken to hospital after being hit by a fast-moving vehicle at 12.45am. Police said 16 people have been charged with offences in relation to the disorder, including burglary, theft and violent disorder.
Mr Duggan's family said they "are not condoning" the riots and looting, while Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg condemned Sunday night's "needless, opportunistic theft and violence". He said it had "absolutely nothing to do with the death of Mark Duggan".
The Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC) has launched an inquiry into the shooting. It said it could not comment on reports that initial tests suggest a bullet found lodged in a police radio after Mr Duggan's death was police issue.
In a statement, London Mayor Boris Johnson said the scenes were "utterly appalling". He said: "I understand the need for urgent answers into the shooting incident that resulted in the death of a young local man, and I've sought reassurances that the IPCC are doing exactly that. But let's be clear - these acts of sheer criminality across London are nothing to do with this incident and must stop now."