Pakistan arrests man in Daniel Pearl's slaying
Qari Abdul Hayee is believed to be the one who facilitated Pearl's kidnapping, a senior Pakistani official said.
The official, who had direct knowledge of the arrest, did not want to be named because he is not authorized to speak to the media.
He was later decapitated, and a video of his killing was sent to U.S. officials.
In addition to showing violent footage of Pearl's death, the video also showed Pearl discussing his Jewish heritage and making propaganda statements, apparently under duress.
Then, looking at the camera, he recounted numerous family visits to Israel and noted that a street in a town in Israel was named after his great-grandfather, who was one of the founders of the town.
On the tape, the group that claimed responsibility for Pearl's abduction -- the National Movement for the Restoration of Pakistan's Sovereignty -- demanded that Pakistanis being held by the United States at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, be released.
The group also demanded an end to the U.S. presence in Pakistan end as well as the delivery of F-16 fighter jets, which Pakistan purchased from the United States but never received.
Hayee joins several other suspects who have been arrested in connection with Pearl's kidnapping and murder.
Ahmad Omar Saeed Sheikh, a British-born Islamic militant, was sentenced to death by hanging by an anti-terrorism court in Hyderabad in connection with Pearl's murder.
In 2003, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed -- who is also a suspected mastermind of the 9/11 attacks on the United States -- was arrested in Pakistan and has confessed to killing Pearl.
Federal agents backed up Mohammed's confession by comparing photos of the veins in his hands and the vein patterns of an assailant in the video of Pearl's killing, according to a report by Georgetown University students and faculty and the Center for Public Integrity.
But Mohammed has not been charged in Pearl's death. According to the report, U.S. officials decided against bringing charges in the Pearl case to avoid complicating Mohammed's prosecution for the 9/11 attacks.
"Daniel Pearl was going in search of the al Qaeda network that was operational in Karachi, and it was at the instruction of Khalid Sheikh Mohammed that Daniel Pearl was killed," Gunaratna said.