Italy in shock after Italian, Moroccan set themselves alight
Italy was in shock today after an Italian builder on trial for tax evasion and a Moroccan man who had not been paid for months set themselves on fire in separate incidents.
Giuseppe C, 58, wrote suicide notes to the tax agency, friends and his wife before setting himself alight in Bologna yesterday. He was saved by a traffic warden and is in a critical condition in a severe burns unit.
"It's a terrible sign of desperation, a single case of distress which sums up a moment of great difficulty," former premier Romano Prodi said today.
"I hope he survives, but he is in a very serious state," he said.
The Moroccan, a 27-year-old resident of Verona who is also a builder, set his arms and head on fire in a street today in an apparent copycat protest after yelling that he had not be paid for four months, police said.
"He shouted out that he hadn't been paid for four months and poured petrol over himself before setting himself alight. Police raced to put the flames out and he has been taken to hospital," Pasquale d'Antonio from Verona police said.
Giuseppe C had been due to attend the first hearing of a court case against him for USD 138,000 in unpaid tax and fines dating from 2007.
"On fire for tax: the taxman is killing the country," read the front page headline of the right-wing Il Giornale daily, while the Repubblica wrote of "the tragedy of a
Prime Minister Mario Monti's government has launched a wide-ranging crackdown on tax evasion as Italy struggles under a vast debt mountain.
The builder had set himself alight in his Fiat Punto in the car park of a former tax agency office. In his note, extracts of which were published in the Corriere della Sera newspaper, he told the agency "I've always paid my taxes."
Please read our before posting comments
indianexpress.comindianexpress.com TERMS OF USE: The views expressed in comments published on indianexpress.com are those of the comment writer's alone. They do not represent the views or opinions of The Indian Express Group or its staff. Comments are automatically posted live; however, indianexpress.com reserves the right to take it down at any time. We also reserve the right not to publish comments that are abusive, obscene, inflammatory, derogatory or defamatory.