ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Former West Australian premier Brian Burke has walked free from court after corruption charges against him were dropped.
Prosecutors announced in the Supreme Court they would not be proceeding with the charges against the former Labor premier, his lobbying business partner Julian Grill and former public servant Nathan Hondros.
All three were charged after a 2007 Corruption and Crime Commission (CCC) inquiry into the influence of lobbyists on public servants.
It was alleged Mr Burke and Mr Grill improperly procured information from Mr Hondros so they could benefit their clients.
They stood trial in 2010, but the case was thrown out by a Supreme Court judge.
Prosecutors successfully appealed and the charges were reinstated.
But today the Supreme Court was told prosecutors believed it was not in the public interest to continue with the case.
Outside the court, Mr Burke said he had been subjected to an unfair process.
"Julian and I have been reduced to financial ruin almost and it's been a time of great physical and emotional pressure and stress on all our families," he said.
He estimates he has spent more than $1.7 million on his legal costs.
Mr Hondros says he has spent about $1 million defending himself.
"It's going to be very difficult to take stock of that," he said.
"It's going to take a while to work out exactly what it is.
"It's easy to talk about the financial and emotional burdens that you bear but it's more than that, so we'll just see what happens."
But Premier Colin Barnett says the decision to drop the case does not mean it was a waste of time.
"Everyone likes independent bodies, the CCC conducts itself accordingly, made recommendations and it's up to the DPP to act on it," he said.
"Now in response to some of the comments made through judges and the like, they've decided not to proceed with it.
"That's their decision, but boy I would hate a situation if we didn't pursue wrongdoing in our community."
Mr Burke was the premier from 1983 until his resignation in 1988.
He was jailed in 1994 for seven months for rorting his travel expenses and then again in 1997 for six months before the second conviction was quashed.
Before his fall from grace, some considered Mr Burke a potential prime minister.