Robert Van Winkle, AKA Vanilla Ice, Released After Being Charged for Residential Burglary: Police
Vanilla Ice, AKA Robert Van Winkle, leaves the Palm Beach County Jail after his arrest on burglary and grand theft charges. (Published Wednesday, Feb. 18, 2015)
The rapper known as Vanilla Ice has been released from custody after being arrested in connection with a Florida residential burglary, Lantana Police said Wednesday.
Robert Van Winkle, 47, was charged with burglary and grand theft.  He was booked into the Palm Beach County Jail and released on a $6,000 bond.
"It's a misunderstanding, it was blown out of proportion. It's sad that good news doesn't travel this fast," Van Winkle told reporters as he left jail. "It's just out of proportion and I wish you guys would focus on all the good things I've done.
"It'll all get cleared up, you'll see."
According to police, the burglary happened at a home in the 100 block of N. Atlantic Drive between December 2014 and February 2015. Numerous furniture items, a pool heater, bicycles and other items were taken, police said.
The home was in the process of foreclosure, and Van Winkle was renovating the residence next to the property, police said.
During the investigation, police determined Van Winkle played a role. A search warrant turned up the stolen items at a residence under the care and control of Van Winkle, police said.
Van Winkle voluntarily met with detectives to provide a sworn statement and he was taken into custody. It was unknown if he has an attorney.
According to a police affidavit released Thursday, Van Winkle told police he found several of the items he was accused of stealing on the curb and "he thought they were trash," NBC News reported.
The former artist is the host of "The Vanilla Ice Project" on DIY Network, which features the '90s rapper renovating homes.
"DIY Network has been made aware of this situation and is currently looking into the matter," the network said in a statement.
The real estate broker of the home said he's not angry but it has been a hassle.
"Whoever it is, why would you jeopardize going to jail for basically junk? It was just worthless furniture and some items so it doesn't make much sense," Jim Lovely said. "The house wasn't full of Picassos, so it wasn't a high-dollar heist, so it's just the principal of having to secure the place two and three times.