ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Former IMF chief Dominique Strauss-Kahn has been released from New York's Rikers Island jail after posting a $US1 million ($940,000) bail, but only after a last-minute flurry over his home detention conditions.
The 62-year-old French politician spent several days in jail after being arrested for the alleged sexual assault of a 32-year-old hotel employee.
Bail was granted only after he promised to put up $US1million in cash, a $5 million bond, wear an electronic tag and live in an apartment under armed guard.
His wife had rented an apartment in a luxury building on Manhattan's Upper East Side, but residents complained about the media attention and building management reportedly backed out.
After a delay of several hours, The New York Times reports Strauss-Kahn will stay in a corporate housing complex used by the security firm guarding him.
"The reason why they changed plans is because the media invaded the first place," defence lawyer William Taylor said.
The security firm approved by the court to guard Strauss-Kahn as part of his bail arrangement is not obliged to keep police informed of Strauss-Kahn's location, a law enforcement official said.
Earlier in the day, New York Supreme Court judge Michael Obus ordered Strauss-Kahn be released from jail after receiving the bail and bond from Strauss-Kahn's lawyers.
Strauss-Kahn, who has spent the past four nights at the notorious Rikers Island jail, has denied charges of a criminal sexual act, attempted rape, sexual abuse, unlawful imprisonment and forcible touching.
The veteran politician has resigned as head of the IMF under the weight of a scandal that has also ended any hope he had of replacing Nicolas Sarkozy as French president in 2012.
The case has sent ripples around the globe, setting off a heated battle between Europe and emerging powers over who should fill his role at the world lender, which is bailing out failing economies left, right and centre.
Under the terms of the bail deal, Strauss-Kahn must wear an ankle monitoring bracelet and be under 24-hour surveillance, meaning any flat he stays in has to be kitted out especially with video cameras.
Prosecutors requested he face strict visitation restrictions - just four non-family visitors at one time - and that he only be allowed to leave the apartment for visits to court, doctors, a house of worship and his lawyers.
He must also have at least one armed guard as part of the elaborate deal, which will come at an estimated personal cost to Strauss-Kahn of more than $US200,000 a month.
Strauss-Kahn has denied all charges and is expected to enter a plea of not guilty at his next court appearance on June 6. He could spend the rest of his life in prison if found guilty.
Jeff Shapiro, a lawyer for Strauss-Kahn's accuser, has said his client, who has not been identified except by some in the French media, was "alarmed" at the prospect of her alleged attacker leaving jail.
She testified on Wednesday and Thursday before the grand jury that later decided to send the case to trial.
If Strauss-Kahn were to plead guilty there would be no trial, but this is considered highly unlikely.
His star lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, said earlier this week the evidence "will not be consistent with a forcible encounter," suggesting the defence was preparing to go to trial and could argue that whatever happened was consensual.