Shocking figures show many prison lifers granted CHRISTMAS LEAVE to go home
The move, which last year saw 93 lifers freed for the festive season, has caused outrage among justice campaigners.  They fear murderers, rapists and repeat violent offenders among those to be released on temporary licence.  Life terms are usually reserved for the most dangerous offenders.  Last year a total of 1,347 prison inmates were given leave.  Last night Conservative MP Philip Davies, who unearthed the figures, said: “This is totally unacceptable. 
“People are sent to prison as a punishment for serious or persistent crimes and it is outrageous that they should be allowed home for a few days over Christmas so they can enjoy eating their turkey with their family. 
“If they want to be able to eat their turkey and spend time with their family over Christmas, they shouldn’t commit the crime in the first place.  “Some of these people will have killed people. The families of their victims will not be able to spend Christmas with their loved ones so I cannot understand why those who carried out the crime should be able to spend time with their families.” The Shipley MP, who sits on the influential Justice Committee, called on the Ministry of Justice to crackdown on the number allowed to spend Christmas at home.  He added: “Everything is geared towards the rights of the prisoner and it appears to have been forgotten why they were sent to prison in the first place.” 
Of those granted temporary release at Christmas last year, almost 300 were convicted of an offence of violence.  Nine had been convicted of a sexual offence, while 202 had been convicted of robbery or burglary.  More than 550 of those released over Christmas had been found guilty of drug offences.  Blantyre House prison, in Kent, released the highest number of prisoners serving life sentences last year, with 13 being allowed home for Christmas.  This was followed by North Sea Camp, in Lincolnshire, where Jeffrey Archer was held, and Sudbury, which has the worst record in the country for the number of prisoners absconding, which each released 10 inmates. 
Justice Minister Andrew Selous said temporary release is granted to help facilitate the “prisoner’s rehabilitation, to encourage them to take responsibility for their actions and take control of their lives”.  He said: “Consideration will therefore be given to allowing prisoners nearing their release date to take ROTL [temporary leave] to fit in with family celebrations and religious holidays of particular significance, including Christmas.”  “All temporary release is subject to rigorous risk assessment, including assessment of the impact of release on any victims. Release will be refused where there is an unacceptable risk of breach.  “Over the past 18 months, we have overhauled the temporary release provisions and in 2014 instances of ROTL fell by 14 per cent, the number of prisoners taking ROTL fell 22 per cent and there was a 39 per cent fall in the number of temporary release failures.”  Of the 1,347 offenders on temporary release on December 25, last year, 1,251 were men and 96 were women. 