Wounded sailor dies, bringing death toll to five
This story is being updated as new information comes in.
CHATTANOOGA, Tenn. (AP) — The U.S. Navy says that Navy Petty Officer 2nd Class Randall Smith, a reservist serving on active duty in Chattanooga, has died, bringing the death toll in Thursday's rampage to five. 
His death occurred two days after a deadly shooting killed four Marines and injured three others, including the sailor, in Chattanooga.
Smith's Facebook page says he lived in Rossville, Ga., and is from Paulding, Ohio.
Smith died from his injuries a little after 2 this morning, according to the Navy.
Early on Thursday before the attack,  Angie Smith and her daughters went to have an early picnic with their dad at the Riverwalk, a favorite family pastime, according to a next door neighbor.
Angie Smith had just pulled into the driveway back home, when she got the news that there had been an incident at her husband's work, said the neighbor who declined to give her name.
Multiple neighbors in the Smith's Rossville, Ga neighborhood, described Smith as a devout family man, who came home every day at precisely 4:30 p.m. He would wave as he road bikes down the street with his three little girls, all under the age of 6, in tow.
Angie and Randall Smith, who have been married since 2011, had moved into the neighborhood less than a year ago.
On Saturday, the house was guarded by four patrol cars as military officials formally notified the family. 
The Salinas Journal in Kansas reported that Smith and his wife Angie have three daughters age 6 and younger. The newspaper spoke to an aunt, Tania Daugherty, who said family members drove all night after the shooting to be at Smith's side in Chattanooga.
Randall Smith lived in Ohio until he entered the service.
"He had just re-enlisted and got transferred [to Chattanooga]," Daugherty told the Journal.
Authorities say Kuwait-born Muhammad Youssef Abdulazeez, 24, of Hixson, Tennessee, unleashed a barrage of fire at a recruiting center in Chattanooga, then drove several miles away to a Navy and Marine reserve center, where he shot and killed the Marines, and wounded the sailor. Abdulazeez was shot to death by police.
Gov. John Kasich has called for prayers for an Ohio sailor reported as the fifth victim of deadly shootings at military sites in Tennessee.
Authorities say Kuwait-born Muhammad Youssef Abdulazeez, opened fire at a recruiting center in Chattanooga on Thursday, then drove several miles away to the Navy and Marine reserve center where he shot and killed four Marines and wounded Smith.
Kasich tweeted Saturday that the killings had claimed another victim and Ohio has lost another hero. He called for prayers for Smith, who grew up in the northwest Ohio village of Paulding, and his family.
DesJarlais' bill to allow military to carry firearms at recruiting centers passes Senate
Tennessee National Guard recruiters likely to reoccupy storefront locations next week after post-July attack upgrades
U.S. Women's World Cup team raises $60,000 to benefit the Chattanooga Heroes Fund
Crowds pack Ross's Landing for tribute to five slain servicemen
Two months after July 16 attack, many questions remain unanswered
Jackson returns to hometown for today's tribute to five fallen heroes
Greeson: Chattanooga Unite offers all of us a chance to remember
July 16 shooter had no hard drugs in his system during April DUI arrest, lab results show
U.S. Marines will not arm recruiters in wake of July 16 attack
Greeson: UTC to honor five military heroes from July 16
Cook: Grief and the violence of July 16
New bill would grant immunity to armed TN National Guard members
Muslims lead donations to families in Chattanooga shooting at Nashville event
A gunman warped our history, now we must shape our future
Chattanooga slayings prompt state, federal changes on military members being armed in U.S.
The moment the call comes in: responding to an active shooter
Pam's Points: Weekend of tributes can lead to healing
Details falling into place for Biden visit, memorial to Chattanooga's fallen heroes
Greeson: A weekend filled with reasons to forever remember all our heroes
Secret Service orders all Chattanooga traffic cameras to go dark Saturday
Photos: UTC retires flag that flew at half-staff in mourning for Chattanooga's fallen five
Cruz says if he becomes president he'll stop trend of 'radical Islamic terrorism'
Memorial for slain servicemen to be held Saturday
Tennessee National Guard has $18 million in needed security upgrades for armories, recruiting centers, motor pools
Wiedmer: World Cuppers' exhibition can still help our fallen heroes
Motorcyclists go on charity ride to honor slain Marine
An open letter to Chattanooga from Adm. Jonathan W. Greenert
Healing but scarred: Marine wounded in July 16 attack back to recruiting
Permanent memorial will be dedicated on one-month anniversary of July 16 attacks
Navy plans to station armed guards at reserve centers across U.S.
Some recruiters will be packing 9 mm handguns under new Tennessee guidelines
Guardsmen with valid permits can now carry guns at facilities
FBI scales back its presence in Chattanooga following July 16 rampage
Wiedmer: Let U.S. Soccer be a Chattanooga hero
Chattanooga Sings For Hope concert remembers the fallen, honors first responders
Haslam: Most Americans wouldn't resent serviceman for shooting at Abdulazeez
Petition to honor servicemen who fired personal weapons at Chattanooga gunman hits 20,000 signatures
Navy: Officer has not been charged for firing personal weapon at Chattanooga gunman
An offering of art: Illinois artist responds to Chattanooga shootings
What's in a name? The absence of terror label after attacks sparks national debate
Tragedy brought out best of Chattanooga says an appreciative WWII, Korean War vet and other letters to the editors
Families of the five slain military servicemen receive donation of nearly $120,000
July 16 tragedy united community and brought out Chattanooga's best
Charitable cottage industry springs up in wake of shooting rampage
Navy officer confirms he shot at Abdulazeez with his personal weapon
Bond between Chattanooga, Port Angeles grows: 'It's almost like we're sister cities'
Defense secretary calls for review of security policies in wake of Chattanooga shootings
White House petitioned to honor Chattanooga servicemen who fired back at gunman
Chattanooga Freedom Float planned to raise money for heroes in July 16 attack
Last of the five slain military servicemen is laid to rest at National Cemetery
The funerals are over, but closure is ongoing
See the DUI arrest of Chattanooga gunman Mohammad Abdulazeez
Gunnery Sgt. Thomas Sullivan is laid to rest in Massachusetts hometown
Are we helping extremists recruit our lost children?
No easy answers forthcoming when the mind's involved
The youngest hero: Thousands gather for funeral of Skip Wells
Bravo Network star visits Chattanooga, lends some of her ample strength to wounded community
After the vigils, the real work begins
Homegrown: The new threat to America comes from within
As threats to Muslims mount, Pentagon asks civilians to stand down
Mother of Sgt. David Allen Wyatt says thanks to Chattanooga
Healing Chattanooga, one life and brick at a time
Chattanooga will prevail after tragedy and other letters to the editors
Wisconsin town says goodbye to Marine slain in Chattanooga
When will the shooting stop?
Body of slain Marine being laid to rest at Chattanooga's National Cemetery
Military Times: Marine Corps confirms Purple Hearts prepared for Marines killed last week in Chattanooga
'Run!' Quick response key to survival in first attack at recruitment office
Funeral for Staff Sgt. Wyatt is today; public invited to line roadside along procession route
Cook: Four poems about the last seven days shared to ease city's pain
Gunning for safety? Military leaders say no
Peyton Manning adds muscle to fundraising for families of shooting victims
Tennessee ramps up handgun permitting for Guard, but can they bring firearms to work?
Moment of radio silence held in remembrance of service members killed
Navy has memorial in Virginia for Tennessee shooting victim
Marines moved citizens in the Riverpark away from shooter
Four misconceptions about the Chattanooga shooting
Tennessee lawmakers to meet next month to assess the state's security status after Haslam directives
Jordan releases uncle of Chattanooga gunman without filing any charges
Funeral plans set for all five slain service members
City Beat: I'm thankful cops sometimes go against human nature
Tunes for tragic times: Sad songs say so much
FBI searches woods at intersection of Highway 153 and Amnicola
Lance Cpl. Skip Wells' body to be escorted this afternoon
Sgt. Thomas J. Sullivan to be buried in hometown
Minute by minute: A timeline of the Chattanooga attack revealed
Terrorist or extremist, was Abdulazeez a man with a plan?
Clipping and snipping, volunteers prepare donated flowers for Marine's last rites
'Best Town Ever' rival reaches out in sympathy to Chattanooga
Greeson: Reason why we are the Best Town Ever -- all of you
City's church bells to chime on one-week anniversary of shooting
Video: Five of the Marines who survived Chattanooga attack tell their story
Kentucky to enhance security at National Guard bases and recruitment offices
Ohio starts to arm recruiters in wake of Chattanooga attack
FBI explains how Chattanooga shooting played out, how Mohammad Abdulazeez was killed
Corker gets choked up, pauses in Senate while honoring slain servicemembers
How will last week's attack affect Chattanooga's brand?
'Mike Battery is here': After loss, Marines regroup, move forward
Fighting for our fighters: Erlanger trauma team called to front lines on day of shootings
'God bless these American heroes,' Obama says in day of tribute, remembrance for fallen
'I don't think they were involved,' neighbor says after FBI raids Mountain Creek Apartments residence
The more we learn, the less we understand
Virginia governor asks for more patrols at recruiting centers
Navy officer, Marine shot at Chattanooga gunman, according to report
Council seeks to ban protesters from funerals of five slain servicemen
Flags at half-staff in South Carolina, again
Chattanooga mayor: we owe these five heroes and their families a deep debt of gratitude
Shooter's family denies reports that Jordanian uncle is tied to Chattanooga attack
Two slain servicemembers will be laid to rest in Chattanooga
Supercuts stores in Chattanooga offer special haircut prices for military and police
Alabama sheriff urges citizens to take up arms to defend against lone wolf attacks
Flags lowered at U.S. Capitol, Obama could lower White House flags today
Makeshift memorials grow as a city moves through waves of grief
Local gun sales spike after attacks on military sites in Chattanooga
Answers elusive as different sides of Mohammad Abdulazeez's life emerge
Because of his love for city, Marine's family wants him to be buried at Chattanooga National Cemetery
Cook: The semantics of terrorism and the quest for peace
Looking for peace? Don't ask Steve Smith
U.S. flag sales soar in Chattanooga after shooting
Two area legislators issue call for action on slaying of four Marines, sailor in Chattanooga
Chattanooga attack was an act of terror, Rep. Chuck Fleischmann says
Iowa to review security at National Guard facilities in wake of Chattanooga attacks
Muslim blogger quoted by gunman in yearbook speaks out
U.S. military tells recruiting centers to step up security by closing blinds
One of the Marines killed Thursday may have carried a privately owned Glock
DesJarlais, Cohen co-introduce bipartisan 'Enhancing Safety at Military Installations Act''; other TN congressmen sign on
Flags to remain at half-staff until sunset on Friday
Wiedmer: Peyton a welcome visitor for our town's finest
Homeland Security committee chairman: 'If it can happen in Chattanooga, it can happen anywhere, anytime, anyplace'
Gov. Bill Haslam orders Tennessee officials to provide more protections for state National Guard following Chattanooga shooting
FBI looking into shooter's possible involvement with ISIS
Hundreds rally in motorcade for the shooting victims
Friends mourn U.S. Navy Petty Officer 2nd Class Randall Smith, shot to death in Chattanooga shooting
Cook: In the big heart of Chattanooga
Marine commander: 'Heroic acts by our Marines on that day'
Will the shooting change life for Chattanooga Muslims?
Tennessee pauses as other states quickly arm Guardsmen in wake of Chattanooga attacks
Friends say Chattanooga shooter was changed by trip to Middle East
Father of Chattanooga shooter says he was blindsided by son's actions
Indiana, Florida, Texas, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Louisiana to arm Guardsmen in wake of Chattanooga shootings
Semper Fi: Remembering the fallen in the Chattanooga attacks
DesJarlais, others say gun restrictions should be lifted at military buildings
More than 1,000 attend interfaith memorial service for slain Marines
Remains of fallen Marines to be given same honors as those killed in action
U.S. House Chairman says Chattanooga slayings now officially a terrorism investigation
Slain Marine's last text to his girlfriend warned of gunman's assault
Fallen Heroes: What we know about the four men who gave all for their country
Minute-by-minute coverage of the Chattanooga shooting that killed four Marines
Chattanoogans reach out on Instagram after tragic shooting
Community grieves, gathers for prayers in wake of tragedy
Nightmare for city: Federal investigation vowed after four Marines killed in shooting
Sympathy for victims pours in following Chattanooga shootings
Tragedy will not define us, our city will heal