Charles Taylor war crimes trial extended in The Hague
The war crimes trial of Liberia's former President Charles Taylor has been extended after judges said they would decide on a defence appeal.
Friday was due to be the last day of the trial, which began in 2007.
But defence lawyer Courtenay Griffiths stormed out of court this week after judges refused to accept the late submission of a document.
Mr Taylor denies 11 counts - including murder, rape, and using child soldiers during the civil war in Sierra Leone.
He is accused of arming and controlling the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels during a 10-year campaign of terror conducted largely against civilians.
The RUF became infamous for hacking off the limbs of their victims, and using rape and murder to terrorise the population.
Mr Taylor also boycotted the opening of his trial in June 2007, arguing he would not get a fair hearing.
Mr Griffiths was in court on Friday but Mr Taylor was not.
One of the reasons why Courtenay Griffiths missed the 14 January deadline for the submission of the final trial brief was that new evidence came to light. A Wikileaks cable that was published in December 2010, corroborated Charles Taylor's long-standing allegation that powerful Western countries, including the United States and Britain, were "out to get him", in the words of Mr Griffiths. The defence may be arguing that this has become a political trial, but the thrust of the prosecution's summing-up this week was that Mr Taylor was the central figure, "the critical actor" and "the godfather", during his support for the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels in Sierra Leone during the "campaign of terror" there in the 1990s. The Open Society Initiative, a non-governmental organisation that has been monitoring this case, says the trial of Mr Taylor boils down to one question: Was the former Liberian president behind the mayhem and crimes committed in Sierra Leone?
Mr Taylor and his lawyers were upset at the court's refusal to accept a 500-page written summary of the trial that was submitted late.
"What we were trying to do is ensure we get some semblance of justice out of this and it's turned into this personalised attack on us," Mr Griffiths told reporters outside the court on Wednesday. "I find it totally despicable."
The defence team has now been granted leave to appeal.
The BBC's Peter Biles in The Hague says after that appeal has been heard - perhaps within the next two weeks - the defence will still need to discuss whether it will be allowed to present closing oral arguments.
The separate issue over the apology demanded by the judges from Mr Griffiths is potentially a disciplinary matter and has been deferred until 25 February, he says.
The defence has argued that Mr Taylor tried to broker peace in Sierra Leone at the request of regional powers.
He is accused of selling "blood diamonds" for the rebels, in return for supplying them with weapons.
Last year supermodel Naomi Campbell and actress Mia Farrow were summoned to give evidence at the trial.
The prosecution was trying to establish a link between Mr Taylor and a number of uncut diamonds that Miss Campbell said she had been given in South Africa in 1997.
The Special Court for Sierra Leone in The Hague has heard from more than 100 witnesses in what is the first international trial of an African former head of state.
The judges are expected to deliver a verdict later in the year.
If convicted, Mr Taylor would serve a prison sentence in the UK.