Woman beheaded in Tenerife had sought aid before attack
The British woman beheaded in a supermarket on the Spanish island of Tenerife was named as it emerged that she had complained of being harassed moments before she was attacked. Jennifer Mills-Westley, 60, from Norwich, was killed on Friday in a frenzied and unprovoked knife attack in the resort town of Los Cristianos.
Her daughter Sarah said: "Mum retired a number of years ago and was fully enjoying her retirement travelling between Tenerife and France where she spent time visiting her daughter and grandchildren, and her other daughter in Norfolk. She was full of life, generous of heart, would do anything for anyone. We now have to find a way of living without her love and light and we would ask at this difficult time for some privacy as we try to come to terms with our loss."
Spanish police identified the alleged killer as Deyan Valentinov Deyanov, 28, an unemployed Bulgarian.
The attack began in a supermarket. Witnesses say the assailant grabbed a knife from inside a shop and stabbed the dead woman at least 14 times. He then decapitated her, carrying the severed head out into the street claiming to be "a prophet from God".
Local media reported that he left the supermarket shouting: "I am God's avenger and I come to mete out justice."
It was initially believed the murder was a random incident. But a report on a British expat website said that Mills-Westley had reported Deyanov to a guard at the town's social security office for threatening behaviour.
Deyanov ranted at the security guard and was moved on. Several minutes later Mills-Westley left the office and entered the supermarket, which was next door. Minutes later the attack took place and the same security guard, named locally as Juan Antonio Hernandez Delgado, heard the commotion and chased the killer down the street before wrestling him to the ground.
Further reports gave an impression of a disturbed individual. Locals said Deyanov had been known for threatening and often violent behaviour, once having punched a local shipowner who refused to tell him the time, smashing his teeth. Jose Alberto Gonzalez Reveron, mayor of Arona, said video footage "showed the man became enraged" inside the store.
Christina Perez, a legal representative at a nearby court, said a group of lawyers had seen the man leave the shop. "They saw the man running out of the supermarket with the head in his hands. A security man from the complex ran after him and jumped on to him so he fell, and then he threw the head on to the road."
Mills-Westley's former employer, Norfolk county council, offered its condolences, praising her work teaching road safety to youngsters.
"Our deepest sympathies go to Jenny's family and friends following this terrible news," the authority said in a statement. "Jenny was a popular and well respected member of staff, who during her time with Norfolk county council worked as a road safety officer working with many schools and children to teach cycling safety training."
The Foreign Office has confirmed that consular officials are liaising with the authorities in Los Cristianos, which is home to a large British expat community.
• This article was amended on 16 May 2011. The original said that the killing had taken place in the town of Arona, which was described as part of Los Cristianos. This has been corrected.