Ohio high schoolers set to return to class days after fatal shooting
The person who authorities say is responsible, 17-year-old T.J. Lane, was charged Thursday afternoon with three counts of aggravated murder, two of attempted aggravated murder and one of felonious assault, the latter related to an individual who was "nicked in the ear" by a bullet, according to Geauga County Prosecuting Attorney David Joyce.
Some students were with their parents in the school, situated in a community of about 5,100 people some 30 miles east of Cleveland, on Thursday and counseling has been made available at various locales since the shooting.
"I watched families walk through the school holding hands, I watched people helping each other come back into the school," said Geauga County Sheriff Dan McClelland of the scene inside the school Thursday. "It was an incredible spirit of Chardon. I'll never forget that. This is why we live here."
Frank Hall, an assistant football coach and study hall teacher who chased the gunman from the school, said Thursday it was important that students and staff return -- if for no other reason than to show that "show that terror and evil do not win out."
"I'm here to tell you that tomorrow our schools will be open, our teachers will be there, our administration will be there, our parents and community, but more important our children will be there," said Hall.
The report stated that Lane's aunt called 911 in December 2009 to report the boy and his uncle "were physically fighting" -- and, at one point, the teen teamed up with his then 16-year-old brother, who himself was later charged with simple assault. Two sheriff's deputies arrived to find the uncle "bleeding from the mouth and ... on the kitchen floor."
His parents had both been charged with domestic violence against each other, according to court documents. His father also served prison time for assaulting a police officer and was charged with holding a different woman under running water and bashing her head into a wall.
"I think there's a lot of kids that go through things like that. That doesn't give them the right to kill other people," said Bob Parmertor, Daniel Parmertor's grandfather. "There are five families, including ours, that have been affected by this. No one has the right to shoot other people because they've had a rough life."
"My brother was the happiest kid on the planet," Dominic Parmertor said of Daniel. "He never got mad at anybody. He just loved to have fun. And when he was happy, other people were happy."
If something posted on a social network "doesn't look right, tell your mom and dad, tell the police, tell a counselor, tell a neighbor, tell a friend. Just tell somebody," he said.