It’s Opening Day for Barry Bonds
This city embraced Bonds, who last played in 2007. People here cheered him and his achievement in overtaking Hank Aaron as baseball’s home run king.
But now that Bonds is retired and the Giants have a World Series championship, will fans turn their backs on their onetime hero? It is clear that some will not. One prospective juror said Monday that he would find it difficult to be fair and impartial while rendering a decision about a great athlete like Bonds.
Scott Ito, a second-year student at the University of San Francisco School of Law, said Sunday night: “If you grow up in San Francisco, you’re a Giants fan. I think Giants fans just want closure. Right now, I think what baseball and the Giants are doing is trying to turn their back on Barry Bonds a little bit because they don’t want the taint of whatever might happen. But at the end of the day, Barry Bonds was a Giant for a long time — whether he did steroids or not. He’s still going to be a Giant. We just want it to be over.”
The trial is expected to last three to four weeks. Prosecutors need to prove that Bonds knew he was using steroids and lied under oath about it.
Bonds has been under scrutiny for eight years for his involvement with the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative and for his testimony before a federal grand jury in 2003 that he never knowingly used performance-enhancing drugs provided to him by his former trainer, Greg Anderson.
In the coming weeks, it will be interesting to see if the support for or opposition to Bonds divides a hard-core, closely knit Giants fans base. On Sunday night, Elias Khalil discussed the trial. “I hope he goes free,” said Khalil, who has operated a liquor store a block and a half from the courthouse for the last 24 years.
“There are things that are more important than this,” Khalil, 55, said. “If he did something really bad and they got him doing it, O.K. I mean real bad, like murder; real bad, like drug selling, dealing. Something like that, O.K.”
The government argues that its pursuit of the case is only about making the point that it will not tolerate lying to a grand jury.
“Is he the only one who lied?” Khalil said.
As he took a study break Sunday night, Ito said he thought he had an idea about what has driven the chase of Bonds.
“I just feel that they spent so much money investigating steroids that they had to justify it by charging him with something,” Ito said. “Perjury just happens to probably be their best bet.”
He added: “I’m not into trying to be a litigator or anything like that, but it seems like common sense. You stop Congress, you hold all these hearings, so you have to have some kind of payoff to justify what you’re doing. It’s not to say that perjury’s not a big deal; it is. But for the government to go through this whole hoopla and end up with perjury, it’s kind of like getting Al Capone on tax evasion.”
On Sunday night at Gateway Croissants, Corey Donaldson finished his coffee and  prepared to go to his security job in a nearby government building. Donaldson’s Giants cap was a dead giveaway for where his heart was: He was a Giants and Bonds fan.
Asked what he thought about the government’s pursuit of Bonds, Donaldson said: “What’s the point? I don’t understand why they go after him like that — because he has money? He’s successful, has a big name.”
Reminded that prosecutors are going after Bonds because they think he lied to a grand jury, Donaldson just shook his head and repeated: “What’s the point? Nobody wins. Ain’t  no winners here, only losers.”
After eight years, it is finally batter up for the prosecution. Bonds is at the plate, and Parrella will have to succeed where so many others have failed. He’ll have to get Bonds out, with a multimillion-dollar fastball.