Same-sex marriage stays on hold for Prop. 8 appeal
A federal appeals court rejected a plea by gay and lesbian couples Wednesday to let same-sex weddings resume in California while the court reviews a 2008 ballot measure that banned such marriages, a process that could take at least one more year.
The Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco reaffirmed an order it issued in August, suspending Chief U.S. District Judge Vaughn Walker's decision that found Proposition 8 unconstitutional.
The order, known as a stay, maintained the prohibition on same-sex weddings. The federal court prolonged the stay in January by asking the California Supreme Court whether state law gave the initiative's sponsors the right to appeal Walker's ruling.
Both then-Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger and Attorney General Jerry Brown, now the governor, declined to appeal, so Prop. 8 could become unenforceable if no one has legal standing to defend it.
The state high court has tentatively scheduled arguments for September and could take three more months before issuing an opinion and returning the case to the federal appeals court, which has the final say.
Arguing that gays' and lesbians' rights suffer every day Prop. 8 remains in effect, plaintiffs in the lawsuit seeking to overturn the measure - two couples, a gay rights group and the city of San Francisco - urged the appeals court to lift the stay while the case is pending.
In a one-sentence order, the three judges on the federal court panel rejected the request. The judges were Stephen Reinhardt, Michael Hawkins and N. Randy Smith.
They cited the court's 2006 ruling in another case that said a stay preventing a judge's order from taking effect should be lifted only if "the facts have changed sufficiently."
The court has never said why it granted the stay that left Prop. 8 in effect. Several legal commentators say the most plausible reason is an unwillingness to allow a short-term resumption of marriages that would again be halted if Walker's ruling were overturned.
"It reflects a preference to wait until the legal issues are finally resolved before letting same-sex couples marry," Jane Schacter, a Stanford law professor, said Wednesday.
A lawyer for Prop. 8's sponsors endorsed that rationale.
The court's order avoids "the unnecessary confusion that would come from another brief legalization of same-sex marriage," said Andrew Pugno, attorney for Protect Marriage, the religious coalition that campaigned for the November 2008 measure.
Prop. 8 overturned a May 2008 ruling by the state Supreme Court that legalized same-sex marriage in California. About 18,000 gay and lesbian couples were married before voters passed the initiative, marriages that remain legally recognized in California.
Walker overturned the initiative on the grounds it unconstitutionally discriminated against gays and lesbians on the basis of sexual orientation and gender.
The American Foundation for Equal Rights, which represents the plaintiffs, expressed disappointment in the appeals court's decision Wednesday.
"It is decidedly unjust and unreasonable to expect California's gay and lesbian couples to put their lives on hold and suffer daily discrimination as second-class citizens while their U.S. District Court victory comes to its final conclusion," Chad Griffin, the group's chairman, said in a statement.