Fugitive Malcolm Naden captured by police in NSW
AUSTRALIA'S most wanted man Malcolm Naden has been charged with the murder of Kristy Scholes at Dubbo, in western New South Wales, almost seven years ago.
Ms Scholes, 24, was found dead in a bedroom of a house in Bumblegumbie Road, Dubbo, on June 23, 2005.
Naden has been charged with her murder, as well as two counts of aggravated indecent assault of person under 16 over an incident involving a 15-year-old girl at Dubbo in 2004; and shoot with intent to murder over the incident involving police officer at Nowendoc on 7 December 2011.
He made a brief court appearance at Taree Court where he did not apply for bail. It was formally refused and he will face court again on April 24.
This morning the 38-year-old left Manning Base Hospital, in Port Macquarie, northeast NSW, surrounded by police in riot gear with his ankles shackled and a bandage around his lower left leg.
The fugitive "master bushman" was nabbed just after midnight on a private property near Gloucester, in the state's mid-north, ending a seven-year search.
Police surrounded the house and arrested Naden after he tried to escape through a back door.
Naden was bitten on the lower left shin by a police dog during the scuffle and an officer also sustained minor wrist injuries.
He was taken to hospital shortly after 11am and released about an hour later after the wound was restitched.
Police sources said that Naden was going to be given McDonald's for breakfast.
The fugitive was found at a private property 30 kilometres west of Gloucester with police from the Tactical Operations Unit and Dog Unit making the arrest about 12.04am.
No police officers were injured during the arrest.
A rifle was seized at the scene, but police are yet to determine if this is the same weapon recently stolen from a Gloucester home.
A full scale search is being performed around the area to find any other items Mr Naden may have used while in hiding.
The arrest ends a multi-million dollar search operation across the state's north.
NSW Police Commissioner Andrew Scipione thanked local residents for their assistance and the efforts of the officers investigating.
"The arrest of this man this morning marks the end of a very difficult and lengthy investigation and search operation by NSW Police,'' Mr Scipione said.
"This result could not have been achieved without the cooperation of communities in northern NSW whose assistance and vital information has helped police over a long period of time. People in those communities deserve praise for their assistance and their perseverance.
"Today's arrest also is a tribute to the many different elements of the NSW Police Force who have come together and operated in a very tough environment,'' Mr Scipione said.
"I want to pay tribute to those people from the Tactical Operations Unit, the Dog Unit, the Air Wing, our general duties police and other specialist units whose work has been invaluable. Everyone who contributed can stand tall.''
The Commander of Strike Force Durkin, Assistant Commissioner Carlene York, said police never lost confidence in their operation.
"We never doubted that we could get to this point,'' Ms York said.
"Our people were operating in extremely difficult conditions and we had to adapt our strategies along the way.
"However, we always understood that every day brought us closer and that our tactics would prevail. This was a game of patience and I am very proud of everyone involved.
"The fact that we have made an arrest today without any harm to members of the public or police officers gives me a lot of comfort.''