Bryce Dejean-Jones, Pelicans Guard, Dies at Age 23
New Orleans Pelicans guard Bryce Dejean-Jones has died at the age of 23, the Dallas County coroner's office confirmed to Travis Hines of the Ames Tribune on Saturday.
Shams Charania of The Vertical reported Dejean-Jones bled to death after suffering a gunshot wound to the abdomen.
Per Sarah Mervosh of the Dallas Morning News, the Dallas Police Department confirmed Dejean-Jones was shot after entering into an apartment complex:
Dejean-Jones' agent Scott Nichols said his client was visiting his girlfriend for his daughter's first birthday, and mistakenly entered the wrong apartment unit, per CNN.com.
"There is no information that suggests the deceased [Bryce] Dejean-Jones knew the apartment resident, or was armed as he entered the apartment," said police spokesman DeMarquis Black, via CNN. 
Former Iowa State head coach and current Chicago Bulls coach Fred Hoiberg expressed his sympathies via a school press release:
"We are deeply saddened to learn the tragic news about Bryce. I'm grateful that our paths crossed in this life. Bryce was a passionate and talented player that lived out his dream of playing in the NBA through hard work and perseverance. It's an incredibly sad day for me and all of Iowa State University. Our thoughts and prayers are with Bryce's family."
The Pelicans also released a statement about the death of Dejean-Jones, via their official Twitter account:
"It is with deep sadness that the Pelicans organization acknowledges the sudden passing of Bryce Dejean-Jones. We are devastated at the loss of this young man's life who had such a promising future ahead of him. Our thoughts and prayers are with Bryce's family during this difficult time."
Iowa State point guard Monte Morris tweeted a picture of himself and Dejean-Jones:
Dejean-Jones played college basketball at USC (2010-11), UNLV (2012-14) and Iowa State (2014-15). After going undrafted in 2015, he played for the Pelicans during Las Vegas Summer League and signed a deal with them in August. After going through training camp with New Orleans, the team waived him a few days before the 2015-16 season began.
The NBA Development League's Idaho Stampede acquired Dejean-Jones off waivers in mid-December. He averaged 19.2 points and 5.1 rebounds in nine games with the team throughout December and January.
The Pelicans signed Dejean-Jones to a 10-day contract on Jan. 21. He appeared in 14 games, making 11 starts, and averaged 5.6 points and 3.4 rebounds per contest. A right wrist fracture ended his rookie season in February.
A week prior to undergoing wrist surgery, the Pelicans signed Dejean-Jones to a partially guaranteed three-year contract, per Charania. His best game came against the Los Angeles Lakers on Feb. 4, when he scored 17 points and grabbed nine rebounds in a 99-96 loss.