Phoenix freeway shootings probe not over despite arrest
The investigation into the Phoenix freeway shootings is not yet over, the Arizona Department of Public Safety said Saturday afternoon, just hours after its suspect made his first court appearance and was ordered held on $1 million bond.
Leslie Allen Merritt Jr., a 21-year-old landscaper, is being held on suspicion with multiple felonies, including intentional acts of terrorism. Merritt told a judge at his initial appearance Saturday morning that "I'm the wrong guy."
At a press conference, DPS said that a $50,000  reward and freeway signs soliciting tips will remain in place despite Merritt's arrest.
"This piece of the pie has been solved, but we are working on all of the loose ends," DPS spokesman Bart Graves said.
Graves said that investigators matched the bullets from the first four shootings in late August with the gun they believe Merritt sold to a local pawn shop. But questions remain about seven later incidents.
"This case is still ongoing. Nothing has been wrapped up," Graves said.
He refused to be drawn into questions about the courtroom statements made earlier in the day by Merritt. Merritt told Maricopa County Superior Court Commissioner Lisa Roberts at his initial appearance that he sold the gun to a pawn shop two months ago —  before the shootings began.
Merritt was charged with four counts each of drive-by shooting, intentional acts of terrorism and discharging a firearm within city limits. He also faces criminal damage, endangerment and disorderly conduct charges.
Merritt's next court appearance is scheduled for Friday morning.
A central Phoenix pawnshop played an important role in the case, Graves said.
He detailed how ballistics experts located and tested the handgun the officials say Merritt used in the first four shootings.
Mo Money Pawn said in a statement posted Friday on Facebook that, at the request of DPS investigators, it provided several weapons to authorities for testing and that "after further ballistics testing found the weapon they thought to be the match of the weapon used in several of the I-10 shootings."
Merritt's initial appearance came hours after his arrest at a Glendale Walmart, which culminated nearly three weeks of angst and fear for many motorists as vehicles along Valley freeways -- mostly on a stretch of Interstate 10 -- were hit, seemingly at random, by bullets and other projectiles.
With Friday’s arrest of Merritt, law-enforcement officials said they had a suspect in at least four of the shootings in custody — news that brought relief but not necessarily closure.
Arizona Department of Public Safety Director Frank Milstead said Merritt had been linked to at least four of 11 shootings incidents through a gun he owned.
“The weapon and man we believe was responsible for starting this spree is in custody,” Milstead said late Friday at a hastily called news conference.
Milstead spoke only for a few minutes and would not divulge other details, such as a possible motive.
“Are there others out there? Are there copycats? That is possible,” Milstead said.
The arrest of Merritt comes weeks after the first freeway shooting, on Aug. 29.
Shootings continued sporadically through Sept. 10 and then stopped as public fear continued to grow and the incidents attracted national attention.
Gov. Doug Ducey first broke the news about the arrest in a tweet just before 7 p.m.,Friday  after SWAT team members closed in on the suspect at a Walmart near 59th and Northern avenues.
Bystanders at the Walmart said they saw investigators obtaining fingerprints from a brown Saturn before loading it onto a flatbed tow truck.
Brandon Copeland, 30, and his fiancée, Danielle Cobb, 40, had just arrived at the Walmart at about 7:15 p.m. when they saw police officers armed with AR-15 assault weapons standing outside the store.
They said six to 10 officers suddenly emerged, escorting a man into a Glendale squad car.
“There were blue and red lights flashing everywhere,” Copeland said.
“He had a blank look on his face,” Cobb said. The man mostly kept his head down and “didn’t seem to be struggling,” she said. The Glendale couple, who live just south of Walmart, said a store associate told them the incident was related to the Phoenix freeway shootings.
Merritt’s father, Leslie Merritt Sr., became physically ill after learning about his son’s arrest.
“Whoever said my son is the freeway shooter is a moron,” he said from his home in Mesa. “It’s got to be some sort of mistake or someone wanted the reward. This is just preposterous.”
Merritt said his son works as a landscaper, just as he does, and puts in 12 to 15 hours a day to support his family.
“He has been raised with too much respect for life and too much for firearms” to have done this, he said.
DPS has confirmed 11 shootings, mostly along the I-10 between 83rd Avenue and 32nd Street.
During that period, eight vehicles were struck by bullets, while three were hit by unspecified projectiles, according to DPS. The bullets hit various parts of the vehicles, including windshields, passenger windows and a ladder.
One person was hurt, when glass from a shattered window cut the ear of a 13-year-old girl.
Most of the incidents happened in the early morning or late at night. Seven of the incidents happened on weekends.
One of the shootings occurred Aug. 29 on I-10 near 43rd Avenue. Robert McDonald was driving an empty tour bus to Las Vegas for his company.
He said he heard a loud bang — “I thought it was a rock,” he said — and got off the freeway to check. When he saw the bullet holes, he called his dispatcher. The dispatcher called DPS.
“Next thing I know, my life changed forever,” he said.
The bullet had lodged in a seat to his right and immediately behind him. He said forensics experts told him if it had not stuck in the seat, he could have been hit.
“It would have flew inches above my shoulder, had I jerked, it could have hit me in the side of the head,” he said.
Late Friday, McDonald heard that an arrest had been made.
“I want to make sure this is the right person,” he said. “If this is in fact the individual, I’m going to help the county attorney with my testimony.”
At about 9:20 p.m., several police officers knocked on the door of a unit on West Nicolet Avenue in Glendale, where Merritt apparently lived with his girlfriend. Though police repeatedly demanded that the door be opened, no one did.
Police officers served a warrant and tactical squads entered the house shortly after 10:30 p.m. without incident and searched inside the single-family home. In all, there were at least 40 officers who secured the scene.
Officers worked well into the night as they carefully examined the house and its contents. Police did not immediately tell reporters on the scene what pieces of evidence they were searching for.
A neighbor, Elizabeth Lopez, said she would talk to Merritt when her dog would run into his yard.
“He seemed like anybody, just another neighbor. You would never expect anything like this,” Lopez said.
In the past week, she said, she did not see anyone leave the home.