Cincinnati nightclub shooting: Two arrested
(CNN)Two men face murder charges in connection with last weekend's Cameo nightclub shooting, Cincinnati police Chief Eliot K. Isaac said.
Cornell Beckley, 27, was arrested Thursday afternoon. Deondre Davis, 29, is being treated for gunshot wounds and is listed in critical condition, Isaac told reporters Thursday.
Police believe more individuals may have been involved. They also plan to add charges to the two suspects as the investigation progresses.
One person was killed and 16 others were injured by gunfire early Sunday. Police identified the slain man as O'Bryan Spikes, 27.
Isaac said it was an altercation in the nightclub that deteriorated into a fight, which "escalated to individuals being able to sneak guns into the bar and shots being fired." Police have recovered 16 shell casings, but believe more shots were fired.
Mayor John Cranley said the city must "figure out a way to get the guns off the streets and teach people not to resolve disputes with guns."
Jackie Davis, Deondre Davis' father, was by his son's bedside in the hospital when he learned he was one of the suspects. "We were so excited that they had (arrested) someone and to see my son's face come across was devastating," Davis told reporters outside the hospital. "I'm still puzzled on how my son is accused," he added.
"He's innocent until proven guilty," Lewis said. The attorney mentioned he had represented Davis in the past for "minor matters," such as traffic charges for allegedly driving without a license.
"If you were in that bar or restaurant and people start shooting in a crowded room, what difference does it make to you what the motivation of the shooter was?" Cranley said. "We live in a city and a country where you should be able to go out and have a good time and not be terrorized by gun violence."
"We, including myself, are all asking how this could have happened," Jay Rodgers, Cameo's owner, said in a statement. He pledged the club would "continue to cooperate with the police investigation and assist in any way in bringing the perpetrators to justice.
"It was just a lot of chaos, obviously, when the shots went off," Cincinnati Police Department Capt. Kimberly Williams said. "People (were) just trying to get out of harm's way."
The Cameo nightclub allows admission to anyone over age 18 on Friday nights. Saturday nights are for those who are 21 and above and promoted as "grown and sexy" night.
"We are aware of it. It (the club) has had some challenges in the past," Neudigate said.