Legal team drops Zimmerman in Florida shooting case
"He has gone on his own. I'm not sure what he's doing or who he's talking to," said legal adviser Craig Sonner. "If he wants us to come back as counsel, he will contact us."
"One of the things every defense attorney tells his client is don't talk to the prosecutors. Don't talk to the cops. Frankly, don't talk to anybody until we get control of the situation and do it through counsel," said Uhrig, adding that he was concerned about his former client's "emotional and physical safety." He said Zimmerman was "probably suffering from post-traumatic stress."
"We believe in his case; we believe in his innocence. We were prepared to defend him all the way. But we simply cannot defend somebody who won't communicate with us and who is off the reservation talking to people we've advised him not to talk to," he said.
An attorney for Martin's family, Benjamin Crump, expressed concern that Zimmerman's lawyers said they did not know his whereabouts. If Zimmerman is charged, then authorities will need to find him to hold him accountable, Crump said. "He's a flight risk," he said. "Right now, we're concerned about that."
Martin's mother, Sybrina Fulton, predicted that both she and Zimmerman himself would be better off if he were arrested. "I think it will be a sense of relief on both ends," she told CNN's Piers Morgan. "He will have a chance to have his day in court, where he can plea for his self-defense, if that's what he wants to use. But we just want him to be arrested so that he can come before a judge and jury."
Martin's father, Tracy Martin, said he had no doubt his son was not the aggressor. "Why would he approach an individual that he didn't know?" the father asked. "He'd never seen George Zimmerman; he'd never heard of George Zimmerman. He had no reason to be the aggressor."
Special prosecutor Angela Corey has not indicated when she will decide whether to file charges against Zimmerman. But on Tuesday, she said she is preparing to release new information on the investigation and will hold a news conference within the next three days.
"The support has been overwhelming in volume and strength. I thank you all and ask that you permit me the time to respond to each one of you personally," he wrote on the site Tuesday.
The shooting was the first violence reported that may have been related to Martin's death, Morgenstern said. No one was hurt and the shooting is under investigation.