Cyprus turns to 'Plan B' as Fed plays down crisis
Cypriot leaders are to decide on a newly drawn-up plan aimed at securing a bailout, as US Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke played down the effect of the banking crisis on the world economy.
President Nicos Anastasiades will "present a Plan B package to party leaders [on Thursday] at the presidential palace," Cyprus state television reported, after he chaired an emergency cabinet meeting called to consider the alternative plan.
"A decision on a Cyprus rescue must be made on Thursday at the latest," the official CNA news agency quoted Mr Anastasiades as saying as he left the palace on Wednesday night.
The proposals, which might still include the controversial one-off levy on bank deposits, were put forward at the cabinet meeting called to end a crisis that has forced the authorities to shut the Mediterranean island's banks for 10 straight days.
They were drawn up after finance minister Michalis Sarris failed to make any progress in Moscow talks to secure aid, as a rough-bargaining Russia sought lucrative assets in exchange for more help.
Authorities spent the day in talks after MPs rejected a measure that would have slapped an unprecedented one-time levy of up to 10 per cent on bank deposits as a condition for a 10-billion-euro ($13 billion) loan.
Unnamed government sources quoted by CNA said the new plan included the creation of a "structural investment fund, which will be reinforced by various provident funds, real estate," and other sources.
"The fund will also be linked with a bond issue and natural gas prospects," CNA said.
The finance ministry said banks, which last opened their doors on Friday, would remain closed again on Thursday and Friday "on grounds of public interest in order to ensure financial stability".
With Monday a scheduled public holiday, there is no prospect of any banking transactions before Tuesday, amid fears of a run on accounts by spooked deposit holders.
That has dealt another blow to Cyprus's debt-laded economy, which contracted 2.3 per cent in 2012, having taken a battering from the global financial crisis and its exposure to Greece.
"We cannot buy, we cannot sell," lamented Costakis Sophoclides, the director of a frozen goods company in Nicosia.
"A lot of my customers are hotels and restaurants ... and we cannot supply them ... I have 25 employees now but next week I will have no products in my stores. What will happen?"
While money is still available from ATMs, the dwindling liquidity has seen petrol stations close their credit card facilities and many stores refusing cheques.
Mr Bernanke admits Cyprus - with a banking system much bigger than its economy - is in a difficult situation, but says global markets do not appear to be overly troubled by the crisis.
However, he warned that forcing savers to bail out their bank could have an impact beyond the Mediterranean nation.
"There is an issue of setting a precedent that might reduce confidence in banks," he said.