China devalues yuan by 2% to boost flagging economy
China has sent shockwaves through global markets by moving to prevent a further drop in exports with the biggest one-off devaluation of its currency in 20 years.
Stock markets fell and commodity prices tumbled as the cut in the yuan’s value sparked concerns that Beijing will suffer a longer period of lacklustre growth before it can revive its flagging economy.
The FTSE fell 1% while the Dow Jones plummeted 250 points [1700 BST] and the price of Brent crude dropped to almost $48.5 a barrel, its lowest point this year.
After recent Chinese data showed falling exports and a stalling manufacturing sector, the country’s central bank said on Tuesday it was allowing the yuan to weaken by nearly 2%. The hope is it will make exports more competitive and push down borrowing costs.
The People’s Bank of China said the centre of the yuan’s trading band was reset 1.9% lower at 6.2298 per US dollar, its weakest point against the US dollar for almost three years. In a loosening of central controls, each day’s midpoint will now be based on the previous day’s closing price, rather than being controlled centrally.
The impact of the decision was felt across regional markets as investors fretted about a prolonged fall in demand from the world’s second biggest economy.
Carmakers and luxury goods stocks were among the worst performers in European markets. China is an important export market for European luxury goods companies and carmakers, and shares in those two sectors were among the hardest hit by the yuan devaluation. Miners were also affected.
Carmaker BMW fell 2.7% in early trading while luxury goods group Swatch and LVMH both weakened by more than 3%. Burberry, the British luxury group, was one of biggest fallers in the FTSE 100, down 35p at £15.72, while mining group Glencore posted the largest decline, falling by more than 7% to £1.91
The US dollar gained against a basket of currencies, moving up 0.2% but the Australian dollar, often used as a liquid proxy for the Chinese currency, slid more than 1% to as low as US$0.73.
Share prices across the region were down, with the Nikkei index in Tokyo falling 0.36% and the ASX200 in Sydney down more than 0.5%. The Hang Seng, however, was up 0.72% in Hong Kong.
The move is a sign that the country’s leaders are increasingly concerned about the economy, which has lost competitiveness as the yuan has climbed in relation to other currencies such as the yen and the euro as it tracked the US dollar higher.
A series of interest rate cuts have failed to kickstart the economy, which has also been hit by turbulence on the country’s stock markets after more than a year of unprecedented rises.
But it could trigger copycat devaluations by central banks as they attempt to maintain their own competitiveness against China.
Australia, Korea and India are among the leading Asia Pacific economies where central banks have cut interest rates to force local currencies down and boost exports hit by flagging world demand.
“The yuan had become relatively expensive as other Asian currencies weakened against the dollar. With fears of an economic slowdown mounting, devaluing the yuan was the only thing China had not tried after implementing monetary, fiscal and equity-boosting policies,” said Masafumi Yamamoto, senior strategist at Monex in Tokyo.
It may also draw criticism from the US which has in the past accused China of manipulating its currency lower. The issue is likely to be discussed when Chinese president Xi Jinping visits the US for talks with President Barack Obama in September.
Diana Choyleva, chief economist at Lombard Street Research, said the devaluation was a necessary re-balancing of global currencies that would encourage Chinese companies and households to spend their savings. She said it was necessary for the US to accept the move and Japan to end its reliance on competitive devaluations to maintain its own exports.
Another dimension is Beijing’s attempts to win greater status for the yuan.
It has been lobbying the International Monetary Fund to include the yuan in its basket of reserve currencies known as special drawing rights (SDR), which are used by the Washington based fund to lend to sovereign borrowers. The current members of the group are the US dollar, yen, euro and British pound.
The devaluation may be an attempt to make trading more open and market-based, observers said.
“I don’t think this is a reaction to the weak trade data over the weekend, I think it’s because of the SDR,” said Zhou Hao of Commerzbank in Singapore. “They need to have a market-based mechanism and they need volatility.”