Asian markets set for cautious open; China Caixin PMI due
China's official manufacturing Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI), a measure of factory activity, stood at 49.7 in December, in line with market expectations. On the other hand, the official non-manufacturing PMI was up 54.4, from November's reading of 53.6. A reading below 50 indicates a contraction in activity on a monthly basis.
The Caixin December manufacturing PMI was down at 48.2, compared with 48.6 in November. The Caixin PMI is a closely-watched gauge of nationwide manufacturing activity, which focuses on smaller and medium-sized companies, filling a niche that isn't covered by the official data.
The geopolitical situation in the Middle East is also a point of concern for market watchers. Parry said China has sizable investment in Iran's oil industry. The escalation of tension between Iran and Saudi Arabia will likely weigh on expectations.
Overnight, Saudi Arabia severed diplomatic ties with Iran after Iranian protesters stormed Saudi Arabia's embassy in Tehran Sunday following Saudi Arabia's execution of Shi'ite cleric Nimr al-Nimr on Saturday.
Lastly, Parry added that hawkish comments from Federal Reserve heads stateside are likely to weigh on investor confidence as markets continue to anticipate the pace of interest rate hikes from the Fed this year.
Before trade, the People's Bank of China set the yuan midpoint at 6.5032 against its previous fixing of 6.4936. The yuan traded at 6.5081 against the dollar.
Starting Monday, trading hours for the yuan on the Shanghai-based foreign exchange market will be extended. The People's Bank of China made the announcement late December; it is considered a step forward in the convergence between China's onshore and offshore rates for the yuan.
The extension allows trading in the Chinese foreign exchange market during European trading hours.
Mainland brokerages saw heavy losses before the trading halt kicked in, with mainland-listed shares of Citic Securities dropping 9.66 percent and Guosen Securities falling 9.27 percent.
Gaming shares in Hong Kong traded down between 1.84 and 3.78 percent after Macau's December gaming revenue fell 21 percent to $2.3 billion, for a 19th straight month of declines. Shares of Wynn Macau were down 2.4 percent, while Sands China fell 3.01 percent.