Skype plans to raise $100m in New York flotation
But internet phone firm faces investigation by US authorities for alleged sanctions-busting in Iran
The internet phone service Skype plans to raise up to $100m (£65m) through a Wall Street flotation, although the company's prospectus revealed today that the firm is facing a potentially embarrassing investigation by US authorities for alleged sanctions-busting in Iran.
Based in Luxembourg, Skype provides low-cost calls through cyberspace and is adding millions of extra users every week – at the end of June, it had 560m registered users, of whom 124m made calls in the average month.
Skype provides free calls between its users but charges a fee for connections to landlines and mobile phones. It reported underlying earnings of $115m in the six months to June, on revenue of $406m.
The public offering is expected to allow various holders to sell, although the company is yet to provide details. Founded in 2003 by two Scandinavian entrepreneurs, Skype was owned by the US online auction company eBay from 2005 to 2009. But eBay sold a 70% stake in November to a group of venture capitalists for $2bn.
At present, a 56% stake is held by a consortium including Silver Lake, a Canadian pension fund, and Andreessen Horowitz, which is run by Netscape founders Marc Andreessen and Ben Horowitz. A further 30% remains in eBay's hands while Skype's original creators, Niklas Zennström and Janus Friis, have 14%.
Skype has set out ambitious expansion plans – it wants to embed its services in televisions and mobile devices and has struck relationships with potential partners including Verizon Wireless, Panasonic, LG and Samsung.
"Although we have achieved significant global scale and user growth to date, the penetration of our connected and paying users is low relative to our market opportunity," said the company.
Such is Skype's popularity that its name has entered the global lexicon as a verb, with users globally talking about "skyping" each other. The company has 839 staff, including 237 in Britain. Some 40% of its calls in the first half of the year involved video contact, as well as voice.
But Skype's prospectus revealed a potentially troublesome distraction in the shape of a probe by the US treasury's office of foreign asset control, which enforces trade sanctions against regimes such as Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's government.
Skype disclosed that at the end of last month, the US authority served a subpoena on one of its controlling shareholders, Silver Lake Partners, demanding information about "call termination fees to an Iranian telecommunications provider" since 2005. If found to have been flouting a trade embargo, Skype admitted it could face "civil penalties including fines".