Greek crisis: European leaders begin talks with views split over agreement
Alexis Tsipras remains hopeful for compromise but opinion is divided as France seeks agreement but Germany retains tough stance in climate of bailout mistrust
European leaders have started emergency talks in Brussels that could prove decisive for Greece’s future in the eurozone, amid signs of a split between the country’s creditors.
Although billed as the last chance to secure “the ultimate agreement” on the Greek debt crisis, a grand political bargain to keep Greece in the eurozone are far from assured.
Arriving for the talks, the Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, said he was looking for compromise: “We can reach an agreement tonight if all parties want it.”
But France and Germany are split on their approach to the Greek question, while Finland could refuse outright to sign up to a third bailout for Greece.
Arriving at the meeting, the French president, François Hollande, vowed to do everything possible to get an agreement on Sunday night, but his German counterpart, Angela Merkel, said there would not be an agreement at any cost.
Italy’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi, is expected to tell Merkel that “enough is enough” and the eurozone should not humiliate Greece when it has already given up so much.
On Sunday afternoon finance ministers said they had made some progress after 14 hours of talks over two days. “We have come a long way, solved a lot of issues, but some big issues still remain,” said Jeroen Dijsselbloem, who chairs the Eurogroup of finance ministers.
Donald Tusk, the president of the European Council, cancelled an emergency full summit of the 28 countries that was to deal with the fallout from Greece’s ejection, in order to give eurozone leaders a last chance to reach an accord saving Greece and forestalling what would be a devastating schism sowing deep resentment and division between Europe’s leaders.
The intractable problem is that many governments do not trust the Greek government to implement a €12bn (£8.6bn) programme of spending cuts and reforms. Eurozone governments are seeking proof from Athens it can keep its promises, in exchange for agreeing to start talks on a possible €80bn bailout.
“The main obstacle to an agreement is trust,” said Pier Carlo Padoan, finance minister of Italy, one of the countries most sympathetic to Greece.
The Irish taoiseach, Enda Kenny, urged his fellow leaders to “look at the bigger picture”. Kenny, who has been Ireland’s leader since the early days of its bailout programme, said in his country’s case trust was built incrementally.
“We don’t want to look back in 10 years’ time and think this could have been saved, but wasn’t,” he said.
Earlier in the day, Slovakia’s finance minister, Peter Kažimír, one of the most hawkish voices around the negotiating table, said he did not expect a deal on Sunday.
But Jean Asselborn, Luxembourg’s foreign minister, said Grexit had to be prevented. He told the Munich newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung: “It would be fateful for Germany’s reputation in the EU and the world.
“Germany’s responsibility is great. It’s about not conjuring up the ghosts of the past,” he told the paper. “If Germany goes for Grexit, it will trigger a deep conflict with France. That would be a catastrophe for Europe.”
Der Spiegel in Hamburg called it the biggest day of Merkel’s 10-year chancellorship and appealed to her to “show greatness” and save Europe. Italy’s Renzi was said to be planning a bitter attack on Merkel, depending on the progress at the summit. Renzi was to tell Germany enough is enough and that the EU could not flourish while member states were humiliated.
If Der Spiegel is right about the momentousness of Merkel’s day, the same could be said for Hollande who, with his government and officials, has been campaigning tirelessly in recent weeks to keep Greece in the euro, helping Athens to draft its proposals.
A so-called Grexit, which has never been closer, would be a shattering failure for Hollande and the resulting Franco-German recriminations will be deeply damaging.