NUJ clashes with BBC management over impact of strikes
BBC's director of business operations says 'six out of seven staff' working, while NUJ claims figure is 'completely untrue'
Trade union leaders have clashed with BBC management over the impact of the 24-hour strike by journalists on Monday that disrupted news programmes across the corporation's TV and radio output.
The BBC's director of business operations, Lucy Adams, said "six out of seven staff" were working normally with "all our services on air" and "limited changes to planned programming".
But Michelle Stanistreet, the general secretary of the National Union of Journalists, said it was "absolutely ludicrous" to suggest such a high level of staff, which she said was "completely untrue".
"The NUJ has several thousand members at the BBC and there have been only a handful of reports of people crossing the picket lines," said Stanistreet, who suggested BBC management was living in "fantasy land".
"There has been a really solid turnout with significant impact on programming, particularly on regional news programmes."
The NUJ called the strike action, the second 24-hour stoppage in less than a month, in protest at compulsory redundancies, with 387 posts due to be lost across the BBC World Service and BBC Monitoring following cuts in government funding.
Another 43 people were due to be made compulsorily redundant on Monday, in addition to the four members of staff who had already left.
Adams, in an email to all BBC staff on Monday, said the BBC had a "similar level of news programming on air as during the previous strike action" on 15 July.
The BBC's 24-hour news channel BBC News remained on air, albeit with fewer familiar faces than normal.
BBC1's 1pm news bulletin was presented by another unfamiliar face, former ITV regional news presenter, Gavin Grey, who spent much of the day fronting News 24.
The channel's 6pm and 10pm bulletins were also expected to go ahead as normal.
But there was severe disruption to the BBC Radio 4 schedule with the loss of PM, The World at One, and a curtailed Today.
BBC Radio 5 Live presenters Nicky Campbell, Victoria Derbyshire and Richard Bacon were all on air, although Shelagh Fogarty was missing from the station's lunchtime show, replaced by two of the station's other presenters, Adrian Goldberg and George Riley.
• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for publication".
• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian onTwitterandFacebook