Eurozone economy saved from recession by German growth
A strong performance by the powerhouse German economy, which grew by 0.5pc, helped haul the 17-members over the line and prevented the eurozone recording a second quarter of contraction in a row, according to the latest figures from Eurostat. In the fourth quarter of 2011, eurozone GDP shrank by 0.3pc.
Howard Archer, economist at Global Insight, said: “While it is welcome news that the eurozone avoided recession, its performance is hardly something to celebrate as GDP was only flat year-on-year in the first quarter of 2012. Furthermore, generally weaker latest data and, particularly, survey evidence suggests that renewed GDP contraction is very much on the menu for the second quarter.”
The debt crisis took its toll on the other core economies. French GDP failed to grow at all in the first three months of the year; Austria and Belgium showed modest growth; the recession in the Netherlands continued as its economy contracted 0.2pc quarter-on-quarter.
In the sinner states, the contraction was more alarming. There was no quarterly data for Greece but GDP shrank by 6.2pc year-on-year. In Italy, the economy shrank by 0.8pc quarter-on-quarter and 1.3pc year-on-year; in Spain the contraction was 0.3pc and 0.4pc; and in Portugal 0.1pc and 0.2pc.
Economists at Moody’s Analytics said: “This divergence in economic performance, if it persists may further complicate policy decisions in Europe.”
The full break-down of the data is not yet available but economists said that positive trade helped the overall economy to avoid recession. Investment is expected to be down and consumer spending sluggish.
Despite the surprise figures, the outlook for the eurozone was still gloomy following a raft of alarming data.
Mr Archer said the area still faced “major headwinds”, particularly from the advancing crisis in Greece. He said: “We fear that renewed Eurozone GDP contraction is very much on the cards for the second quarter as latest survey evidence has been largely disappointing and softer.”
He added: “There seems a compelling case for the European Central Bank to cut interest rates from the current level of 1pc, but we suspect that the bank will remain reluctant to do so unless major downside risks to the Eurozone outlook materialize. The impression we get is that there is still a marked reluctance within the ECB to take interest rates below 1.00% and it will probably need sustained weakened Eurozone economic news to result in it happening.”
Moody’s said: “We expect tensions over the debt crisis to remain high with the probability of Greece exiting the euro this year around 50%, rising to 70% next year. The European stabilisation funds are not big enough to deal with rescues of Spain and Italy and also to support the regional banking sector in a full blown crisis. Furthermore, no single currency would want to pull the trigger on Greece and the country still wants to remain part of the currency bloc. It is also not clear how the European Central Bank will react to the situation. It has been more reactive than proactive so far during the crisis.”