Tube workers begin 24-hour strike
Thousands of London Underground workers began a 24-hour strike this evening, threatening disruption for commuters and other passengers and problems for businesses.
Members of the Rail, Maritime and Transport (RMT) union and the Transport Salaried Staffs' Association (TSSA) walked out at 6.30pm as part of a long-running dispute over 800 ticket office job cuts.
It was the fourth stoppage in recent months following the collapse last week of talks aimed at breaking the deadlock.
Transport for London (TfL) pledged to run as many tube services as possible, but warned of disruption all day on Monday, with services not expected to return to normal until Tuesday.
Labour's mayoral candidate, Ken Livingstone, urged London mayor Boris Johnson to intervene, saying: "It's been well over 900 days since Boris Johnson was elected and he is yet to speak to the representatives of tube workers. As mayor of London and chairman of TfL, meeting the representatives of tube workers is an essential part of the job, whether Boris Johnson likes it or not."
Nick Winch of the Federation of Small Businesses, said up to two thirds of staff were late arriving for work or couldn't get in during the last strike on 2 November.
"What is concerning to members is that many of their staff will be trying to get home in the dark - perhaps making unaccustomed journeys by foot, posing a potential threat to their safety. When coupled with the potential for snow, movement around London could become impossible."
RMT general secretary Bob Crow said: "It is incredible that LU management would not agree to a 12-week suspension of the cuts to allow a thorough safety evaluation on the impact on each station of their cuts plans. That shows complete and utter contempt for the safety of both their passengers and their staff.
"With more chaos as a result of infrastructure failures this morning adding to a month of misery, Londoners can see the real impact of the LU/TfL cuts plans for themselves and it is those very same safety-critical cuts that are at the heart of this dispute."
Mike Brown, managing director of LU, said: "We will be doing everything we can to get as many tube services as possible operating throughout Sunday evening and Monday, and to keep Londoners on the move with extra buses, river services, and alternatives. Londoners will face some disruption, but we intend to run services on nearly all tube lines, meaning people will be able to get around.
"We have been consulting with the union leaderships for more than six months, trying to establish what specific safety concerns they may now have. This week we offered a further six weeks to discuss our plans to see if there are any local issues which need to be addressed, but the leaders of the RMT and TSSA prefer to attack the people of London yet again and attempt to hold us all to ransom.
"If they are serious about resolving this issue, they should immediately call off their unnecessary strike, which will achieve nothing."