Manchester Central Library book pulping: text of letter of protest
To Neil MacInnes, Head of Libraries and Archives, Manchester
The book collection of the Manchester Central Library is an invaluable resource not just for the north-west, but for the world. It contains literary, commercial, educational and political records going back 150 years, street directories, dictionaries, encylopaedias, and volumes concerning the history of science and engineering. The majority of the collection covers the period between 1850 and the present day. The quality and depth of this collection was arguably rivaled in this country only by the British Library – it was certainly unique amongst public access collections.
There has been a good deal of attention and comment on social media and in the news over the past weeks about the destruction of a significant proportion of this book stock, as part of the general refurbishment. There have been various claims and counter claims, but some facts are clear.
Despite early assurances that there would be little, if any, loss of books beyond normal "weeding" practice, it is now admitted by the library service that 210,000 reference books, formerly stored in the famous stacks, are to be removed. Other sources suggest that the original estimate was as high as 500,000. This destruction has been going on behind closed doors for over 18 months already. No one seems to know how much, or what, has already been lost.
This is clearly far more than a simple weeding of duplicated, out of date or damaged books. We still do not know why this change of policy took place. There are rumours that it was the result of a miscalculation of how much shelving was required in the new library. If this is not the case, what was the basis for such a drastic reversal of policy? Who made the decision, and what are the criteria for removal? Why have we heard of no public consultation at all?
At the time of writing the library has only just published its disposals policy after many demands. Why did it take so long, and when was this document actually written?
Even though this massive cull of books could represent up to 50% of the total stock, there are no subject specialists involved in the process. Ordinary library staff, no matter how dedicated or experienced, cannot possibly know what should be kept and what should be thrown out from such a massive clear-out. How can the library know how much stock is to be removed before they have assessed its worth? Surely this points to quantitative rather than qualitative criteria?
Of course the refurbishment is the ideal time to thin out stock; no one is suggesting that the collection be preserved entire. But we are concerned that far too much of this irreplaceable collection is in danger of being lost forever. We demand that the current destruction of stock be halted, and that a thorough investigation into the library's disposals policy is carried out. A complete account of what has already been destroyed over the past 18 months needs to be published and the library service, in the interests of transparency, needs to publish full lists of what it will be discarding in the months to come. If not, we may lose a uniquely important resource before it has even been properly explored and assessed.
The books at central library are not owned by the council; they are owned by the people of Manchester. It is they, not politicians and bureaucrats, who need to have a say in what happens to this valuable Mancunian treasure.
Academics Dr Jerome de Groot, senior lecturer in English and American studies at Manchester university; (at Manchester Metropolitan University): Julie Wilkinson, senior lecturer in English and creative writing; professor Joanna Hodge, philosophy department; Dr Andrew Moor, reader in cinema history; Dr Angelica Michelis, Dr Paul Wake, English department; professor Berthold Schoene, director, Institute for Humanities and Social Sciences Research; Sherry Ashworth, novelist and lecturer in creative writing; Michael Symmons Roberts, professor of Poetry, academic director, Manchester Writing School, director, Centre of Research in English; James Draper, co-director, Manchester Children's Book Festival; Matthew Frost, head of editorial, Manchester University Press; Andrew Biswell, director of the Anthony Burgess Foundation; Judy Kendall, poet & lecturer at Salford University.
Writers Carol Ann Duffy, the poet Laureate; Simon Armitage, poet; John Cooper Clark, poet; Mike Garry, poet; Jeanette Winterson, novelist and visiting professor of creative writing at Manchester university; Frank Cottrell Boyce, novelist and screen writer; Willy Russell, playwright; Melvin Burgess, novelist; Jane Rogers, novelist; Adele Geras, novelist; Dave Simpson, playwright; Dave Haslam, former Hacienda DJ, writer and academic.
Media Sarah Frankcom and Greg Hersov, artistic directors, Royal Exchange Theatre, Manchester; Lee Hardman, director Digital Fiction Factory, Media City; professor Michael Schmidt, founder & director of Carcanet Press; Kevin Duffy, of Bluemoose Books; Tony Warren, creator of Coronation Street.