Miles Franklin Literary Award: Sofie Laguna wins for novel The Eye Of The Sheep
Sofie Laguna has taken out Australia's top fiction prize, the $60,000 Miles Franklin Literary Award, for the novel, The Eye Of The Sheep.
Laguna's novel was chosen from a shortlist which also included works by Sonya Hartnett, Joan London, Christine Piper and Craig Sherborne.
An emotional winner, the mother of two said the award meant security for her and her children.
"I am still writing whether I have to sit in the corridor while the baby sleeps or in a giant play centre lit by fluorescent tubes and full of plastic play equipment ... the writing just continues," she said.
Laguna said, in retrospect, that it seemed pertinent that a novel exploring domestic violence should win the prize at a time when the issue was very much in the public eye.
"It's interesting that it is timely, but I've heard before that writers or artists, without being really conscious of it, we are really reflecting back to society the issues of the day."
The Eye Of The Sheep is Laguna's second novel for adults and her first to be shortlisted for the Miles Franklin award.
Her first novel One Foot Wrong was long-listed for the award and short-listed for the Prime Minister's Literary Award.
The judges said The Eye Of The Sheep, which is told through the eyes of young boy Jimmy Flick, "impressively examined domestic violence through Jimmy's non-judgmental perceptions".
"Hints of his parents' challenging upbringings adds to the gravity of the story of these working-class people trying their hardest to build a family, capable of both proud love and sickening violence," the judges notes said.
"Gavin's battle with alcohol, and Paula's with her health, are related through Jimmy's skewed interpretations.
"The power of this finely crafted novel lies in its coruscating language, inventive and imaginative, reflecting Jimmy's vivid inner world of light and connections and pulsing energy.
"Laguna has a true ear for the rhythms of everyday dialogue, and her compassionate rendering of the frustrations - and compensations - of dealing with a child of sideways abilities, makes this novel an impressively eloquent achievement."
The Miles Franklin Award is presented each year to a novel which "presents Australian life in any of its phases".
It was established through the will of writer Stella Miles Franklin, best known for her novel My Brilliant Career.
Past winners of the award include Tim Winton, Thea Astley, David Malouf and Peter Carey.