Eurovision Song Contest won by Denmark
Denmark has triumphed at this year's Eurovision Song Contest, held in the Swedish city of Malmo.
Emmelie de Forest, 20, had been the overwhelming favourite among the 26 entries, with her song Only Teardrops. Azerbaijan finished second.
The UK's Bonnie Tyler came 19th, an improvement on last year when Engelbert Humperdinck came second from last.
There was disappointment for Ireland's Ryan Dolan as he finished in last place with just five points.
De Forest won with 281 points and Azerbaijan's Farid Mammadov finished 47 points behind, followed by Ukraine in third and Norway in fourth.
Denmark, which will now have the job of hosting the 59th contest next year, had previously won in 1963 and 2000.
De Forest sang her up-tempo tune barefoot, saying before she performed: "It makes me feel closer to the ground, the earth and makes me feel more relaxed."
At the post-event news conference, she told reporters: "It has been quite stressful but it's also a wonderful thing that has happened to me. It's amazing.
"It was crazy when they put the butterfly [of the winning country's flag] on the dress. I didn't understand we had won at that point."
She added: "Of course I believed in the song, but that's the exciting thing about Eurovision you don't know what's going to happen. So I was surprised and shocked when it happened."
TV viewers across Europe were treated to the mix of high-energy pop and power ballads that have become synonymous with the contest, as well as some outlandish stage performances.
One of the more eccentric acts was Romania's Cezar, who mixed his operatic voice with a disco beat. He managed a respectable 13th position.
UK entrant Tyler, 61, who is best known for her 1983 hit Total Eclipse of the Heart, had high hopes for her chances.
But the Welsh singer scored just 23 points for her performance of Believe In Me.
Speaking afterwards, Tyler said that despite her final score the experience had been "a night to remember".
She said: "I got the feeling tonight that I got at the Grammy awards.
"I'm sure a lot of people will be disappointed on my behalf but I have really enjoyed my Eurovision experience.
"I did the best that I could do with a great song. I don't feel down and I'm ready to party."
Johnny Logan, the three-time Eurovision winner who represented Ireland, said the UK's entries had not been strong enough in recent years.
"I think over the years it's been slated so much in England and Ireland that the best writers don't take part in it any more. That's the reality," he said.