Ready Steady Cook gets canned after ratings go off the boil
BBC cookery show Ready Steady Cook is getting the chop after more than 15 years because viewers have lost their taste for it.
The show, which first aired in 1994 with Fern Britton, 53, at the helm, initially had three million viewers tuning in to see what professional chefs could do with a £5 bag of mystery ingredients.
But in recent years, the figures have slipped to an unpalatable 1.5million.
Ainsley Harriot, 53, became a household name with his catchphrases 'Percy Pepper' and 'Sally Salt' when he took over hosting the show in 2000, having been a chef on it previously.
It's become Britain's longest-running cookery show with 21 series and almost 2000 episodes.
The main focus of the show was to pit two members of the public or two celebrities together to team up with well-know chefs and cook in competition against each other.
Members of the audience then voted for which team they thought had come up with the best dishes - either the 'green pepper' or the 'red tomato' team by holding up a card featuring a pepper or tomato.
But its now emerged the last shows were filmed late last year. 
Harriott said in a statement: 'I feel privileged to have been party of the Ready Steady Cook family for 15 years.
'I am immensely proud of its success and will always look back on it with the fondest memories.' 
The move to axe Ready Steady Cook is part of a plan by BBC's head of daytime, Liam Keelan, to revamp the schedule.
Keelan said: 'Ready Steady Cook has hung up its cooking aprons.
'I'm proud of the show, which will go down in history as the longest running cookery show on TV.
'While the series has been hugely popular on BBC Two, it was felt that Ready Steady Cook has been taken as far as it could.'
The show's format has been sold to 25 countries around the world , including the US.
It will be replaced by other food-based shows including Hairy Bikers' Cook-Off, featuring the hirsute chefs David Myers and Simon King, which has just started on BBC2.  
Repeats of Ready Steady Cook will still be shown until the end of next year however until it's taken off air altogether.  