P.J. Harvey Nabs a Second Mercury Prize
P.J. Harvey became the first singer on Tuesday to win the prestigious Mercury Prize twice, when she accepted the award for her album “Let England Shake.” Adele, the young soul-singer who had dominated the charts for much of the summer with her hit record “21,” was left in the also-ran category. It was the second time that Ms. Harvey, the 41-year-old singer-songwriter from Yeovil, England, had taken home the prize, which is given every year to the best album from an English or Irish act. She first won in 2001, when the ceremony was held on Sept. 11. She was on tour in the United States at the time and got caught up in the chaotic day of the terror attack.
“I was in Washington, D.C., watching the Pentagon burning from my bedroom window,” she recalled as she took the microphone to thank her managers and her record label, Island Records, for helping her deserve this year’s prize.
Ms. Harvey – the P.J. stands for Polly Jean — won for her eighth studio album, a dark collection inspired by the horrors of war. The songs revolve around the themes of patriotism and the price that England extracts from its soldiers in wars both present and past. She took on the personas of soldiers and observers in the songs, floating above battlefields as she spoke of British conflicts from the disastrous attack on Gallipoli in 1915 to more recent actions in Afghanistan. Throughout the album, she presents an unvarnished and unromantic view of war, singing in a sometimes wavering and scratchy voice. “Ms. Harvey’s vocals rise out of a kind of bleary skiffle, with the strumming of Autoharp or distorted electric guitar above rudimentary drumbeats,” the New York Times critic Jon Pareles wrote in a review in February. “The melodies hint at hymns and traditional songs, sometimes turned halting and irregular. Ms. Harvey sings most of them in her quavery upper register: the tones of precocious little girls, haggard aunties or horrified ghosts. But here they are trying to convey desperate news: “Went hellwards, and some of us returned/And some of us did not,” she sings in “In the Dark Places.””
She was backed on the album largely by the bassist Mick Harvey, who is no relation, and the guitarist John Parish, her longtime collaborator, both of them playing a variety of instruments. Ms. Harvey has told interviewers she spent more than two years researching the songs, reading about the Gallipoli campaign and delving into testimonies from civilians and soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan. She said her writing was influenced by the poetry of T.S. Eliot and the war works of the painter Francisco de Goya, as well as the songs of rock groups like The Doors, The Pogues and The Velvet Underground.
Ms. Harvey beat out a strong field of 12 nominees, including the rapper Tinie Tempah and the rock band Elbow, which won in 2008. Three other female singer-songwriters – Adele, Katy B and Anna Calvi – were also nominatedt. The other nominees included the group Metronomy and the whizkid of electronic sampling, James Blake.
Since 1992, the award has been given to the best album by an English or Irish artist. A small group of music journalists and music industry professionals vote on the nominees after they perform at the yearly ceremony in September. The winner receives a $31,800 prize.