BBC strike: news bulletins forced off air
Action over pensions affects radio and TV breakfast shows Stand-in presenter drafted in for lunchtime bulletin
Radio 4's Today programme was knocked off air this morning and other BBC News breakfast output was hit as journalists began a 48-hour strike over pensions.
Emma Crosby, the former GMTV presenter, was drafted in to anchor BBC1's 1pm news bulletin from the BBC News channel studio. Crosby, who began doing shifts on the rolling news service last month, then continued presenting for BBC News channel when the BBC1 simulcast ended at 1.30pm.
Speaking on the National Union of Journalists picket line outside BBC Television Centre at lunchtime, the union's general secretary, Jeremy Dear, compared the corporation's director general, Mark Thompson, to Muhammed Saeed al-Sahaf, the Iraqi information minister at the time of the 2003 invasion who became known as "Comical Ali".
"When Mark Thompson says that this strike is having no effect on the BBC's service, it's a bit like Comical Ali standing outside Baghdad airport saying there are no Americans in Baghdad as the troops swarm in," Dear said.
He added that he was "delighted" with how the strike was going but said that the NUJ remained open to talks at any time. "We would be prepared to consider working longer or paying more but not working longer and paying more and getting lower benefits at the end of it," he said.
He added that he was disappointed that other BBC unions, including Bectu, had not voted to join the strike.
Earlier today Thompson reiterated to BBC staff that management's improved pension proposal was "our final offer". "We can make no more changes without imposing an unacceptable burden on licence fee payers," he wrote on a BBC blogpost.
Thompson apologised to audiences for the disruption to BBC services and said the corporation was doing "everything in our power to bring you as much as possible of our usual programming and services".
He pointed out that only the NUJ, out of five BBC unions, had rejected the revised pension offer and said its members only made up a "very small percentage" – 17% – of the corporation's total workforce.
Lucy Adams, the BBC People director, said in a BBC News channel interview today that the corporation was faced, like many employers, "with a final defined benefit pension scheme that is no longer affordable".
"The deficit is going to be at least £1.5bn, possibly higher. While we don't know the final figure, we know it's going to be in that region. We have to start paying it off from June next year," Adams added.
She said that if the BBC did not act now, it would be "negligent". "We need to accept that pension benefits for BBC employees, like many other employees around the country, are not going to be what they were."
This morning, regular Today features including Thought For The Day, Farming Today, sports and business updates and the paper review were replaced by an electic mix of repeats including Off the Page: Living Cheap, a discussion about how to live in tough times.
BBC Breakfast and Radio 5 Live Breakfast made it to air, but without their regular presenters and with a reduced offering featuring extended pre-recorded packages.
Outside BBC Television Centre in west London, where the corporation's main TV and radio programmes are based, a handful of NUJ members including Newsnight economics editor and union rep Paul Mason, were manning a low-key picket line.
Mark Byford, the outgoing BBC deputy director general, crossed the picket line without saying a word or looking at anyone.
John Humphrys and Sarah Montague, who were due to present Today, chose not to cross National Union of Journalists picket lines. Radio 4 announcer Susan Rae anchored a 15-minute news bulletin at the top of the hour during Today's normal running time, with repeats filling the rest of the airtime.
These included Ian Hislop fronting Lord Kitchener's Image; Great Lives: Winston Churchill; and The Estuary, a look at migratory birds in the Wash on the east coast.
Ian Payne took over from regular Radio 5 Live Breakfast hosts Nicky Campbell and Shelagh Fogarty.
BBC Breakfast is normally simulcast on the BBC News channel. Today it was the other way round, with regular Breakfast Friday hosts Susanna Reid and Charlie Stayt and the show's cosy sofa set replaced by a single presenter behind the BBC News channel desk.
On the BBC News channel, from 9am Simon McCoy was handling things alone instead of the usual two presenters and the rolling news network ran schedule padded out with pre-recorded packages rather than live material.
Victoria Derbyshire's 10am Radio 5 Live show was running repeats of her interviews, including one from earlier this week featuring the culture secretary, Jeremy Hunt.
Later today Simon Mayo's afternoon show on Radio 5 Live is also to be replaced by repeats.
Radio 3's breakfast show was also off air, while about half the BBC's 40 local radio stations were operating a normal service and the rest offering core bulletins and a reduced output.
The breakfast programmes on Radio Scotland and Good Morning Ulster were replaced by Radio 5 Live output.
• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 3353 2000.
• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for publication".