Cuba opens new online frontline in war of words: Castropedia
Havana's alternative to Wikipedia is intended to set the historical record straight – and it is unlikely to go down very well in the US
Cuba today unveiled its own version of Wikipedia, the online encyclopaedia devoted to the "accumulation and development of knowledge".
However, some of EcuRed's 20,000 entries appear to bear a slightly partisan stamp. Not only does the site refer to the US as "the empire of our time" and "the most powerful nation of all time", it also notes that Cuba's near-neighbour has historically taken "by force territory and natural resources from other nations, to put at the service of its businesses and monopolies".
Nor does the factfile end there: "[The US] consumes 25% of the energy produced on the planet and in spite of its wealth, more than a third of its population does not have assured medical attention," it reports.
With a poetic flourish, it also makes reference to US-Cuban relations. From early on, it says, Washington gazed at the island "like those who admire a beautiful fruit that will end up falling in their hands".
EcuRed, which was developed by the Youth Club of Computing and Electronics, supposedly allows users to update entries with prior approval from the site's administrators.
In a statement, the club described the launch as "a dream come true", and thanked all those involved for "bringing their little grains of sand to such a beautiful task: that of shaping and sharing knowledge".
TSeemingly experiencing teething troubles, the site proved impossible to access today, however.
EcuRed contains an extensive biography of the former Cuban leader Fidel Castro, including details of his role after the illness that made him cede power to his brother, Raúl, in 2006.
"Today he writes and participates in the struggle of ideas at a global level," it says. "For his moral authority, he influences important and strategic decisions of the revolution."
There is also an article about Raúl, who officially replaced his brother as president in 2008 and is described as a "revolutionary combatant, political leader, statesman and military chief".
"He has contributed relevant support to the struggles of the Cuban people in defence of their sovereignty and independence," the entry says.
EcuRed does not yet include mention of economic reforms introduced this year by President Castro to update the Cuban socialist model, which are currently the object of a national debate.
According to a government survey conducted earlier this year, about 1.6 million Cubans, out of a population of 11.2 million, have access to the internet.