Bafta Awards 2012: as it happened
• Silent film The Artist dominates the 65th Baftas, clinching seven prizes • Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy wins Best British film and Adapted Screenplay • Meryl Streep's portrayal of Margaret Thatcher wins her the Best Actress award
23.09 So the winners will be off to backslap, airkiss, group hug and carouse deep into the London night. The losers will drown their sorrows and mutter darkly about how they'll have their day at the Oscars. That's it for our Baftas liveblog - an evening that reaffirmed the magic of cinema and had some charming moments, if not terribly many surprises. Thanks for keeping me company, not to mention all your tweets, emails and comments. Thank you, goodnight and roll credits...
@nevpierce It's belittling to the British Academy and the industry as a whole that the other categories are raced through in, basically, a montage
@simonmhickson I wish Stephen Fry to reduce his word usage by 84%
@danielmaier Alongside the 'Dead of The Year' reel, it would be lovely if they did a 'Hurray, They're Still Alive!' one
22.59 And that's our lot. Typically eloquent closing remarks from Stephen Fry remind us of the escapist role that film can play in even the darkest times. Ain't that the truth. We then get a whistle-stop round-up of the lower-profile awards presented earlier this evening - mainly more recognition for Hugo, Senna and, naturellement, The Artist. The Iron Lady gets Best Make-Up and Hair - you mean that blonde beehive wasn't natural?
22.54 Lovely tributes paid on films by Christopher "Saruman" Lee and Robert De Niro (yes, we're talking to you), before a montage of some of the finest films of the past four decades: Mean Streets, Taxi Driver, Raging Bull, Goodfellas, Th King Of Comedy, Casino, Gangs Of New York, The Departed... Quite the CV. And the Bafta Fellowship, of course, goes to...
Martin Scorsese. The diminutive director arrives on stage to a huge ovation and makes a lovely speech, full of the genuine love of film that informs and characterises his own great work. He pays tribute to Powell and Pressburger, and generally plays a blinder. Well done sir.
22.49 And now the evening's last golden mask gong: the Bafta Fellowship, to be presented with appropriate gravtias by venerable great actor Max Von Sydow. Rather inappropriate to play him on with Coldplay, though. Give the guy some dignity.
22.47 And the Bafta for Best Film goes to...
The Artist. No surprises there after the night it has had but still lovely to see. The silent black and white film was the unanimous bookies' favourite for the big award. Can it translate its huge success here to the Oscars later this month?
22.44 Time for the penultimate award, Best Film, presented by an A-list Aussie duo of Hugh Jackman and Russell Crowe. The pair perform some repartee that, surprisingly for one of these things, isn't too painful. Well played, chaps.
22.42 And the Bafta goes to...
Jean Dujardin for The Artist! Of course it does and rightly so. A note-perfect performance. Uffie the dog will be wagging his tail with pride. Another thoroughly charming speech from a Frenchman too. Dujardin even namechecks William Webb Ellis and Benny Hill. Unfortunately, a line of scantily-clad women don't chase him off-stage, while slapping him on the head.
22.39 And now the gong for Best Actor, presented by Penelope Cruz. Another tightly contested one. Could Oldman, Fassbender or Clooney steal it from under The Artist's silent nose?
22.38 Streep gives a nod to her Lincolnshire ancestry at the end of her speech, there. She's one of ours. A bit.
22.35 And the winner is...
Meryl Streep for The Iron Lady. Thatcher, Thatcher, Bafta snatcher. The lady's not for turning this award down. You can have those headlines tomorrow, tabloids. It's Streep's first Bafta for precisely 31 years. She takes to the stage in a black Vivienne Westwood gown with power-shoulders and, shall we say, some impressive cantilevering. Breathless, luvvie-ish speech from La Streep.
22.33 And now one of the biggies. Best Actress, presented by last year's Best Actor winner Colin Firth, who notes that he's been "grievously overlooked" for this one. Ooh, Mister Darcy.
22.31 And the Bafta goes to...
Michel Hazanavicius for The Artist. Bradley Pitt The Younger does a fine job at pronouncing that surname, as Michel goes on to mention.
22.28 These films about the Best Picture nominees are rather like glorified trailers aren't they? Still, ther're doing a decent job of building anticipation for the big gong later on. Drive getting the treatment now. Very cool. And our next presenter is some ugly character actor called Brad Pitt, dishing out the gong for Best Director.
22.24 Now the award for Best Adapted Screenplay, presented by - female population sit bolt upright on their sofas - John Hamm aka Don Draper from Mad Men. He looks as dashing as ever despite his face almost being obscured by an outsized bow tie. and the Bafta goes to...
Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy, its second major award of the evening. Lovely to see. Let's hope Peter Straughn's got enough speeches prepared. Neat gag there where he thanks The Artist for not being adapted from a book. Then a touching tribute to his late wife Bridget O'Connor, who we've just seen on the Those We Have Lost montage. A sobering moment.
22.21 Time for the traditional montage of those in the film industry we've lost over the past year. Jane Russell, Ken Russell, Nicol Williamson, Hugh Martin, Ben Gazzara, Shelagh Delaney, Steve Jobs, Sidney Lumet, Liz Taylor and, hastily added, Whitney Houston... RIP.
22.13 Next up is the golden mask for Best Documentary, presented by actor Paul Bettany. And the award goes too...
Senna, the astonishing film about the Formula One - not that you need to be a motorsport fan to love it, as I can testify. Great documentary with lots of v-va-vroom.
22.00 And now the award for Outstanding British Contribution for Cinema. It goes to, of course...
John Hurt, a well-deserved award after decades of exemplary acting in all sorts of landark films. Hurt comes up on stage ery humbly. That's either his chest bursting with pride or an alien's about to explode out. Touching speech that even seems to move host Stephen Fry.
22.11 And now the award for Orange Rising Star. A slightly controversial one, this, as the shortlist was all-male - as if there aren’t any promising actresses around. And the winner is...
Adam Deacon - the Hackney-born talent who rose to fame in Kidulthood and Adulthood, then went onto co-writing, directing and star in Brit comedy Anuvahood. Slight surprise winner but very well deserved.
21.49 A scarily strong shortlist, but the winner is....
Octavia Spencer for The Help. Hurrah! She seems properly surprised, which is refreshing, not to mention slightly out of breath after dashing to the stage. Bless her. Worthy winner.
21.45 Best Supporting Actress now, presented by Harry Potter. Sorry! Daniel Radcliffe, the boy wizard. Oops, I mean, the proper actor.
21.43 And the Bafta goes to...
Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy. Deservedly so and hopefully not the classy, beautifully nuanced and superbly acted spy film's last moment in the spotlight this evening. Popular winner in the room.
21.40 And now the cockle-warming, heart-stirringly patriotic gong for Outstanding British Film, presented by a pair of Bond girls whose names I won't attempt to spell, if you don't mind awfully. Blimey, we've turned out some gems this past year.
21.36 And the Bafta goes to...
Hurrah, Christopher Plummer. Who isn't there but sends a touching little notelet.
21.34 And now the award for Best Supporting Actor, to be awarded by Helena Bonham Carter who gets a gloriously verbose intro from the thesaurus-swallowing Fry. Christopher Plummer is my choice, but Jonah Hill and Kenneth Branagh are in the building, if that means anything.
21.32 One of the nominees there reminds me of my favourite cinematic joke du jour... A War Horse walks into a bar. The barman asks, "Why the long film?"
21.30 The amazing Viola Davis from The Help awards the Bafta for handsomest film to...
21.29 Good pop at the Hollywood branch of Bafta by Fry, followed by a clip of tonight's hot favourite The Artist. And now it's the award for Production Design.
21.24 And the Bafta for *deep breath* Outstanding Debut By A British Director, Producer or Writer goes to...
Paddy Considine and Diarmid Scrimshaw for Tyrannosaur. A popular winner in the room, especially as the marvellous Olivia Colman was tragically overlooked for a Best Actress nod. Well-deserved for a visceral, frequently hard-to-watch but brilliant film.
21.20 And now it's the gong for Outstanding Debut, presented by two stars from superb comedy Bridesmaids. Awkward skit alert.
21.18 And the Bafta for Special Visual Effects goes to *cue whizzy little gold mask icon*...
21.15 Perhaps I spoke too soon, as Fry refers to "that dread bitch whore, time" and "Usain bleeding Bolt". That's more like it, sir. First award is for Special Visual Effects, to be presented by Cuba Gooding Jr - wearing a suit by Hackett, fashion fans. Gooding makes the first reference of the evening to Whitney Houston, who sadly died last night.
21.12 Montage o'clock. The magic of the movies right there. Not a vintage monologue from Fry, I didn't think. He seemed nervous and playing it rather safe.
21.10 Brad Pitt didn't look too delighted about being asked to blow a kiss into the camera there. He's a SERIOUS ACTOR, you know.
21.08 Sir Fry look very dapper and welcomes "lords, iron ladies and assorted media scum". He makes a wisecrack about how this is the most eargerly awaited global event in London this year. Sadly, there's no cut to Sebastian Coe. Some impressive stats being wheeled out about what a great year it's been for the British film industry. Makes you proud doesn't it?
21.05 Tom introduces Stephen Fry, who enters to much applause. Clearly big QI fans in Hollywood.
21.02 We kick off with Tom Jones crooning the Thunderball theme tune, to celebrate the Bond film's 50th anniversary. Still got a fine set of pipes, boyo.
21.00 And we're off! Red carpet montage. Claudia Winkleman voiceover. Early nod to The Artist there. An omen?
20.59 OK darlings, eyes and teeth. We're about to go to the Royal Opera House in London's glittering Covent Garden for the awards...
20.55 Five minutes until showtime. Miss Piggy was on the red carpet, interviewing celebrities. The publicity for The Muppets movie has been relentless hasn't it? Kermit and that porcine glamourpuss have been inescapable this past fortnight. The frog even introduced Football Focus yesterday. Very clever PR. Wonder who's, ahem, pulling the strings?
20.45 How's Top Gear/Call The Midwife/supper/the papers working out for you? Fifteen minutes til curtain up on the Beeb. Plenty of time to don a dinner suit or designer frock. Or, you know, not.
20.34 Half an hour before the BBC One broadcast, hosted by Sir Stephen Of Fry with his velveteen tones and gorgeous way with a word. The Artist is still hot favourite to sweep most of the gongs, but I've got sneaky feelings for Meryl Streep, Gary Oldman, Christopher Plummer and Octavia Spencer in the actorly categories. How about you?
20.23 And I agree with this too...
@nevpierce Lack of a live Baftas broadcast is rubbish. The BBC should make this an event, as Sky does the Oscars. They've got enough channels
@taraking Edith Bowman starstruck and babbling about her thermal undies to George Clooney. How embarrassing
@jonronson Rooting for Peter Straugn to win a Bafta for Tinker Tailor, as would you be if you had a soul inside that body of yours
20.10 Must say, it was nice to see some of the stars of Downton Abbey on the red carpet alongside the Hollywood set. It's easy to get carried away with the glamour of cinema but let's not forget that we make some of the finest television in the world here in Britian. Something to be proud of. Sorry for that sincere interlude. Normal facetious service will resume shortly.
20.03 By the way, in case you were wondering, I'm wearing checked shirt by someone or other, trousers by Levi Strauss, shoes by Converse and socks by Marks & Spencer. If only I had access to E! channel's stiletto cam, I could prove the latter two. You'll have to take my word for it.
19.59 And that's it for now on BBC Three. We now have an hour's wait for the BBC One broadcast of the ceremony to start at 9pm. So please let me know your thoughts so far by tweeting me (@michaelhogan), emailing michaelhogan100@hotmail.com or leave some words of wisdom in the comments box below. I'll report them while we wait.
19.58 Brad Pitt now, nominated for Best Actor for Moneyball. He slips in a cricket reference, which makes him fine by me.
19.56 Edith is conducting her interviews in front of a giant Bafta mask. Is it just me or did its eyes move a moment ago?
19.55 And here's gorgeous George himself. Phwoar. Again. Lovely chap, though. Put your tongue away and keep it together, Edith.
19.53 Last of the Best Film nominees now, magnificent family drama The Descendants, starring George Clooney. Phwoar. Etc.
19.51 A fashion montage now. Inb short: everyone looks fabulous. Here's the brilliant Michelle Williams, star of My Week With Marilyn and probably Meryl Streep's main rival for Best Actress tonight. She's wearing a custom-made dress by high street brand H&M, amazingly. Well done her.
19.50 I know what you're thinking: where's Uffie the dog? Well the adorable Jack Russell has apparently been ill recently so has temporarily retired from promotional duties. Feeling a little ruff, eh? A bit pawly? Get well soon, Uffie.
19.48 A look at The Artist now, the ravishing homage to the black-and-white silent movie era that has an incredible 12 nominations tonight. We may be hearing about this film later...
19.47 A chat with the lovely Viola Davis now. She's wearing Valentino but, get this, made from recycled bottles as part of Livia Firth's Green Carpet Challenge. I couldn't see any wine bottle labels or R White's Lemonade lids so I can't help but feel disappointed and cheated, frankly.
19.44 A look at the next nominee now, The Help. In which white people liberate black people from racial discrimination. Go white people!
19.43 Oh I see. The men don't get asked what they're wearing. Tut tut.
19.42 A chat with Michael Fassbender, nominated for Best Actor for Shame. I happen to know he's wearing Armani. Wonder if he's about to admit that very fact?
19.41 Christina reveals that she's wearing Vivienne Westwood and that her co-star Ryan Gosling is "a really nice person". Hold the front page!
19.39 Second of the Best Picture nominees now: noir heist thriller Drive. It's the rank outsider but immensely cool. Prepare for Christina Hendricks from Mad Men talking about it on the red carpet. Her face is up there.
19.37 Harry Potter now. Sorry, Daniel Radcliffe. He's moved on from that role, you know. Oh yes. TEN POINTS HUFFLEPUFF! Sorry, it just slipped out.
19.36 Incisive questioning from Edith there. "It must be exciting? Congratulations." Woodward and Bernstein, watch out.
19.35 Time for the first look at the Best Film nominees and it's our own Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy. It's up for 11 awards tonight, second only to The Artist's 12 nominations, and should win a few thanks to the partisan British vote. Rightly so. What a story. What a cast.
19.33 Eddie Redmayne from My Week With Marilyn and TV's Birdsong on the red carpet. He's a nicely-spoken young man who says things like "Ken Branagh" and is wearing velvet Burberry. Partly because, as a Burberry model, he's paid to.
19.31 It's Edith Bowman! Who seems to have dressed for a Nativity Play!
19.30 As the announcer man says: it's a MASSIVE night for UK cinema. Even though The Artist will probably win everything and it's Americans who will monopolise the column inches. MASSIVE.
19.28 Switching to BBC Three any minute now. Please come with me. It'll be fun and there might be nibbles.
19.26 Oh and literally everyone is honoured and excited to be here. Who knew?
19.25 Here's a few things I've learned so far from following the red carpet inanities: George Clooney works the crowds like a pro and renders all journalist lobotomised. Brad Pitt looks long-haired and a tad greasy but is sat at the end of the second row - an indication he might be a winner? Jean Dujardin from The Artist is thoroughly charming but no TV presenter can pronounce his name. Celebrities generally are TINY.
19.20 Inside the Royal Opera House, the ceremony is underway and Sir Stephen Of Fry is doing his opening monologue. The BBC coverage is two hours behind, so be careful if you're planning to follow that and don't want spoilers on the winners. Turn off Twitter. Avoid news channels and radio. Just stay with me right here. Where it's safe. And warm. And sounding slightly creepy. Apologies. There's a red carpet show over on BBC Three shortly, so let's watch that together and discuss what everyone's wearing.
19.15 In the interests of fairness, the red carpet reports on BBC News 24 weren't much better. More stilted than, well, someone on actual stilits.
19.12 The one good thing about the E! coverage is their "stiletto cam" - a rather grand name for what's essentially a camera placed on the floor - so celebrities can show off what shoes they're wearing. This is Pulitzer Prize-worthy stuff. I hope Panorama is taking note.
19.10 So has anyone been following the red carpet coverage on the E! channel? It was live at 5pm and is being repeated (as if it's live, confusingly) right now. And blimey, it's awkward. Fearne Cotton and Dermot O'Leary seem nervy and starstruck. There's frantic filling - in fact, at one point a mic was left on and either Dermot or critic James King murmured "that's what's I beleive they call filling". Embarrassing.
19.05 Hello! Just a bit of housekeeping because some people have asked: this blog is a view from the sofa, NOT from inside the ceremony. So if you're following it on the BBC, there will be no spoilers here. Clear? GOOD! I'm glad we got that sorted out and, you know, remained friends.
19.00 Welcome everyone to the Telegraph's live coverage of the 2012 Bafta Film Awards. I'm Michael and I'll be live blogging the entire evening, from 7pm to 11pm. I'd love to hear your thoughts, so please chip in on Twitter, where I'm @michaelhogan, by emailing michaelhogan100@hotmail.com or by using the comments box down below. There's 30 minutes to go until the stars start arriving at Covent Garden's Royal Opera House for what promises to be a glamorous and gripping awards ceremony. TV red carpet coverage is on the E! channel right now, before switching to BBC Three at 7.30pm. There's an hour's break while attendees pretend to eat their dinner and practise their gallant loser smiles, before the main event on BBC One at 9pm, hosted by Sir Stephen Of Fry.
Almost all the high-profile showdowns will this year feature British talent, with Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy largely to thank for that. But The Artist, which pays homage to the black-and-white silent film era, might well dominate proceedings as it did at the recent Golden Globes.
According to William Hill, the current odds for the main categories are:
Best Film: 1/6 The Artist, 5/1 Tinker Taylor Soldier Spy, 7/1 The Descendants, 16/1 The Help, 20/1 Drive
Leading Actress: 2/7 Meryl Streep (The Iron Lady), 4/1 Viola Davis (The Help), 6/1 Michelle Williams (My Week with Marilyn), 20/1 Tilda Swinton (We Need To Talk About Kevin), 25/1 Berenice Bejo (The Artist)