Senior Tory's leaked memo and sudden death of Cameron's 'rock'
The genteel lanes of David Cameron's Oxfordshire constituency are usually a world away from the muddy chaos of Glastonbury, but the two collided following the death of a 56-year-old businessman in a festival toilet.
Friends and political colleagues of Christopher Shale, the chairman of West Oxfordshire Conservative Association (Woca), expressed disbelief and grief as they came to terms with his sudden death – apparently from a heart attack midway through the festival programme.
Shale had become such a close political ally of the prime minister's that Cameron described him as "a big rock in my life".
Shale was found dead at around 9am. It has emerged that he may have died as early as Saturday lunchtime and was only discovered after a search.
In the picturesque hamlets and villages on the edge of the Cotswolds, where Shale lived near several of Cameron's inner circle of political and media allies, the entrepreneur-turned-Tory-activist's death was all the more shocking because it emerged just hours after a strategy document he had drafted was published in a Sunday newspaper, complete with strident criticisms of the attractiveness of the party as it stands.
The coincidence sparked unsubstantiated rumours at Glastonbury – described as "totally scurrilous" by party officials, that he might have committed suicide.
The theory was floated by the festival organiser, Michael Eavis, but it was later played down by festival officials and seemed wide of the mark to many of those 100 miles away in Cameron country who knew Shale.
Described variously as "full of life", "hale and hearty" and "a man in a permanently good mood", it seemed impossible that he would react in such a way, they said.
"This has been a terrible shock for everybody who knew Christopher in West Oxfordshire and nationally and for our party members who knew him so well," said Barry Norton, Cameron's constituency agent, who gave an interview from the constituency office, in front of a portrait of Cameron.
"Here was a man full of life and energy. I spoke to him yesterday lunchtime and he spoke to me of some of the things he had in mind to do over the coming weeks. He said he was enjoying his Glastonbury weekend. Everything was very happy and positive in what he had to say to me," said Norton.
"It's just shocking – there are no words," said Martin Cornish, 54, the chairman of the Witney South branch of Woca and landlord of the New Inn in Witney, where Shale joined Cameron on election night in 2010.
"We're completely baffled by it. I'm really shocked and surprised. One of my customers said that someone from the Woca had died at Glastonbury. It could only have been Christopher Shales. He was very outgoing, very gregarious: a good talker and chatterer. He was a life-and-soul kind of guy and always enthusiastic. He's helped this association massively over the years – mainly with his enthusiasm and his ability to get people round the table."
Elsewhere in the Cotswold town, the few residents who had heard of Shale's death appeared puzzled.
"I know that someone from the Conservative association was found dead behind the Pyramid stage," said one. "I'm quite shocked."
From his passion for Glastonbury to his drive to reform his party's membership, in many ways Shale appeared to be an exemplary modern Conservative.
He apparently decided to become involved with the party originally because of his personal admiration for Cameron rather than from any ideological motivation.
A father of three, married to Nikki, 55, who runs a property company, Shale had worked in marketing and management consultancy and lived in a handsome house on a remote lane near the village of Over Worton in the rolling Oxfordshire countryside around Chipping Norton, which has become a weekend powerbase for the Conservatives.
His two sons, who were at Glastonbury with him, were due to return to the family home while his wife was to stay with his body in Somerset.
The family home is six miles from the Camerons' constituency cottage and a short drive from the homes of Rebekah Brooks, the chief executive of News International, Elisabeth Murdoch, a board director of News Corp, and Steve Hilton, Cameron's director of strategy in Downing Street.
Glastonbury had become a regular fixture in Shale's social diary and was a highlight of his year, one friend said.
He sometimes met up at the festival with Rupert Soames, the old-Etonian grandson of Winston Churchill, who had been a friend for around 20 years. Soames is chief executive of the power equipment company Aggreko, which provides power to the site.
"He [Shale] was a successful and well-connected businessman who got involved in politics because he liked David," one senior Conservative politician said.
"He was a sophisticated man and a local organiser, but you would see him at national events because he was so well-connected."
The politician knew him as "a man in a permanently good mood" and said Shale became a regular at national Conservative events.
He is said to have helped establish the party patrons club, a scheme to raise money for the Tories.
Previously, Shale was the chief executive of SGL Communications and was also a director of the Centre for Policy Studies between 2001 and 2005 and a sponsor of the eurosceptic thinktank OpenEurope.
"He was a very positive and enthusiastic man, full of ideas," Mike Howes, the president of the Chipping Norton branch of the association, said.
"He was only just appointed as chairman about six months ago and we were looking forward to stability. He was keen on promoting membership and being positive and he was very supportive of David [Cameron], which is what we all want."
Shale had been involved in a Conservative party project to help people in Rwanda, and made his fifth visit to the country this year.
"I have hundreds of happy moments from Rwanda," he wrote on the Umubano project's website. "It has always been such a mix of people, all ages and talents, learning from and laughing with our Rwandan partners – some of the most inspirational people I have ever met. I'd urge people to do whatever necessary to raise the money to visit ...".
"We are all very, very sad," Marion Dowding, Shale's deputy at Woca, said. "He was a lovely guy."
On the Conservative party's failure to attract new members
There is "no reason to join. Lots of reasons not to".
"Collectively we are not always an appealing proposition ... When we are together we are not always a group of people to whom many of our potential members are going to be magnetically drawn ... When we come together as a group we sometimes morph into something different, less attractive."
On the association's fundraising: "We have come across as graceless, voracious, crass, always on the take."
"We must look different – when we communicate, when we're together. We must sound different – in what we say, how we say it, the language we use, our tone of voice. We must behave differently – try to see ourselves as others see us."
Shale's plan for reviving the association: Events with "money-can't-buy appeal" such as "The PMQ DIY Lunch: Bring your own sandwiches to watch PMQs in a different fine country house in the constituency (by courtesy of a PPC member) every week; glass of wine, cup of coffee, informal discussion, yours for a fiver."
• This article was amended on 27 June 2011. The original said that Umubano was a place, and also quoted Christopher Shale seeming to suggest people visit it. This has been corrected.