Winning ticket for huge Powerball jackpot sold in Florida
Do you have the lucky ticket? A winner for the huge Powerball jackpot was sold at a supermarket in Zephyrhills, Fla., a Florida Lottery official confirmed to NBC News early Sunday.
The winning Powerball numbers drawn late Saturday were 10, 13, 14, 22, 52 with Powerball number 11.
Powerball's website said one winner was sold in Florida, and David Bishop of the Florida Lottery confirmed that it was sold at a Publix supermarket in Zephyrhills, a suburb of Tampa.
The jackpot of the 43-state lottery game surged ahead of the drawing and had been estimated at $600 million -- the second-largest pot in U.S. lottery history. Powerball officials later revised that to more than $590 million.
Still, that grand prize, accumulated after two months of drawings, surpassed the previous record Powerball payoff of $587.5 million, set in November 2012. That was split by two winners.
The largest jackpot in U.S. history stands at $656 million, won in the Mega Millions lottery of March 2012. That prize was split between winners in Maryland, Kansas and Illinois.
The store where the winning ticket was sold will receive an $85,000 bonus commission, according to Shelly Gerteisen, a spokeswoman for the Florida Lottery.
The chances of winning the big prize were low — 1 in 175.2 million — but it didn't stop hopeful Americans across the country from purchasing about 80 percent of all possible combinations, according to lottery officials.
In addition to the big prize at stake Saturday, tickets worth $2 million were sold in New York and South Carolina. In California, which joined the Powerball lottery in April and figures winnings by pari-mutuel, two tickets each worth $2.3 million were sold, according to the California State Lottery website.
The estimated cash value of Saturday's drawing, if it had hit $600 million and the winner chose to be paid in one lump sum, would have been roughly $377 million -- before taxes, of course.
Tiffany Satchell told NBCMiami.com that she knows exactly what she'd do if she won.
"Pay off all my bills," she said. "I really want a Range Rover."
NBC News' Hasani Gittens, Justin Kirschner and the Associated Press contributed to this report.
This story was originally published on