Gulzar, Bollywood’s favourite lyricist, wins Dadasaheb Phalke award
MUMBAI: Fifty years after he started his creative journey, Sampooran Singh Kalra , better known as Gulzar , is now a contented man, happy that he has been honoured for his entire body of work with a Dadasaheb Phalke award “It is very fulfilling as the award is not about just one film or a song. That is gratifying for any creative person and reassuring too,” said the 79-year-old about receiving the highest honour for cinema in India for 2013. He started work in a motor garage in Mumbai and went on to become Bollywood’s favourite lyricist-filmmaker. The journey has been an eventful one, with guidance from Bollywood seniors and successful collaborations with younger artists. “I had a number of gurus like Bimal Roy, S D Burman, Madan Mohan and Salil Chowdhury. I was lucky to have worked with them,” said Gulzar. Born in 1934 in Punjab, Gulzar got his first break in Roy’s ‘Bandini’ (1963) with the song ‘Mora Gora Ang Layle’. He went on to work with several composers to create evergreen hits like ‘Tere Bina Zindagi Se’, ‘Aanewala Pal Jaane Wala Hain’ and ‘Mera Kuchh Saamaan’. Soon, he started writing script, story, dialogue and also directed critically acclaimed films like ‘Aandhi’, ‘Mausam’, ‘Lekin’ and ‘Maachis’. On television, he created standout series like ‘Mirza Ghalib’ and ‘Tahreer Munshi Premchand ki’. Wife and actor Raakhee Gulzar, said he deserves the honour. “People have been calling to congratulate me and I am thanking them on his behalf. I am so happy today. Whether it is poetry, lyric writing or cinema, his work has a unique stamp,” she said. “He is one of the most prolific creative persons in the country. Apart from cinematography, he has done everything,” said filmmaker and theatre personality Salim Arif, who has adapted Gulzar’s works for the stage. Besides his huge volume of work, Gulzar has been involved in films right from scripting to editing and post-production. “This kind of commitment is rare,” said Arif. Rarer still is Gulzar’s ability to re-invent himself and write a peppy ‘Beedi Jalaile’ or ‘Kajra Re’ and work with a new generation of talents like Vishal Bharadwaj, Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra and A R Rahman with ease. While Gulzar maintains he is lucky to have got the opportunities, Arif said he was a ‘rock star’ for remaining connected with younger audiences. He has received several awards including many National awards and Filmfare awards, the Sahitya Akademi award, the Padma Bhushan as well as an Academy Award for best original song for ‘Jai Ho’ (shared with Rahman) in 2009.