ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Thailand will have its first female prime minister after the Red Shirt-backed opposition won landmark elections.
The main opposition, the Pheu Thai party led by Yingluck Shinawatra, won enough votes to govern outright but will join with smaller party, Chart Thai Pattana, to extend its majority to about 290 seats.
Ms Yingluck's party is backed by the Red Shirt protest movement, who still support her brother and former prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra who was ousted in a coup in 2006.
There are questions over whether the military, which helped engineer the 2006 coup, will accept the result, although the head of the army says it will.
Ms Yingluck, a 44-year-old business executive, says her key aim is to reconcile the country. An amnesty to clear those convicted of political crimes, including Thaksin, is among the party's policies.
"I'll do my best and will not disappoint you," she told supporters after receiving a call of congratulations from her billionaire brother, who was ousted in a 2006 coup and lives in Dubai to avoid jail for graft charges that he says were politically motivated.
"He told me that there is still much hard work ahead of us."
Initially, exit polls indicated a landslide victory but the margin tightened during official counting.
Nevertheless the former prime minister and Democrat leader, Abhisit Vejjajiva, conceded defeat.
With nearly all votes counted, Ms Yingluck's party won a projected 261 seats with prime minister Mr Abhisit's Democrat Party taking 162, according to the election commission.
"I would like to congratulate the Puea Thai Party for the right to form a government," Mr Abhisit said.
Exit polls by Bangkok's Suan Dusit University showed Puea Thai doing even better, winning 313 seats compared to just 152 for the Democrats, dismal enough to threaten Mr Abhisit's job as party leader.
Ms Yingluck's supporters were jubilant, erupting in roars and cheers as television broadcast the exit polls.
"Number one Yingluck", some shouted. "Prime minister Yingluck" screamed others, as party members slapped each other on the back.
"Yingluck has helped us and now Puea Thai can solve our problems and they'll solve the country's problems," said Saiksa Chankerd, a 40-year-old government worker.
The results were a rebuke of the traditional establishment of generals, old-money families and royal advisers in Bangkok who loathed Mr Thaksin and backed Mr Abhisit, an Oxford-trained economist who struggled to find a common touch.
"People wanted change and they got it," said Kongkiat Opaswongkarn, chief executive of Asia Plus Securities in Bangkok.
"It tells you that a majority of people still want most of the things that the ex-prime minister had done for the country in the past."
The size of Puea Thai's victory could usher in much-needed political stability after six years of sporadic unrest that featured the occupation of Bangkok's two airports, a blockade of parliament, an assassination attempt and protests last year that descended into chaotic clashes with the army.
"Chances of blocking Puea Thai in the near term are severely limited," said Roberto Herrera-Lim, South-East Asian analyst at political risk consultancy Eurasia Group.
"The instability everyone has been worried about now looks less likely. The military will have to be pragmatic now."
Mr Thaksin, a former telecommunications tycoon, scored landslide election wins in 2001 and 2005 and remains idolised by the poor as the first politician to address the needs of millions living beyond Bangkok's bright lights.
His sister electrified his supporters, ran a disciplined campaign, and promised Thaksin-style populist policies, including a big rise in the national minimum wage and free tablet PCs for nearly 1 million school children.
Mr Abhisit had warned of instability if Ms Yingluck won, blaming the red shirts for unrest last year in which 91 people, mostly civilians, were killed.
His backers want Thaksin to serve a two-year prison term. They dismiss Ms Yingluck as a simple proxy for her brother.
Throughout the six-week campaign, the two sides presented similar populist campaigns of subsidies for the poor, improved healthcare benefits and infrastructure investment including high-speed rail systems across the country - a style of policymaking known in Thailand as "Thaksinomics".
The clear majority should make it easier for the opposition to execute those promises but could also fan inflation if they pursue a plan to lift the minimum wage to 300 baht ($9) per day - about a 40 per cent increase.
The election is Thailand's 26th since it became a democracy in 1932, ending seven centuries of absolute monarchy. Since then, it has seen 18 military coups or coup attempts.