Doctors and nurses launch campaign for right to help terminally ill to end their lives
New group will challenge medical bodies such as the BMA that oppose any change in the law on assisted suicide
Leading doctors who endorse assisted dying for the terminally ill will this week launch an unprecedented campaign to change the law on the right to die.
Healthcare Professionals for Change, a group of doctors, nurses and allied health professionals, says it wants to challenge bodies such as the British Medical Association, which oppose any change in the law that would allow others to help terminally ill people to die.
The group is the first professional body of its kind to be set up with the explicit aim of changing the 1961 Suicide Act, which forbids such assistance.
The group will be chaired by Dr Ann McPherson, a GP and fellow of the Royal College of General Practitioners and of Green College, Oxford, who is dying of pancreatic cancer. "By taking a hostile approach to a change in the law on assisted dying, medical bodies such as the BMA and the Royal College of Physicians are failing to adequately reflect the views of all their members," she said. "Many of us believe dying patients should not have to suffer against their wishes at the end of life. Alongside access to good quality end-of-life care, we believe that terminally ill, mentally competent patients should be able to choose an assisted death, subject to safeguards."
This year's British Social Attitudes Survey found more than 80% of people support assisted dying. The issue has also become an important subject for the arts. Last year's BBC drama, A Short Stay in Switzerland, in which Julie Walters playeda retired English doctor with an incurable degenerative disease who decides to take her own life at the Dignitas clinic, was prime time viewing.
But virtually all of the major professional health bodies oppose any change in the law that would allow doctors and other medical experts to help another person to end their life.
The BMA was briefly neutral on the issue in 2005, but is now against any relaxation of the law. The Royal College of Anaesthetists, the Royal College of General Practitioners, and the Royal College of Physicians are all opposed.
"As a group we aim to represent the views of the many healthcare professionals who support a change in the law to allow the choice of safeguarded assisted dying, and we hope to challenge the positions of the medical bodies and colleges that we are members of," McPherson said. "Last year the Royal College of Nursing dropped its official opposition to a change in the law; the other royal colleges and the BMA should follow suit."
Sir Graeme Catto, a former chairman of the General Medical Council, who is not a member of the group but supports its views, will attend its launch at the King's Fund, the health thinktank, on 13 October. "Some of us think we should put our names forward and say we do believe in this, but we understand why others don't," he said. A retired renal specialist, Catto said his experiences with patients who were undergoing dialysis had helped to shape his views. "When we were helping those patients, we never really considered whether they had come to the end of the road and I think in retrospect we should have thought more about it from the patient's point of view." He added: "I think every doctor who has treated terminally ill patients knows there are patients who would benefit from end of life sooner rather than later."
The launch is expected to be attended by Hazel Biggs, professor of law at Southampton University, and Professor Raymond Tallis, a philosopher and former geriatrician, who will discuss ethics and outline why he has changed his mind on assisted dying .
Catto predicted there would be a change in the law one day. "It's not likely to happen very quickly because the legislators are all very nervous about it, but at some point society will insist on it."
The event is supported by Dignity in Dying, which campaigns for terminally ill adults to have the right to an assisted death. "This new group is an important development," said Sarah Wootton, its chief executive. "It highlights that healthcare professionals, like the public, share a range of views on this issue, and that when, for example, the BMA issues hostile briefings it is failing to represent a significant proportion of its own membership." She criticised the way the current law led to scores of Britons travelling to clinics such as the one in Switzerland run by Dignitas.
Dr Peter Saunders, director of the Care Not Killing alliance, which opposes assisted dying, said he was not surprised the new organisation had been formed. "There has always been a minority of doctors who have supported a change in the law," Saunders said. But he added that all of the professional bodies took the view that "when patients' needs are properly provided for, then requests for euthanasia and assisted suicide are extremely rare. "They believe any change in the law would put pressure on vulnerable people who did not wish to be a burden to their families."
• This article was amended on 7 October 2010. The original list of bodies opposed to any change in the law on physician-assisted suicide included the Royal Society of Medicine. This has been corrected.