ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Billionaire mining tycoon Clive Palmer has launched a bid to become the next prime minister, announcing he will stand for a Queensland seat in September's federal election.
The flamboyant businessman, who is also behind a plan to build a replica of the Titanic, floated his latest idea at a Brisbane news conference today.
He said his new United Australia Party would contest every seat across the country, but so far he is the only candidate.
Mr Palmer said he would stand in the Sunshine Coast seat of Fairfax, currently held by the LNP's Alex Somlyay.
"The reason I'm standing for federal parliament is because I'm standing to be the next prime minister of Australia," he said.
He said more candidates would be announced soon.
"In the coming weeks and the days ahead, you'll see major figures in Australian politics and in this nation's history, right across the country... make a courageous stand to get government back for the people," he said.
The billionaire said he was forming the political party because it was "time for Australia to claim back itself".
"I could go off and stay in Monaco, have a nice drink and forget about this country, but we've got more commitment to Australia, to your children, than anyone else," he said.
"I'm fed up with watching television and seeing Tony Abbott, who is no different than Julia Gillard, they're both of the same lot - and that's what you'll get.
"Don't look at these policy debates, they're all rubbish. They won't be implemented by anybody."
A former life member and generous donor to Queensland's Liberal National Party, Mr Palmer has outlined policy differences between his party and the LNP.
He told Lateline last night he would ban lobbyists from the party, scrap the carbon tax retrospectively and arrange for asylum seekers to fly to Australia to seek protection.
"I'm not interested in being involved in dreams, I'm interested in making change in this country and providing employment and a real future and a real aspiration for our people," he said.
"That's why I'm standing, because I think I can offer better service to the community than anyone else.
"I have no personal interest. I've made enough money in my life. I'm not seeking any enrichment or wealth for myself. I'm seeking it for the Australian people."
A major player in Australia's resources sector through his company Mineralogy, Mr Palmer is reported to be worth nearly $4 billion.
He says he would not distance himself from the business if he were to become an MP but would bring in stricter accountability measures to guard against any conflict of interest.
"There's no question of giving up who you are," he said.
"If you're a farmer, you don't stop being a farmer if you go into Parliament - you are who you are.
"The question is that you do nothing wrong, or with impropriety."
The one-time LNP stalwart quit the party in November after his criticism of Queensland's LNP government prompted moves to expel him.
But before the feud erupted, Mr Palmer had been a frequent donor to the Coalition.
The latest returns from the Australian Electoral Commission for the financial year 2011-12 show Mineralogy gave at least $200,000 to the Coalition parties at federal and state level.
The previous year his political donations topped nearly $1 million.
The current LNP Member for Fairfax, Alex Somlyay, who is retiring at the next election, has welcomed Mr Palmer's announcement "in the spirit of competition".
But he says the LNP's candidate, businessman Ted O'Brien, has been "very well accepted" as his replacement in the seat.
Mr O'Brien says he is not worried about his new rival.
"I think locally here in Fairfax on the Sunshine Coast it doesn't matter if you're Clive Palmer or Homer Simpson or anyone else, this election is going to be about whether or not people want to see a change in the federal government."
Opposition Leader Tony Abbott has dismissed Mr Palmer's bid to run the country as frivolous.
"I suspect that if there's another party on the fringe it might compete with Mr [Bob] Katter's party," he said.
"I'm very, very confident that the people of Australia are very savvy here.
"They are going to vote for the people who are serious."
Federal MP Bob Katter, whose Katter's Australian Party will also stand at the federal election, said Mr Palmer's plans reflected the changing nature of the political landscape.
"There is a universal disgust and contempt for the mainstream parties," he said.
"I mean, every election now there is 20 or 30 per cent out there up for grabs.
"Australians are waking up to the fact that they don't have to have a two-party system and it has been diabolical for Australia."
But Tasmanian Liberal Party elder and former Senate president Paul Calvert said be believed the appeal of Mr Palmer and Mr Katter's parties would mainly be limited to "rednecks" in Queensland.
"You know what North Queensland's like. They're a little different. Rednecks, I think they're called up there," he said.
"They seem to be one-issue or two-issue parties, and I think at the end of the day we've got a large percentage of voters who've already made their minds up, a large percentage who will look at the overall policies rather than one or two things.
"I think Clive Palmer's party will be a bit like his Titanic he was going to build. It will just disappear."
Mr Palmer has regularly made headlines with his forays into political issues.
Last year he threatened to launch a legal challenge to the carbon tax legislation and accused the US Central Intelligence Agency of funding a Greens campaign against the Australian coal industry, an accusation the CIA refuted as "false".
Mr Palmer has also been a frequent target of Treasurer Wayne Swan, who has accused him, and other wealthy mining magnates Andrew Forrest and Gina Rinehart, of threatening Australia's democracy.
The Federal Government has largely been dismissive of Mr Palmer's announcement.
"Obviously only a very few people have multiple billions of dollars to start a new party from scratch," cabinet minister Bill Shorten said.
"He was unsuccessful in convincing the Liberal Party to pick him as a Liberal candidate so clearly he's taken his bat and ball and decided to run his own party."