Robocalls a factor in Liberals' federal election defeat, says Rae
TORONTO — Voter suppression tactics, including a pattern of harassing phone calls, were a factor in the Liberal party’s defeat in the last election, says interim leader Bob Rae.
“I have no doubt at all that it contributed to the defeat of a number of candidates,” he said Saturday at a news conference in Toronto.
Rae believes the automated and non-automated calls were not the actions of one person, but a concerted effort by a group of individuals targeting Liberal candidates.
“I think when you get as many ridings coming forward as we’ve seen now, you can’t just say it’s an isolated incident or an isolated case,” he said, flanked by supporters, including party president Mike Crawley and Markham-Unionville, Ont., MP John McCallum.
“This is not an isolated problem. It’s becoming a very disturbing pattern which we can see right across the country, not just in a few ridings.”
On Friday, Postmedia News and the Ottawa Citizen reported evidence of a “systematic voter-suppression campaign” against Liberals in tight ridings during last May’s federal election.
This campaign consisted of harassing phone calls targeting Liberal voters in 14 ridings — the majority of which were in southern Ontario.
Liberal supporters say the repeated calls usually came during dinner, late at night or early in the morning from people claiming to represent the local Liberal candidate.
Calls also were placed to voters with Jewish-sounding names during the Saturday Sabbath and in one riding with a South Asian candidate, voters received phone calls from someone imitating a Pakistani accent.
Those who received the calls say they got them repeatedly and that the person on the other line spoke to them rudely.
Rae says at least 27 ridings have reported receiving complaints about these calls.
He urged anyone who may have pertinent information — including Prime Minster Stephen Harper — to come forward about these “dirty tricks” as the RCMP and Elections Canada continue with their probe into these reports.
Under the Elections Act, it is illegal to tell voters to go to a wrong or non-existent polling station.
“It just isn’t good enough for the Conservatives to say they didn’t know anything about it,” said Rae. “That defies all credibility. The notion that one person would be responsible for these robocalls.”
In the meantime, Rae says the party is considering calling for a number of byelections or even pursing legal action.
“Dirty tricks are not permissible at anytime. They are not permissible in election campaigns,” he said.
On Friday, Rae sent a letter to House of Commons Speaker Andrew Scheer, asking him to allow an emergency debate on the matter when Parliament resumes Monday.
But interim federal NDP leader Nycole Turmel says approval for such a debate is unlikely because it is not the responsibility of the federal government to probe these kinds of situations.
Instead, she urged for a thorough investigation by the RCMP and Elections Canada.
“It is really sad for the election process,” said Turmel in Toronto. “This doesn’t help people who don’t vote, to come back and believe in the election process.”
On Saturday, Conservative MP Dean Del Mastro said his party also was on the receiving end of such phone calls.
“My own campaign in Peterborough (Ont.) was the victim of dirty tricks phone calls, with Conservative supporters harassed by late-night abusive calls, and our party condemns these acts,” he said in a release.
Earlier this week, a spokeswoman for the Conservatives distanced the Tories from the scandal, saying that whoever initiated it did so alone.
On Friday, a young Conservative staffer in Guelph, Ont., reportedly resigned amid the growing scandal.
It’s unclear what role, if any, Micheal Sona, 23, may have played in this robocall ordeal.
With files from Stephen Maher and Jason Fekete, Postmedia News, and Glen McGregor, Ottawa Citizen