Akhilesh’s laptop bonanza for 8,000 students
Akhilesh Yadav GHAZIABAD: In a function here on Monday, UP chief minister Akhilesh Yadav distributed laptops to about 8,000 students from Ghaziabad and Noida in the presence of senior party leaders. The students belonged to the first batch shortlisted in the two districts—including 5,598 students from 10 schools in Ghaziabad and 2,476 students from five schools in Gautam Budh Nagar—for receiving free laptops as promised by the party.
Akhilesh was accompanied by his uncle and senior Samajwadi Party leader Ramgopal Yadav, UP cabinet minister Azam Khan , minister of prisons Rajendra Choudhary, besides a host of senior ministers and party functionaries. The function lasted nearly for an hour and a half. After addressing the gathering, the CM stepped from the dais to meet students who had come to collect their laptops early in the morning. Akhilesh interacted with the public for at least 20 minutes. The students were upbeat after the young CM chatted with them. There was chaos around the dais as Akhilesh walked around flanked by the security personnel while the public and journalists jostled to get a glimpse of him. Senior SP leaders’ criticism of the former BSP regime, led by Mayawati, jarred with the mismanagement at the venue. “While the BSP used to spend on statues, we are spending on developmental schemes,” said Akhilesh. The students had been brought in more than 150 buses. A number of students fainted due to the humidity. The students were taken to a makeshift hospital near the venue. “We were asked to be on our chairs by 9am. There were no proper arrangements for water or refreshments,” said Ankita, a student. The CM’s visit was marred by protests over the massacre of seven members of a Ghaziabad family. When asked about the rising crime, he said police have done a better job than expected in many cases. He parried questions on shortage of water and electricity in NCR . Arterial roads were choked between 9am and 10am after the CM’s retinue passed through them. Agitations were first reported early in the morning from near Nai Basti, where the murders took place. A number of protesters reached the Kavi Nagar residential area, barely 2km from the venue. Police deployed at the venue kept off the agitators. The function passed off without any law-and-order trouble. A number of students were seen complaining to district administration officials about being left out despite being eligible for the laptops Most of the 8,000-odd college students of Noida and Ghaziabad were happy to receive laptops. They, however, felt the laptops would have had more utility if they were accompanied by a free internet connection. The laptops, costing Rs 19,058 each, were distributed along with carry bags. Most of the students in the first batch were girls. Anjali Raghav, a first-year BCom student, said students were much more fascinated with the device that would help them in their studies than the politics around it.