Law enforcement coalition calls on Congress to bolster background checks
CHICAGO — With President Obama weighing whether to take executive action to expand the nation's gun laws, several high-profile law enforcement officials on Monday called on federal lawmakers to strengthen background checks on gun purchases.
Leaders of nine national law enforcement groups made the call at the annual International Association of Chiefs of Police conference the day before hundreds of police chiefs and sheriffs are to hear from President Obama, who has vowed to be more forceful in his push to bolster U.S. gun laws.
The coalition called on Congress to specifically expand background checks to cover all gun purchases. It also asked Congress to strengthen the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) to ensure that all states and federal agencies include disqualifying records in the system.
The coalition also called for increasing the current time that the FBI has to complete a background check before a sale is automatically completed.
Currently, background checks only cover gun purchases made through licensed gun deals, not private sales or purchases made at a gun show.
And under federal law, if there’s a delay in obtaining information from NICS, a gun can be legally transferred after three days. Last year, federal authorities counted more than 2,500 instances when someone who should have been prevented from purchasing a weapon was able to obtain one because three days had passed without the check being completed.
“The common denominator from Chicago to Charlotte is that guns are getting in the hands of the wrong people and lives are being erased, all because easy access to guns by people intent on doing harm to themselves or others,” said Chicago Police Superintendent Garry McCarthy.
McCarthy has seen homicides rise 19% and shooting incidents rise by 18% in the Windy City so far in 2015 even as police have made 25% more gun-related arrests in the city so this year.
More than 466,000 people were victims of crimes involving guns in the USA last year, up 40% from the prior year, according to the Bureau of Justice Statistics. Mass shootings, such as this month’s rampage at an Oregon community college that left 10 dead and nine others wounded, are also occurring more frequently.
Mass shootings were up 56% in 2014 from the previous year, according to an FBI report published in September.
Obama is expected to talk to the gathering of chiefs on Tuesday in Chicago about the need for tougher gun laws and how police can work more effectively with their communities to combat violence. Attorney General Loretta Lynch is also expected to address the police chiefs’ conference.
The president made a failed attempt at pushing tougher gun legislation in the aftermath of the 2012 massacre at Newtown, Conn., in which 20 children and six adult staff members were killed.  At the time, the White House backed a series of gun law reforms including requiring criminal background checks for all gun sales, reinstating a ban on assault weapons that was in place from 1994 to 2004, and limiting ammunition magazines to 10 rounds.
While the coalition’s push is more limited than the overhaul the White House pressed for unsuccessfully in 2012, leaders of the law enforcement organizations had few answers to why they believed that a push for Congressional action on background checks could be more successful than it was after the Sandy Hook tragedy.
Baltimore County Police chief Jim Johnson suggested that a more narrow campaign on background checks could have broader support.
“One thing that Americans want and what we want as public safety leadership is a national background check,” Johnson said.
The coalition includes the Commission on the Accreditation of Law Enforcement Agencies, Hispanic American Police Command Officers Association, International Association of Campus Law Enforcement Administrators, International Association of Chiefs of Police, Major Cities Chiefs Association, National Association of Women Law Enforcement Executives, National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives, Police Executive Research Forum, and Police Foundation.
After this month’s tragedy at Umpqua Community College in Oregon, the president suggested that he would “politicize” the push for tougher gun legislation during his remaining time in office.
"What is also routine is that somebody, somewhere will comment and say 'Obama politicized this issue,'" Obama said in remarks following the Oregon shooting. “Well, this is something we should politicize. It is relevant to our common life together, to the body politic."
Since the Oregon shootings, the White House has been studying what executive action the president might be able to take to strengthen the nation’s gun laws.
Johnson, the Baltimore County chief, said the police chiefs would embrace such a move.
“We support any initiative that includes a national background check,” Johnson said.