Republicans rally to Mitt Romney - as it happened
8pm: They think it's all over – and it is now, as five states vote tonight for the Republican presidential nominee, and Mitt Romney is expected to win all five and assume the mantle of GOP candidate.
New York, Pennsylvania, Connecticut and Rhode Island all vote tonight – and one clear result that we can expect is that Barack Obama will official seal the Democratic nomination, a minor bureaucratic hurdle but a result nonetheless.
On the Republican side, all tension left tonight's contests once Rick Santorum – who may have made a real fight of it in his home state of Pennsylvania – dropped out. The only tension of the night remains the size of Romney's victories, and the fate of Newt Gingrich, who is likely to "reassess" his campaign if he fails to even win tiny Delaware, the fifth state to vote tonight.
At 9pm Romney is to speak in New Hampshire, in a speech clearly aimed at the general election in November. We'll be covering all this right here, so stay tuned.
8.10pm: So polls have closed everywhere as of now – other than New York, where they close at 9pm – and it's a sign of the excitement surrounding tonight's primaries that precisely zero of the cable news networks are covering the vote counts tonight.
8.16pm: And the first result of the night is in – and the AP calls Connecticut for Mitt Romney. That didn't take long.
Spooky fact: with 13% of the vote in, Mitt Romney has 66.6% of the vote in Connecticut. Bad omen?
8.23pm: And now the AP awards the Rhode Island primary to Ron Paul! Just kidding. It's Mitt Romney. Sorry.
8.29pm: The only sliver of tension tonight – apart from whether or not Newt Gingrich is going to not only smell the coffee but drink it as well – is in Delaware, where Gingrich has spent a lot of time campaigning. It's close to his home, so he didn't have to travel far or spend any money.
But it hasn't appeared to work, so far. With 7% of the vote in, Mitt Romney is ahead by 52% to 33% for Gingrich.
8.36pm: So much for Delaware: NBC News is calling it for Mitt Romney. Taxi for Mr Gingrich.
And to think these same Republican voters gave us Christine O'Donnell two years ago. Not so crazy now, huh? Then again, even Christine O'D herself endorsed Romney.
8.40pm: Now AP also calls Delaware for Mitt Romney, so it's not even close.
And indeed, the latest tallies from Delaware – with 69% reporting – have Romney leading Gingrich by 57% to 26%.
That's it, Newt's done, right? Come on man, pull the plug.
8.41pm: How low key tonight's results are: even C-Span isn't covering it. On C-Span 3, Senator Bill Nelson is telling someone with incredulity that one of his young staff members doesn't even watch TV at all! Kids today, eh Bill?
8.43pm: Here we go: Newt Gingrich is to speak in 10 minutes. So we'll soon know.
8.49pm: Newt Gingrich speaks! And after exactly one minute, CNN cuts away from him. Good job.
8.52pm: Never mind Newt, here's Mitt Romney, taking the stage a little early, possibly just to step on Gingrich in one final humiliation.
Romney is introduced by his wife, Ann, before a podium sign reading: "A better America begins tonight".
8.54pm: "Everywhere I go, Americans are tired of being tired, and many of those who are fortunate enough to have a job are working harder for less," Mitt Romney begins his speech. He then reels off a list of unnamed people – "the grandparents who can't afford to the gas to visit their grandparents" – who are worse off. But then:
8.56pm: Romney says he wants to meet every American personally "and learn about your families". That could take a while. And he wants to them about himself. "I'll probably bore you with stories about my kids and grandkids," says Mitt.
More to the point, Romney says:
8.58pm: "I know how to lead us out of a stagnant Obama economy and into a job-creating recovery," Romney declares:
No, the crowds responds. Now there's a surprise.
"It's still about the economy – and we're not stupid," says Mitt.
9pm: Meanwhile, as Romney speaks, NBC News declares Romney the winner of the Pennsylvania primary as well. So that's going to be five from five tonight, with just New York to come.
Meanwhile, Newt Gingrich is still speaking, and believe it or not vowing to "go all the way to Tampa," for the convention.
9.05pm: AP awards Pennsylvania to Mitt Romney as well.
Romney is making a big play about "fairness" in this speech, although more correctly it's "unfairness" he's complaining about:
9.06pm: Mitt Romney is getting into the "shining city on the hill" part of his speech:
9.07pm: Overall, this is a pretty bland speech from Mitt Romney, almost like one of those one-size-fits-all US politician speech. Here's his ringing peroration, for example:
That's pretty much what every presidential candidate ever has said, apart from Jimmy Carter and his "We are all cursed by an angry god" speech.
9.09pm: Polls have now closed in New York state, no news yet.
According to Fox News, Mitt Romney's speech was utterly fabulous, one that made Cicero sound like a stuttering fool. Basically, the election is over and we are just hanging around until the votes are counted on 6 November.
9.12pm: And what about Newt Gingrich? He kept flapping his jaws for some time. But he did say: "Over the next few days, we are going to look realistically at where we're at."
What's that old saying about doing something or getting off the pot?
9.22pm: Meanwhile, Rick Santorum is appearing with his wife Karen on CNN, to be lightly chatted with by Piers Morgan, the former journalist.
9.30pm: In the loser's circle, Newt Gingrich has cancelled the press conference he was to have held, although he somehow manages to tell some journalists that he won't make a decision "before Sunday". As if we care.
9.35pm: And there we have it: CBS News now projects that the New York state Republican primary will be won by Mitt Romney. That's the full five states tonight going for Mitt, and all by big margins.
9.36pm: Some actual news – or lack of it – out of Rick Santorum's back massage with Piers Morgan tonight, when Santorum refuses to endorse Mitt Romney. Although he does say that he's meeting with Romney's staff tomorrow. So, ok.
9.40pm: Just in case Newt Gingrich needs any help in making his decision: he is currently being beaten by Ron Paul in Connecticut, Rhode Island and New York. And in Pennsylvania – the state where Newt was actually born 700 years ago – Gingrich is running fourth out of four, below both Paul and Rick Santorum, who isn't even in the running any more.
Even in Delaware Newt came second and only trailed Romney by... hmm ... 30 percentage points. Oh if only he'd had a couple more years.
9.47pm: The full text of Mitt Romney's totally awesome speech is online here. Memorise it now and surprise your co-workers tomorrow by reciting it at lunch break.
9.52pm: The New York Times has its take on Romney's victory lap tonight, saying that he "laid out a succinct argument for his economic leadership and urged Americans to consider whether they are better off now than when Mr Obama took office three years ago".
But the question remains about the lack of enthusiasm for Romney among Republicans:
10pm: Oh yeah and AP predicts that Barack Obama wins the Democratic nomination as of tonight, taking enough delegates. So there's that.
10.04pm: My Guardian colleague Ewen MacAskill is working on his report on tonight's events, but he has these thoughts on Mitt Romney's speech:
10.15pm: Say what you like about Michele Bachmann – actually don't, it would take too long and probably get shouty – she has a fantastic political antennae:
Talk about going out on a limb. Or going out on a limp.
10.20pm: Exciting news – if you're living in Pennsylvania – is that two centrist Democratic members of Congress have lost their primaries. Tim Holden and Jason Altmire have both gone down in flames.
Coincidentally (or not), both Holden and Altmire voted against Obama's healthcare reforms back in the day. Then came redistricting, and now they won't be voting against anything any more.
10.32pm: AP says that in Pennsylvania, Tom Smith has won the Republican nomination to challenge the Democratic party's Bob Casey for the US Senate seat he currently occupies.
Smith is a coal magnate, which has a pleasantly 19th century ring to it.
10.51pm: Mitt Romney "finally declared the Republican presidential race over Tuesday night after sweeping victories in Pennsylvania, New York, Delaware, Connecticut and Rhode Island," writes the Guardian's Ewen MacAskill:
11.10pm: Goodness me, Ron Paul got 24% of the vote in plucky little Rhode Island's primary. That is only 3,500 actual live votes, though. Newt Gingrich got 6%.
11.30pm: To end our coverage, here's a summary of the night's events.
• Mitt Romney convincingly swept the board of the five states holding primaries on Tuesday, winning more than 55% of the Republican vote in each of New York, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Delaware and Rhode Island and cementing his place as the GOP's presidential nominee
• Turning his attention to the coming presidential campaign, Romney told supporters in New Hampshire: "I have a simple message: Hold on a little longer. A better America begins tonight," and foreshadowed a campaign theme of "fairness"
• Newt Gingrich failed in his long-shot bid to win Delaware's primary but pulled back from ending his presidential campaign, although he offered clear hints that he will probably exit the contest early next week
• Barack Obama easily won the remaining delegates he needed to officially retain the Democratic nomination