Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's election statement
The new challenges facing our economy will require new ways The of thinking, new ways of acting, new ways of planning. One thing I know for certain, the old politics of the past just won't work for the future. Wall to wall negativity doesn't create a single job. Negative personal politics doesn't build a single school. The old politics of division doesn't build a single hospital.
Three-word slogans don't solve complex problems, they never have and they never will. Australia needs a new way of dealing with the new challenges we face in the future. At this election, the Australian people will decide who they trust best to navigate the way through. So that we can have our absolute best shot at maintaining our living standards, and our prosperity and our security. But also on top of that, unlocking the potential which lies in each individual member of the great Australian family, so that we become the best we possibly can. For me, all that was made possible some 30 or so years ago, when reforms by an earlier Labor Government made it possible for a kid from the Queensland country, neither of whose parents went much beyond primary school, to go off to university and chart his own future and end up as PM of the country.
Elections are about judgements of our record, just as they are about our plans for the future. In the years [we have] been in office we have helped keep our economy strong, while economies around the world have lost tens of millions of jobs, businesses in Australia have added just under one million jobs over the last five and a half years. While economies around the world have tumbled into recession, we in this country Australia, acting with business, have kept the economy out of recession, almost uniquely across the developed countries of the world, and while others continue to make false claims that somehow this country is in a debt and deficit crisis, they can never answer this simple question – if that is the case, why does Australia, among only eight countries in the world, continue to have a triple A credit rating and a stable outlook?
Nor can they answer why the Australian government debt per head of population is one of the lowest across all the developed countries in the world. It just doesn't add up. It is a false claim and should be named and nailed as such through this campaign. Of course, the business of government is more than managing the economy, although that, for me, is fundamental. The economy must be strong in order to do everything else. We have also kept our economy strong through a series of carefully costed policies. During the most difficult of global economic circumstances. This has required hard decisions, like the ones you saw announced last week and the government's economic statement released by the Treasurer and the finance minister.
I believe it is far better we level with the Australian people about the tough choices we have made, rather than pretend you can somehow wave a magic wand and create $70 billion out of nowhere. I have already said we have made our mistakes in the past, that is true. All governments do. Even though most tend not to admit it however. The key is to learn from the experience. I said before that elections are both about our record and about our plans for the future.