Kosovo elections: PM wins first post-independence vote
"This is a vote for a European Kosovo," Mr Thaci said. "It is a referendum for good governance."
According to the exit poll, conducted by Kosovo-based Gani Bobi Center, Mr Thaci won 31 per cent of the vote, with former coalition partners Democratic League of Kosovo trailing at 25 per cent. If the results are confirmed it means Mr Thaci will have the upper hand in forming a government. Official results are expected on Monday.
A newcomer to Kosovo's politics, former student leader Albin Kurti, won 17 per cent of the vote, according to the poll, and former rebel leader Ramush Haradinaj's Alliance for the Future of Kosovo won 12 per cent.
Mr Kurti advocates Kosovo's unification with Albania and opposes any talks with Serbia. Such talks are a condition for Serbia and Kosovo to move closer to membership in the European Union.
The vote was held amid hopes by majority ethnic Albanians to improve Kosovo's struggling economy, as well as a minority Serb vote that has highlighted the divisions between the ethnic communities. Most Serbs broke with tradition and came out to vote in areas surrounded by ethnic Albanians. But Serbs in Kosovo's north - where they form a majority - shunned the vote after a series of violent attacks aimed at intimidating potential voters.
Officials said polling stations in Kosovo's north closed three hours ahead of time for security reasons.
Serbia called for Kosovo's Serb minority to boycott the vote to protest the province's declaration of independence, which Serbia does not recognize as valid. The call deepened fears that Kosovo could split into a Serb north and an ethnic Albanian south, something that would run counter to decades of efforts by the West to calm ethnic tensions in the region.
The boycott is likely to weaken Pristina's claim over the territory in upcoming EU-brokered talks with Serbia. The region is patrolled by NATO peacekeepers and EU police, but is run as a fiefdom by local Serb leaders picked by Belgrade, the Serbian capital.
Some 1.6 million voters were eligible to vote and 29 political parties, coalitions and citizens' initiatives were seeking to enter Kosovo's 120-seat parliament. Ten of the seats were reserved for minority Serbs.