ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Tasmanian Premier David Bartlett has confirmed he will stand down as the state's leader, citing family reasons.
Mr Bartlett has used the social networking site Facebook to confirm he is resigning as premier.
He has also backed Deputy Premier Lara Giddings as his successor.
Mr Bartlett fronted the media in the backyard of his family home in Hobart this afternoon.
It was a fitting place for the Premier to announce his decision to step down and spend more time with his young children.
With wife Larissa by his side, Mr Bartlett said the demands of politics were incompatible with being a good father.
Mr Bartlett says the demands of the job clash with the needs of his young son and daughter.
"We've come to a point in our lives where we need a bit more time for each other and our family," he said.
He says it has been the hardest decision of his political career but it is time for his seven-year-old son and five-year-old daughter to come first.
Mr Bartlett says Ms Giddings would be an outstanding premier and has his full support.
The ABC understands Ms Giddings also has widespread support within Labor.
If elected by the party Ms Giddings would become Tasmania's first female premier.
Ms Giddings has requested Mr Bartlett remain in State Cabinet and he has agreed to fill any role she chooses for him, but he will not recontest the 2014 state election.
It is understood that former deputy Bryan Green is also among the potential candidates.
Mr Bartlett steps down from his position after two years as the state's leader.
His popularity as premier hit an all-time low in polls last year, following his deal with the Greens to secure a State Labor Government.
The positions of premier and deputy premier's will be officially decided at a meeting of caucus tomorrow.
Mr Bartlett, 43, was elected to the seat of Denison in 2004 on a recount after the late premier Jim Bacon retired due to ill health.
Mr Bartlett had previously worked in education, health, and information technology before moving into the public sector under Paul Lennon and the then treasurer David Crean.
Following his re-election in March 2006, Mr Bartlett's career progressed quickly, first as education minister, then his appointment as deputy premier in April 2008.
The next month he became Premier, after the resignation of Mr Lennon.
But it has been a turbulent two years at the top.
His first six months saw a revolving door of ministers, including one MP's suicide attempt.
There was also a stoush with the Director of Public Prosecutions and a police commissioner facing criminal charges.
Mr Bartlett's wavering "line in the sand" over further assistance to Gunns for the planned pulp mill drew flack, fuelling the perception of a back-flipping premier.
The 10 Tasmania Tomorrow education reforms were overturned after strong resistance and a proposed power price cap was found to be unaffordable.
Mr Bartlett's overseen the rollout of the National Broadband Network in Tasmania and fuelled a push for the island state to become the "food bowl" of the nation.
The 2010 Tasmanian election delivered a hung parliament and voters were forced to wait three weeks to find out who would be running the state.
For the premier, forming a minority Government with the Greens was his biggest challenge of 2010.
"I think the alternative would have been political chaos and parliamentary chaos, and that would be good for no-one," Mr Bartlett said late last year.
"It had better work because with Tasmania facing hung parliaments and minority governments for the next decade or two as a regular part of our political landscape, we must find ways to make this work."