ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Thousands of protesters have rampaged in Haitian towns, torching buildings in armed clashes that left four dead, after election results triggered bitter accusations of vote-rigging, witnesses said.
Supporters of popular singer Michel Martelly took to the streets after Tuesday night's results showed he had been narrowly beaten into third place in the race for the presidency of the impoverished Caribbean nation.
Instead, president Rene Preval's handpicked protege Jude Celestin defied all predictions to snap up second place and a coveted slot in January's run-off, in which he will battle a former first lady for the nation's top job.
Mr Preval called for calm in the nation, still struggling to rebuild after January's devastating earthquake, and which has a bloody history of political upheaval and dictatorships.
"Demonstrate, that is your right. But don't attack public buildings, businesses or private property," Mr Preval said on Haiti's national radio, after the headquarters of his ruling INITE (UNITY) party were set ablaze Wednesday.
"You are giving Haiti a bad image. Conflicts are not resolved by setting things on fire and breaking things. Pull yourselves together Haitians."
Demonstrations, which had rumbled through the night, turned violent in several of major cities as well as the capital Port-au-Prince.
Three young protesters were shot dead in clashes in the southern town of Cayes, some 200 kilometres south of the capital, former senator Gabriel Fortune said.
"One of the youths was shot in front of the election offices by Senegalese UN troops and two others were killed at the entrance to the town, where a police station was ransacked and the police had their guns stolen," he added.
"Ninety per cent of the public buildings in the town have been set on fire, and a bank and private homes have been attacked by young people," he added.
A school and a radio station belonging to a candidate close to the ruling party were also targeted, he said.
A fourth person was killed in armed clashes in the second city of Cap Haitien, local media sources said.
The outbreak of violence caused officials to close the country's airports as several major airlines cancelled their flights to and from Haiti.
Mr Martelly has until December 20 to formally lodge a complaint with the electoral commission and the US embassy in Port-au-Prince has voiced concern at the "inconsistent" results.
The singer, known as "Sweet Micky," was pushed into third place by fewer than 7,000 votes by Mr Celestin, who will now run for the presidency on January 16 against former first lady Mirlande Manigat, officials said.
The results announced in a packed Port-au-Prince restaurant credited Ms Manigat with 31 percent of the vote, Mr Celestin with 22 per cent, and Mr Martelly with 21.84 per cent.
"The people came out to vote for Martelly because Manigat and Celestin are not going to sort anything out. Martelly was ahead and they have stolen the elections," one masked youth told AFP.
"We will destroy the country until Martelly is made president," he warned.
Political turmoil only compounds Haiti's misery. Much of the capital still lies in ruins since the January 12 earthquake that killed 250,000 people and left 1.3 million homeless, now living in precarious tent cities.