Ireland's Green party considers whether to stay in government
Coalition partner holds meeting after Brian Cowen steps down as leader of ruling Fianna Fáil party
Ireland's junior coalition partner, the Green party, is meeting today to decide if it will remain in government.
The discussions follow Brian Cowen's decision on Saturday to step down as the leader of the ruling Fianna Fáil party but to remain as prime minister until the general election on 11 March.
If the Greens – who currently have six members sitting in the Dáil – pull out of the administration, it would precipitate an earlier election, probably in February. The decision will be made public later this afternoon.
The Greens had pledged to help push the finance bill though the Irish parliament before the election. The legislation contains the austerity measures from the December budget.
The government in Dublin is concerned that if the finance bill is not passed, international bond markets will panic, fearing Ireland is reneging on its commitment to the IMF and Europe that it intends to drive down its national deficit. This in turn could trigger another global crisis of confidence in the Irish economy.
Meanwhile, Ireland's finance minister today launched his bid to lead Fianna Fáil into the election.
Brian Lenihan admitted that his party had made mistakes in handling the Republic's economy.
At a lunchtime press conference in Dublin, Lenihan, who has been battling with pancreatic cancer, said he was up to the physical challenge of being party leader. He said he had received assurances from his doctors in relation to his health.
Lenihan is one of four senior Fianna Fáil politicians who have entered the leadership race after Cowen's dramatic decision yesterday to step down.
Mary Hanafin, the minister for tourism, also launched her leadership bid in Dublin today.
"I would love to lead a party that was renewed, that was new, to have members who felt very proud to admit that they were members of Fianna Fáil," she said.
Asked if Fianna Fáil was ready for a female leader, she said she was prepared to lead the party if it accepted her.
"This is a party, this is a country, that is divided evenly 50:50 male-female. We should never have a situation where the largest political party in the country is presenting a team of four men to contest the leadership."
The third candidate expected to enter the contest is Eamon O'Cuiv, the minister for social protection and grandson of Eamon de Valera.
The bookies' favourite, however, remains the recently resigned foreign minister, Micheál Martin.