ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Burma has been placed under a 90-day state of emergency after holding its first election in 20 years.
Emergency rule to prevent political gatherings has been in place for three months in the lead-up to the poll.
The state of emergency prevents further political gatherings and stops soldiers from leaving the military for three months.
It is part of a campaign by Burma's junta-turned-political party to limit fallout from yesterday's election, which was held under strict controls.
Official results will take days but there is no question the main military-backed party will win the election, which has been widely condemned as a sham.
An opposition call for an election boycott seems to have had an impact, with some reports of voter turnout as low as 35 per cent in some areas.
Yet ballot boxes were somehow half full only a few hours into the poll and some of those who did turn up were threatened if they voted against the main junta-backed party.
Soe Aung is a Burmese activist exiled in Thailand, one of millions who have fled the country due to political repression and abject poverty under a brutal regime.
He fears the mere holding of the flawed election will make the situation in Burma worse because the military regime will claim it allowed a democratic process.
"There are people being threatened. If they are not going to vote they will lose their citizenship," he said.
"The military regime can say that we had an election and we have elected parliamentarians in the parliament."
Most of the junta's leaders have resigned from the army to create a so-called civilian government.
But the ruling junta is the only party standing in all seats and one-quarter of the parliament is reserved for the military.
The junta also banned Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi's opposition party and some ethnic groups were barred from voting.
More than 2,000 political prisoners remain in jail.
The British ambassador to Burma, Andy Heyn, admits international lobbying for a fair poll was a complete failure.
"What we have sadly is a process which has been neither free, fair nor inclusive," he said.
US secretary of state Hillary Clinton has once again raised the prospect of an international human rights probe into the junta.
Britain says the election would "mean the return to power of a brutal regime".
However flawed, Burma's long-suffering population will soon have the closest thing to civilian government in almost 50 years.
The hope is the few elected, non-junta parliamentarians can achieve change from the inside and with that there may be a new and tougher approach from the international community.
Australia has been waiting to see if the election would achieve change before revisiting the idea of a commission into the behaviour of Burma's junta, which has no tolerance of free speech and deals violently with ethnic division.
Benjamin Zawacki from Amnesty International says now is the time to strengthen the stance.
"We believe there is enough evidence at the moment to prove or at least to strongly suggest there are war crimes and crimes against humanity taking place," he said.
"If a commission were able to officially... look into these things then it could eventually lead to accountability on some level."