Hong Kong pro-democracy protesters in fresh stand-off with police
Hundreds of Hong Kong pro-democracy protesters were locked in a standoff with police on Sunday who warned they would crack down on a mass sit-in outside government headquarters.
Students and activists have been camped outside the government complex all weekend. Students started the rally but by early Sunday leaders of the broader Occupy Central civil movement said they were joining them to kickstart a long-threatened mass sit-in.
Demonstrators barricaded themselves inside the protest zone using metal crowd control barriers originally brought in by authorities. They donned protective gear in case police use pepper spray, wrapping their faces and arms with plastic wrap and wearing cheap plastic raincoats, goggles and surgical masks.
Clashes with police and the arrest of several student leaders had brought supporters onto the streets after around 150 demonstrators broke through police lines and stormed the city headquarters late on Friday night, prompting 74 arrests. Three well-known activists were still being held on Sunday morning.
Police used pepper spray as they struggled to clear demonstrators from the scene overnight. But late on Saturday, large crowds gathered around the complex to support the student protesters, who had been boycotting classes all week.
“Occupy Central starts now,” the movement’s leader Benny Tai announced in the early hours of Sunday morning – not long after saying there would be no change in plans for the non-violent protest movement.
“Actually we are being encouraged by the students to join. We are touched by the works of students. I will even admit that we are late [in announcing]; we should be ashamed of ourselves,” he added.
The former British colony is run separately from the mainland under the “one country, two systems” framework. Beijing promised universal suffrage for the election of its chief executive from 2017.
But reformers are angered by the restrictions imposed on the process, which would see tight control of candidates by a nomination committee stacked with pro-Beijing loyalists. It would effectively rule out the prospect of any democrat standing.
They had hoped that the threat of action might persuade Beijing to compromise.
Instead, the details of the decision from the standing committee of the National People’s Congress – China’s largely rubber-stamp parliament – underlined their fears that Hong Kong’s identity and autonomy is being gradually eroded.
Occupy Central With Peace and Lovehad originally planned to take over the financial district from Wednesday, a national holiday.
In a statement, Occupy Central said: “The two nights of occupation of Civic Square in Admiralty [next to Central] have completely embodied the awakening of Hong Kong people’s desire to decide their own lives. The courage of the students and members of the public in their spontaneous decision stay has touched many Hong Kong people. Yet, the government has remained unmoved … We have decided to arise and act.
“We reiterate we will stand firm in our belief in peace and non-violence. We urge Hong Kong people to respond to the call of history, to stand up and have the courage to be a real Hong Kong citizen.”
Its demands are to withdraw Beijing’s decision on the framework for Hong Kong’s political reform, and a resumption of political reform consultations.
Media outlets have reported that many of those outside the government headquarters left the scene after Occupy Central’s statement, although more than 1,000 remained there overnight as hundreds of police officers watched.
They rearranged crowd-control barriers brought by police to defend their position, and slept swathed in plastic wrap and cheap raincoats, wearing goggles and masks, to protect against pepper spray.
“A lot of students left as soon as Occupy made the announcement they were starting their occupation,” Vito Leung, a recent graduate, said.
“I think they were really forcing it. This was always a separate student movement with similar goals but different directions. I don’t think it should be brought together like this,” added Leung, vowing to stay until police released Joshua Wong, the prominent 17-year-old leader of the activist group Scholarism.
He was among the first to be arrested as protestors charged the government complex on Friday night, and was still being detained early on Sunday, along with fellow student leaders Alex Chow and Lester Shum. His parents said in a statement that his detention was an act of “political persecution”.
Civic party leader Alan Leong told the South China Morning Post that 18 pan-democrat lawmakers, including himself, would take part in the sit-in. He added: “[Some protesters] may not want to support Occupy and have left, but all Hong Kongers who want their attitude known to the Communist party [should come] because this is a defining moment of Hong Kong.”
Publishing tycoon Jimmy Lai, an outspoken critic of Beijing and backer of democracy activists, said: “Whoever loves Hong Kong should come and join us. This is for Hong Kong’s future.”
Police have urged the protesters to leave peacefully and avoid obstructing officers, saying otherwise they would “soon take actions to restore public order”.
At least 34 people have been injured since the protest began, including four police officers and 11 government staff and guards, authorities said. One officer suffered a gash after being poked by an umbrella used to deflect pepper spray.