New Zealand flag referendum final result - Kyle Lockwood's Silver Fern the winner
The final results of the flag referendum are in, confirming Kyle Lockwood's Silver Fern the winner. 
This is consistent with the preliminary results released on Friday night. 
The flag Silver Fern (Red, White and Blue) was confirmed in its second place followed by Red Peak, Silver Fern (Black and White) and Koru.
The total votes received were 1,546,734, which included 149,747 informal votes (9.7 per cent) and 3372 invalid votes (0.22 per cent).
Winning designer Kyle Lockwood said he was blown away by the confirmation, but the now Melbourne-based architect's excitement had peaked at the preliminary announcement on Friday night.
"I was in shock. I saw the result when I was walking home from work, refreshing my screen on my mobile phone. My jaw dropped basically. Somebody rang me and I was speechless."
Especially as a "private sort of person", Lockwood thought it best to leave it to New Zealanders to decide if the new design better represented them, rather than being a figurehead in any efforts pushing for flag change.
But he did think the final colour scheme choice between his two designs was the right call. "This flag actually includes red in it in the southern cross, so we've got the best of both worlds really."
A spokesperson for Prime Minister John Key said he was pleased more than 1.5 million Kiwis had participated in the first referendum.
"New Zealanders now have a clear choice whether to change our flag or keep our existing one."
Key has always been a fan of the Lockwood designs, which took out first and second spot as the preferred alternative flags.
Deputy Prime Minister Bill English said New Zealanders could now use the summer holiday period to decide which flag they prefer.
"This is an historically significant choice we have in front of us."
"I'd encourage everyone to have an input in this decision - even for those who didn't vote in the first referendum, everybody eligible to vote can do so in the second, conclusive referendum," English said.
The official results include tens of thousands more votes date-stamped before voting closed on Friday and received by the Electoral Commission by noon on Tuesday. 
The black, white, and blue flag will go up against the current New Zealand flag in a run-off next March. 
In the preliminary results it only narrowly pipped the former Wellington designer's alternative Silver Fern design, a mere 14,000 votes ahead of its Red, White and Blue sister for a 50.53 per cent to 49.47 per cent victory.
READ MORE: * NZ's flag has a challenger - now what? * How the New Zealand public voted * Does the result deliver John Key a mandate for change? * Kyle Lockwood and the 'honour' of winning  * How did the second most preferred first pick win the referendum?  * A short history of New Zealand's $26 million flag debate 
Critics of the referendum have pointed to the 48 per cent voting turnout as a sign of dissatisfaction with the process.
The high level of "informal" votes, at nearly 10 per cent on the back of a campaign to spoil ballots in protest, has also been highlighted by some.
Acting Labour leader Annette King said while Labour didn't agree with the process of the referendum, "it is what it is and now people have a very important choice ahead of them".
King was tight-lipped on which flag was her first choice and would only go as far to say the winning flag wasn't it.
"I didn't particularly like any of them but I did vote and what we've got is what the slim majority decided," she said.