Jat agitation LIVE: Haryana CM Khattar heckled in Rohtak; Rajnath Singh meets PM Modi
Violence continued unabated in Haryana on Monday with stone-pelting mobs attacking security personnel trying to clear a road blockade triggering a clash in which three civilians were killed raising the death toll to 19 in the nine-day old stir.
Besides the clash in Sonipat which also left nine people injured, fresh incidents of arson and violence erupted in several districts including Rohtak, Kaithal and Hissar.
Listen to the audio clip that points to Hooda aide’s ‘role’ in Jat agitation in Haryana
For news updates, follow us on Facebook, Twitter, Google+ & Instagram
7:37 pm With day-to-day life limping back to normalcy after the Jat protests in Haryana, supply of fuel and cooking gas almost turned normal in most cities, except Sonipat, Hissar and Bhiwani – epicenter of the stir. “The supplies of petrol, diesel and LPG are now turning normal in most parts of Haryana. Our supplies through trucks also resumed which got stuck in blockades put up by protesters. We hope supplies in all the districts will become normal by Thursday,” an official
6:21pm: BJP alleged that Congress had a role in the extensive violence in Haryana during the Jat’s stir for quota and asked Rahul Gandhi to stop his “divisive politics”.
Committee formed on #JatReservation issue meets at Union Minister Venkaiah Naidu’s residence in Delhi pic.twitter.com/TJ0pPboNsI
5:00 pm: Railways today cancelled about 210 more trains due to the Jat agitation including Kalka Shatabdi, Ludhiana Shatabdi and Himalayan Queen. A total of 1152 trains have been cancelled or short-terminated due to the ongoing agitation in Haryana.
4:53 pm: Leaders of 35 non-Jat communities threatened to launch protest if any action is taken by BJP against its party MP Raj Kumar Saini in connection with the Jat stir for quota.
4:23 pm When did I say I am against reservations? I have always supported them-Arvind Kejriwal
4:00 pm: A mob vandalised a railway station and set ablaze a goods train engine in the district where normal life remained affected for the second consecutive day due to the Jat quota stir.
3:15 pm: Actor Mallika Sherawat has called on the agitating Jat community to maintain peace and non-violence. “My appeal to the jaat community to maintain peace and nonviolence,” Sherawat, who is from Haryana, posted on Twitter.
1:15 pm: The Chief Minister was heckled while he was speaking in Rohtak, the epicentre of the protests. The people raised ‘murdabad’ slogans against the government and hurled black flags.
12:40 pm: CM Manohar Lal Khattar speaks in Rohtak on the agitation.
This is not a small incident. It is a huge tragedy. There will be an investigation: CM Khattar
Watch Video | Jat Agitation: What Are The Political Implications & Challenges For The Central & State Govt
The government wants to give the assurance that compensation will be paid adequately for all those whose property was damaged: CM Khattar
12:20 pm: These are some visuals of post-violence in Rohtak.
11:55 am: Water supply was partially restored in some parts of north and central Delhi this morning, even as Delhi Water minister Kapil Mishra said there would be limited supply till the Munak canal, damaged in the Jat stir in Haryana, is repaired.
11:45 am: CM Manohar Khattar has reached Rohtak, the epicentre of the agitation, to take stock of the situation.
11:20 am: Jat protesters in Hissar have ended their agitation. They vacated railway tracks at Mayyar
9:50 am: Why do Jats want a quota in Haryana? Read Christophe Jaffrelot’s column here
9:45 am: Delhi-Chandigarh Highway which was blocked by protesters, has been cleared, reports ANI
9:30 am: The government has said that it will bring the quota bill soon in the Assembly. Read story.
9:20 am: The Jat protest could be one of the issues likely to be discussed at the BJP Parliamentary Party executive meeting scheduled for today at 5:30 pm.
8:45 pm Three more killed in fresh violence
6:50 pm The Centre today directed security forces to forcefully clear all blockades put by Jats, whose violent agitation has paralysed normal life in Haryana. The clear instruction was given to the central security personnel deployed to assist the Haryana administration to bring back normalcy as early as possible as there is a feeling of a breakdown in the law-and-order situation, a senior government official said.
6:46 pm 16 persons have so far lost their lives in the on going agitation and 183 are injured. 102 persons arrested, 320 cases registered.
6:00 pm While blockades at several places have been lifted, efforts are on to remove the remaining 449 blockades on rails and roads.
5:45 pm Haryana Roadways has suffered a loss of Rs 15 crore as 33 buses have been set on fire and 99 buses are damaged.
5:00 pm Out of 2370 petrol pumps in the State, 381 have become dry. Out of 387 LPG Agencies, 185 are without their stock. The State Government is trying to ensure its supply through Punjab. Out of 26 petrol pumps damaged during the agitation, eight of these are in Rohtak, five in Bhiwani and six in Jhajjar.
The Rohtak bypass at Delhi-Bahadurgarh border chowk has been reopened after it was shut by protesters this morning.
The Delhi government has called an emergency meeting of DJB officials, NDMC officials as well as those from related government departments. The meeting is to sense what immediate measures need to be taken to resolve the water crisis. They will meet at Deputy CM Manish Sisodia’s residence at 9:00 am.
In what comes as a relief to the government of Delhi and its residents, the Indian Army along with the Rapid Action Force have taken control of Haryana’s Munak Canal that supplies water to the national capital, and the site has been cleared of protesters.
The Delhi-Chandigarh Highway has been cleared of protesters and traffic has resumed, ANI reported this morning. Efforts are currently underway to clear national highways and bring back normalcy in violence-hit regions of Haryana.
As thousands of people continue to remain stranded here in view of disruption in rail and road traffic due to ongoing agitation for reservation to Jats in Haryana, the Indian Air Force has decided to keep its air Base at Jammu open for operation of civil aircrafts during night as well. With this, airport in Jammu will be available to civil operators round the clock, an official spokesperson said. (read more)
Haryana govt has appointed Mr Sirikant Jadhav, IG Rohtak range, as IG state crime record bureau Madhuban with immediate effect.
Haryana fails to restore water supply to Delhi, 1 dead in police firing at Munak canal.  “Efforts were made to disperse the protesters at Akbarpur-Barota so as to release water for Delhi, but all in vain. As they [protesters] were in huge number, not much force was used to avoid casualties. However, the efforts to  release water were temporarily postponed, but according to reports reaching here, one person was killed in firing. We appeal to the protesters to let the administration release water for Delhi as it would not be fair on their part to resort to such tactics”, said Additional Chief Secretary (Home) PK Das.
Committee headed by a senior Union minister to be set up to look into demands of Jats, said BJP leader Anil Jain after meet chaired by Home Minister Rajnath Singh.
Bill to be brought in Haryana Assembly for grant of OBC status to Jats, says Jain after meeting HM Rajnath Singh had with Jat leaders.
The ongoing Jat stir for quota spread to Panchkula district, adjoining Chandigarh with agitators blocking Zirakpur-Shimla highway.
The Supreme Court on Sunday agreed to give urgent hearing Monday to the petition moved by Delhi government seeking Centre’s intervention for the uninterrupted supply of water from Munak Canal in Haryana which is allegedly under siege of the Jat agitators demanding reservation. (read more)
The Jat agitation for quota has hit rail services hard in the northern states, affecting around 1000 trains with 736 trains cancelled and 105 diverted besides damage to rail property.
Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh has appealed to restore peace in Haryana saying a solution could be worked out. “I appeal to everyone to maintain peace so that no unfortunate incident takes place. I met Jat community representatives yesterday, even today I will meet some people. I think some solution will be found,” Singh said.
The Haryana DGP has said that as of today, ten people have lost their lives and about 15o people have suffered injuries in the protests.
The Civil Aviation Ministry has made available additional flights towards Chandigarh from this evening inorder to help those stranded due to the ongoing protests.
Prices of flights to Chandigarh have shot up as the Railways is still not full operational. A usual air-ticket during this time of the year costs around Rs 3,000 while ticket prices for a flight on Monday begin at Rs 14,000.
Protesters have entered Delhi and have currently blocked the road infront of Nalgloi metro station in West Delhi.
The road between Rewari and Jhajjar (Haryana) has been reopened. Cabinet Secretary Sinha has also directed authorities to take stringent action against those taking up violence and round up anti social elements.
11.20 am: The National Crisis Management Committee has asked the Haryana government to ensure that there is no disruption of water supply in Delhi
Railways Minister Suresh Prabhu has urged protesters not to target Railways and to allow the smooth functioning of trains.
Former Haryana Chief Minister Bhupinder Hooda has begun an indefinite hunger strike for harmony in the state
Ticket counter of Basai Railway Station in Haryana has been set on fire by agitators early this morning, ANI reports.
10.00 am: Jat and Khap leaders of Haryana will meet Home Minister Rajnath Singh today at 3 pm at Singh’s residence over the Jat reservation issue.
The ongoing situation continued to remain tense in several parts of Haryana on Sunday, which was hit by Jat quota stir after it turned violent even as security personnel staged flag marches in affected areas.
Despite various political leaders including Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar appealing protesting Jats to maintain calm and peace, the incidents of violence and arson continued during the night in various parts of the state, crippling normal life in worst affected places such as Rohtak, Jind, Bhiwani, Jhajjar, Sonipat and Hisar.
8:45 pm: Himachal Road Transport Corporation suspends its bus services on 124 routes to Delhi & Haryana
8:34 pm: Around 50 Jat leaders from UP and Delhi are here to meet HM- Sanjeev Baliyan, Union Minister.
8:00 pm: Violence and arson in the Jat quota stir in Haryana spread to more areas today with four people being killed in firing by security personnel at Rohtak and Jhajjar districts taking the death toll to five even as he Army staged flag marches in affected pockets.
7:45 pm: 810 trains affected including 527 cancelled. 210 Mail/Express and 317 Passenger Trains cancelled, 104 Mail/Express Trains diverted, 78 Mail/Express and 23 Passenger Trains Short Terminated and 53 Mail/Express and 25 Passenger Trains Short Originated so far.
7:25 pm: The District Magistrate also ordered to shut down all liquor vends in the district with immediate effect. Superintendent of Police, all Sub Divisional Magistrates, Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner have been directed to shut down the liquor shops in their respective jurisdictions till February 22, 2016.
7:21 pm: Police and Army urged the people not to come out of their houses as curfew had been imposed in the area. “Action would be taken against those found violating the curfew and Section 144”, said Pankaj, District Magistrate, Bhiwani.
7:20 pm: Liqour vends shut in Bhiwani – In view of the ongoing agitation in the State, the joint teams of Army and Police today carried out flag march in Bhiwani city and urged the people to cooperate with District Administration and Army.
7:10 pm: 10 companies of para-military forces have reached & 23 more companies are on their way to Haryana- YP Singhal, Haryana DGP
7:00 pm: 13 army columns have reached & are assisting administration. 10 more army columns are being airlifted to respective destinations- YP Singhal
6:39 pm: Several trains from Jammu cancelled, causing inconvenience to passengers, specially those who had come on pilgrimage to Mata Vaishno Devi cave shrine.
6:30 pm: Shoot at sight orders issued by District commissioner in areas of Hissar and Hansi areas of Haryana.
6:20 pm: Army column open fire at Jhajjar (Haryana) to disperse crowd as agitation got violent, 1 civilian casualty. More details awaited.
6:10 pm: 33 army columns deployed in 9 districts of Haryana with maximum deployment in Rohtak. Additional columns are on standby. (ANI)
5:30 pm: Cabinet Secy PK Sinha said that safety of people, protection to property & maintenance of law & order & harmony should be given top priority.
5:00 pm: More than 600 trains cancelled due to the agitation: Anil Saxena, Railways
4.38 pm: The trains which were cancelled are Ahmedabad-New Delhi Rajdhani Express, Jodhpur-Delhi Mandore Express, Jodhpur/Bikaner-Delhi Sampark Kranti Express, Udaipur-Delhi Chetak Express, Ajmer-New Delhi Shatabdi Express, Ajmer-Haridwar Express, Ajmer-Amritsar Express, Delhi-Udaipur Chetak Express and Delhi-Bandra Terminus Garibrath Express, NWR CPRO Tarun Jain said.
4.30 pm: Jat leaders from Uttar Pradesh to meet Home Minister Rajnath Singh at 8 pm today.
4.20 pm: BJP issues showcase notice to party MP Raj kumar Saini for his alleged comments opposing the Jat reservation.
4:00 pm: This is not a time to do politics, priority should be to maintain peace: Bhupinder Singh Hooda
3:15 pm: In order to deal with any situation of clashes with the security agencies or Army, Jats have put women and children as their shield. Women, too armed, are shouting slogans in various parts of Rohtak.
1:00 pm: A mob pelted stones at the house of senior Haryana Minister O P Dhankar in Jhajjar. No one was injured in the incident.
12:45 pm: Army took out a flag march in Hisar and cleared rail and road blockades set by Jat protesters who continued to indulge in arson and violence.
A contingent of army along with police cleared road blockades and rail tracks put up by protesters at several places, official sources told PTI.
The army also took out flag march near village Mayyar where Jats are sitting near the rail track on Hisar-Bhiwani route.
11:45 am: Some unidentified persons set on fire the Budha Khera Railway Station in Jind district. Furniture, record room and other articles were set on fire at the railway station, which falls on the Jind-Panipat rail section, police told PTI.
Jind is among the districts worst-hit by the ongoing Jat stir.
9:55 am: Neeraj Sharma, CPRO, Northern Railway, has said that around 150 trains have been cancelled. There have been fire incidents at Jhajjar station, he added. Tracks at some places have been damaged as well.
9:25 am: Bhoopinder Singh Hooda, ex-CM of Haryana, told ANI that a solution must be found through talks. He also urged protesters to agitate peacefully without causing loss to life and property.
9:20 am: The Army troops were flown into Rohtak via helicopters as all major roads and highways in Haryana remain blocked by Jat protestors.
9:10 am: Meanwhile, ANI is reporting that the Army flag march in Bhiwani has turned violent. Curfew has been imposed.
9:05 am: On a petition seeking directions to Haryana government to promptly act and stop “unlawful violent agitations” by Jat protesters, the Punjab and Haryana High Court Friday granted three days to the state government to file a status report in this regard. Read story here
8:55 am: Over 100 trains that pass through districts like Rohtak and Bhiwani stand cancelled causing severe inconvenience to over 1 lakh passengers in the region. Read here
8:50 am: Read how three people were killed in the protests on Friday
8:40 am: The protestors have set fire to the Khera railway station in Jind district, according to news agency ANI
8:30 am: Agitators are blocking roads and highways in Bahadurgarh.
For all the latest India News, download Indian Express App