Economist Lucas Papademos Named Prime Minister of Greece
He will have to move swiftly to reassure the European leaders there will be no repeat of the shock they suffered in October, when the former prime minister, , after negotiating a new $177 billion loan, decided without warning to submit the bailout package to a referendum. The move infuriated the Europeans, who had concocted the Greek bailout as part of a painstakingly negotiated broader effort to stabilize . It also started the clock on the end of Mr. ’s tenure.
Mr. Papademos will have to deal with 2011 budget shortfalls and the passage of a 2012 budget that is expected to call for another round of austerity measures in a climate of growing social unrest. He will also have to start what are expected to be difficult negotiations with private sector that have agreed, in principle, to write off 50 percent of the face value of their Greek bond holdings as part of the rescue plan.
As if to underscore the problems, the national statistics authority reported on Thursday that unemployment had jumped to a record high 18.4 percent in August, a month when the tourist season normally lowers the rate, from 16.5 percent in July.
Mr. Papademos almost did not get the job. After Mr. Papandreou agreed on Sunday to step aside once a new coalition government had been formed, the parties could not seem to stop fighting long enough to settle on a candidate. With new elections expected early next year, all sides were maneuvering for strategic advantages. On Wednesday evening, Mr. Papandreou went on television to give his farewell speech as prime minister and was expected to announce a different successor.
But some 50 members of his party, and members of the opposition as well, pressed for Mr. Papademos, seen as an outsider to the old-boy political networks — a technocrat, perhaps able to take Greece on a new path. But it was not an easy sell. Some analysts here have said that the political parties were reluctant to embrace him because he would be an unknown, and perhaps a rival, at election time.
Only after another five hours of negotiations on Thursday morning did the president’s office issue a written statement confirming that Mr. Papademos would take on the task of trying to bring Greece’s economy back from the brink. It was unclear on Thursday night what his cabinet might look like.
News reports earlier this week said that Mr. Papademos had also set certain conditions before he was willing to take the post that had added to some of the reluctance to embrace him. The reports said he wanted a term of at least six months; earlier, the major political parties had agreed to new elections in just 100 days.
Other reports said that Mr. Papademos was insisting that members of the main opposition New Democracy party play a significant role in the unity government. It was widely reported that the opposition, headed by Antonis Samaras, had resisted participating, not wanting to be linked to deeply unpopular reforms with an election around the corner.
But standing outside the presidential palace, Mr. Papademos said he had not made any demands before accepting the job. He also said the new unity government would be “transitional,” and its priority would be to make sure that Greece stayed in the euro zone. “I am convinced that Greece’s continued participation in the euro zone is a guarantee for the country’s stability and future prosperity,” he said.
Whether he will succeed remains an open question. But some analysts said they considered his appointment to be Greece’s best shot.
“The political parties have opened a new chapter here, and that is a good thing,” said George Kirtsos, a political analyst with the conservative daily City Press. “Whether it will work is hard to tell. The problems get more complicated all the time. The European Union is a mess as well — now and . But this is a good move.”
Still, Mr. Kirtsos acknowledged that Mr. Papademos would be in a tough position. He would be trying to stabilize the economy while the political classes would be concentrating on the next elections. “If he gets no support,” he said, “it could become a very tricky situation.”
His appointment was welcomed by leaders of the European Union. In a statement, the president of the , , and , the president of the European Council, said they had long stressed the need for consensus on the measures needed to lift Greece out of its crisis. They added that would do all it could to help, but that “Greece must also do everything within its power to help itself.”
Former colleagues say that if any Greek can command the trust of international creditors and European leaders, it is probably Mr. Papademos.
He is a former classmate of , the new president of the European Central Bank. The two men studied at together, both earning doctorates in economics in the late 1970s, and they remain close.
But whether Mr. Papademos will be a popular figure outside of government is less clear. His friends say he has little gift for oratory. And some Greeks have become deeply suspicious of anyone associated with banking.
Athanasia Katalianou, 50, the owner of a craft shop, said she was not optimistic about Mr. Papademos’s appointment. “Papademos is a man of the memorandum,” she said. “He doesn’t care about the country; he’s with the creditors and not the debtors. He’s a champion of the banking system.”
But others were more inclined to celebrate the changing of the guard.
Tilemachos Sideris, 52, who is self-employed, said Mr. Papademos might be the right person to put the state in order.
“I’m an optimist; I think things will go better,” he said.