Lori Berenson Ordered to Return to Prison in Peru
Beyond the court’s official reasoning, it was also clear that broad resentment over the release of Ms. Berenson — who is widely viewed in Peru as a symbol of the insurgents and the war against them that cost nearly 70,000 lives between 1980 and 2000 — influenced the decision.
“Berenson was sent to prison for 20 years, and she only served 14 years, five months and 25 days,” said Luis Marill del Águila, an official in Peru’s Justice Ministry who announced the court’s ruling.
“She hasn’t even served three-fourths of her sentence,” said Mr. Marill del Águila, adding that Ms. Berenson’s immediate arrest had been ordered.
The Justice Ministry said in a statement that the court’s decision reversing her parole could not be appealed.
But Guillermo González, a spokesman for Peru’s Supreme Court, said that the case would return to Judge Jéssica León, who granted parole to Ms. Berenson and that it would ultimately be up to her whether Ms. Berenson and her son would remain in prison.
“The main reason for this is in the issue of her domicile,” Mr. González said.
Ms. Berenson’s parents, Rhoda and Mark, said their daughter’s parole had been “annulled on a technicality” that they hoped could be sorted out. “We are still in an unsure position,” they said in an e-mail.
Ms. Berenson learned of the decision while she was at the embassy in Lima, where she was at a previously scheduled consular meeting, an official at the embassy said.
“This was a Peruvian judicial process,” James Fennell, a spokesman for the embassy, said in a statement. “Berenson voluntarily turned herself in today to Peruvian authorities in order to comply with the court’s order. With her consent, she was picked up at the embassy this afternoon by Peruvian authorities.”
Ms. Berenson’s lawyer, Aníbal Apari, told local reporters that Ms. Berenson had made no effort to flee the country, despite disagreeing with the court’s decision. Mr. Apari, a former rebel who is also the father of Ms. Berenson’s son, said she and Salvador would return to prison. In Peru, children are allowed to remain with their mother until age 3 if the mother is incarcerated.
Mr. Apari also questioned the court’s decision to base its ruling on doubts surrounding information about Ms. Berenson’s address. “Everyone knows where she lives,” he said.
She was initially arrested in 1995 in Peru while enmeshed with members of the Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, a group that became known internationally in 1996 when it raided the Japanese Embassy in Lima and took hundreds of diplomats and senior government officials hostage.
In an appearance before court officials on Monday, Ms. Berenson acknowledged collaborating with the Túpac Amaru group but said she had never killed anyone or took part in violent actions.
“If my participation contributed to societal violence I am very sorry for this,” she said at the televised hearing.
But Julio Galindo, the prosecutor who sought the annulment of Ms. Berenson’s parole, said such statements were a tactic aimed at keeping her out of prison. “For me,” Mr. Galindo said, “all such apologies are natural acts used by those condemned for terrorism as strategy.”