S'porean man shot dead by police, 2 others detained in incident near Shangri-La Hotel, Courts & Crime News & Top Stories
SINGAPORE - A 34-year-old Singaporean man was shot dead by police and two others were arrested in an incident near the Shangri-La Hotel, where a high-level security summit was being held.
The incident happened at 4.36 am on Sunday, said the police. The two men arrested,who are also Singaporeans, are 26 and 31 years old respectively.
The three men in a Singapore-registered red Subaru Impreza were stopped at a police vehicular checkpoint set up along Ardmore Park.
When police officers asked to inspect the car boot, the 34-year-old driver suddenly accelerated the vehicle and headed towards Anderson Road. Despite warnings to stop, the driver continued to crash through police barricades, endangering the lives of the officers, the police said.
"Police opened fire at the vehicle to stop further danger. The vehicle subsequently stopped at the junction of Orange Grove Road and Anderson Road," said the police statement.
A bag containing white powdery substances, believed to be controlled drugs, was recovered in the car.
Substances which appeared to be controlled drugs and an item believed to be a drug-taking utensil were also found on the men arrested.
The driver and one of the passengers were wanted by the authorities for various offences, said the police. The 31-year-old passenger was injured during the incident and was taken to the hospital conscious.
Police and officers from SAF’s Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Explosives Defence Group have searched the car. No explosives, arms or weapons were found in the vehicle.
No weapons were found on the men. The incident appeared to be an isolated one, according to preliminary investigations by the police.
The red Subaru Impreza was towed away close to noon time.
Security measures, including vehicle and person check points, have been put in place in the vicinity of the Shangri-La Hotel because of the Shangri-La Dialogue. The three-day security summit, which closes later on Sunday, was attended by defence chiefs from 26 nations, security analysts, academics and media from around the world.
Deputy Prime Minister Teo Chee Hean, who was attending the dialogue on Sunday, told reporters: "Police have kept me informed of the situation which they have got swiftly under control. The investigations so far indicate that it's a situation related to drugs."
Mr Teo, who is also Minister for Home Affairs, added: "The police will act firmly according to the law with anyone who breaks the law to make sure that we maintain public safety and security."
Ms Rachel Maher, 42, a resident of the nearby Ardmore II condo, said she and her husband heard two gunshots after 4am.
"It was quick, we heard the gunshots, jumped out of bed and looked out the window."
She added: "It was scary, at that point we didn't know the justification for the shots."
Ms Daisy Umarani, a security guard at Ardmore Residence condominium, was on duty when she heard several gunshots. "I was shocked, but I couldn't go out to look, I needed to stay at the condo," said the 40-year-old.
At about 9am on Sunday, the entrance to Anderson Road from Stevens Road was cordoned off. Residents who wanted to return to their apartments in the area had to be escorted by police officers. The entrance to Anderson Road was reopened at about 11am.
Police armoured vehicles and Special Operations Command vehicles were seen leaving the scene at about 9.27am.
Orange Grove Road, Anderson Road and Ardmore Park were temporarily closed following the incident, but all three roads were reopened to traffic by 11.10am.