Defiant Moran gets 26 years for murder
As she had done during her trial, she arrived in a wheelchair and remained seated, listening intently during Justice Lasry's sentencing address. A jury had found Judy Moran guilty of plotting the June 2009 murder of Mr Moran and of paying hitman Geoffrey Armour to kill him. Armour carried out his part of the deal by pumping seven shots into Mr Moran who was paying for his lunch in the Ascot Vale cafe he visited almost daily. Armour, who had pleaded guilty, received an identical sentence to Moran. Moran claimed during her trial she had nothing to do with the murder and at the time had been tending the grave of her murdered son Mark who had been shot dead on the same date - June 15 - nine years earlier.
Mark Moran's murder followed that of his father, Les Cole, an underworld figure murdered in 1982, by which time his mother had already taken up with Lewis Moran. Her second son Jason was murdered in 2003 and Lewis in 2004. Justice Lasry said he accepted the murders of Moran's husbands and sons had devastated her. "Having been so terribly affected, it makes it much more difficult for me to understand why you would become involved yourself in such a callous and public killing of Desmond Moran," he told her. The jury at Moran's trial heard she had given Armour a Land Rover vehicle in payment for the murder of her brother-in-law, a man who had played only a minor role in the substantial criminal enterprises of his brother and nephews.
It also heard Moran believed he had stashed away a large sum of money on behalf of Lewis Moran. She believed she was entitled to a share of the money and also to a share of the home in which "Tuppence" Moran lived. The murder plot evolved after her brother-in-law cut off payments he regularly made to her, which, according to one witness, were as much as $2000 a month, although no clear motive was established. Justice Lasry told both Moran and Armour, who was sentenced earlier on Wednesday, that they had "no care for the fate of Desmond Moran". He told Moran she had similar disregard for any member of the public who might have got in the way of the "machinations of your family" during the murder which occurred at lunchtime in a busy cafe.
"This was an appalling murder, both in the way it was carried out and the very public manner in which it occurred," he said. "This was a deliberate and brutal killing for either retribution or financial benefit or some combination of both." Justice Lasry said he had taken into account Moran's age and her poor physical and mental health. In previous hearings, Armour's lawyers had told the court he had intended merely to collect money from Mr Moran and had only killed him when he panicked after sensing he had been recognised.