North Main Street in Herkimer comes to standstill after shootings
Herkimer, NY -- The four blocks of North Main Street in Herkimer came to a standstill today while a man suspected of killing four people remained on the loose.
Parked cars sat vacant on both sides of the street. Yellow caution tape hung from downtown buildings and onto trees. A small crowd stood at the corner trying to make out what was happening.
Police cars crowded the middle of North Main Street just after 10:30 a.m. as a suspected gunman, who allegedly killed four people and wounded two others, remained at large.
By noon, news crews and crowds were gathered in the middle of North Main Street as police converged at an unoccupied building adjacent to Glory Days – a popular tavern, locals said.
The suspected gunman, Kurt Myers, was thought to be inside the building, police said.
Brandon Fallon was inside the court house on North Main Street when he was told that the building was on lock down.
“I didn’t know what was going on,” Fallon said. “I was hearing things from other people on my phone but as far as I knew I couldn’t see or hear anything.”
After nearly three hours of waiting, Fallon and a small group were escorted out through a back door, he said.
His friend, Michael Dennis II, was inside his apartment at 137 North Main Street when he heard shots outside, he said.
Just after 1 p.m., shots rang out.
Dennis opened his window, looked down the street and saw town, village, SWAT and state police cars in front of the unoccupied building, he said. Dennis saw two snipers on a roof next to him and two more on other buildings up the street.
Media crews and locals standing in the middle of North Main Street were pushed back to the end of the street near Route 5, they said, by law enforcement.
About 3 p.m., Dennis was able to leave his apartment. He and Fallon both gathered near the corner of North Main Street hoping they would hear something about the daylong event.
Red police lights flickered all day to block off traffic from the central location of downtown.
People living in the area were concerned, they said. One woman cried for her dogs who had been in her apartment since 4:30 a.m.
“Please,” she said. “Can’t someone just go get them?”