John Major tells Leveson inquiry Murdoch demanded policy changes
Former prime minister says mogul disliked Tories' stance on Europe and switched to Labour when changes weren't made
John Major accused Rupert Murdoch of trying to use his newspapers to force his government to change its policy on Europe – but denied former Sun editor Kelvin MacKenzie ever threatened to pour a "bucket of shit" over him.
The former Conservative prime minister told the Leveson inquiry on Tuesdaythat Murdoch delivered the ultimatum at a private meeting three months before the 1997 general election which the Tories lost heavily to Labour.
Major became the second former prime minister in successive days to dispute Murdoch's evidence to the inquiry after Gordon Brown said that he never declared war on News Corporation as the media mogul has claimed.
Major, who prompted an unlikely burst of nostalgia with an assured performance 15 years after he left Downing Street, said Murdoch's claim to the inquiry on 25 April that he had "never asked a prime minister for anything" was "on a strict interpretation literally true".
"Certainly he never asked for anything directly from me but he was not averse to pressing for policy changes," said Major.
"In the run-up to the 1997 general election in my third and last meeting with him on 2 February 1997 he made it clear that he disliked my European policies which he wished me to change.
"If not, his papers could not and would not support the Conservative government. So far as I recall he made no mention of editorial independence but referred to all his papers as 'we'.
"Both Mr Murdoch and I kept our word. I made no change in policy and Mr Murdoch's titles did indeed oppose the Conservative party. It came as no surprise to me when soon after our meeting the Sun newspaper announced its support for Labour."
At a private dinner also attended by his wife and Murdoch's daughter Elisabeth, Major said Murdoch wanted Britain to withdraw from the European Union and said he made it clear to him that was not going to happen.
In response to Major's claims, a spokesman for News International said: "News International titles did not act in unison in the 1997 election. The Sunday Times supported John Major, the Times was neutral, and the Sun and the News of the World supported Labour."
Major said he was not as close to Murdoch as his predecessor Margaret Thatcher because he "did not admire much that was in his newspapers, nor his methods or his political philosophy", and said the Sun had "lowered the tone" of discourse on public life.
Major claimed it was a myth that the then Sun editor, Kelvin MacKenzie, had told him in a telephone call on "Black Wednesday" in 1992 that he would "pour a bucket of shit over him" in the next day's paper following Britain's ignominious exit from the Exchange Rate Mechanism.
"It wasn't a very successful phone call," said Major. "There are more myths about Black Wednesday than the Greeks ever created."
MacKenzie stood by his version of events. "Isn't it amazing how poor the memories of prime ministers become once they leave office," added the former Sun editor.
During two and a half hours of evidence to the inquiry, Major said newspaper proprietors should be "personally liable" for articles in their titles and could not "wash their hands in Pontius Pilate fashion" of alleged misdeeds by their reporters.He also accused aides to Gordon Brown of lying for party political advantage. The former Labour prime minister has denied the allegation that he had instructed anyone to brief against Major.