Key moments in the manhunt for James DiMaggio
The man accused of kidnapping 16-year-old Hannah Anderson and murdering her mother and brother was killed on Saturday, bringing to an end a manhunt that spanned from California to Idaho, authorities said.
James Lee DiMaggio, 40, was shot and killed James Lee DiMaggio, 40, was shot and killed by an FBI agent following what was described as a "confrontation" near Morehead Lake, according to authorities.
Hannah was found alive, and she was taken to an area hospital for an evaluation, authorities said.
a statewide Amber Alert Authorities in Southern California issue a statewide Amber Alert via cell phone for Hannah and her 8-year-old brother, Ethan, after they are reported missing by their grandparents, the same day DiMaggio's home was burned.
The San Diego County Sheriff's Office releases several photos of DiMaggio, saying they believe he is driving a blue, four-door Nissan Versa with California license plate 6WCU986.
"Jim, I can't fathom what you were thinking. The damage is done. I'm begging you to let my daughter go. You've taken everything else," he tells reporters. "Hannah, we all love you very much. If you have a chance, you take it, you run. You'll be found."
Anderson does not mention Ethan in his remarks, prompting a reporter to ask San Diego Sheriff's Department Lt. Glenn Giannantonio whether the child's remains might be those of the boy.
The search for DiMaggio expands from California to other states as tips pour in to San Diego authorities with possible sightings of DiMaggio, Hannah and Ethan.
An Amber Alert is issued in Oregon An Amber Alert is issued in Oregon after a possible sighting of DiMaggio's vehicle, the Oregon State Police said.
DiMaggio's car has been found Authorities announce DiMaggio's car has been found after a man on horseback reported he had a brief conversation with two campers in the Idaho wilderness on Wednesday.
San Diego authorities formally confirm the remains of the child found inside the burned out home were those of Ethan.
About 250 law enforcement personnel -- among them about 150 FBI agents, in addition to state, county and other federal agents -- converge on the Frank Church-River of No Return Wilderness, about 15 miles outside Cascade, Idaho, looking for the teenage girl and DiMaggio.