Charlotte protest: One person shot during violence; officer wounded
Charlotte, North Carolina (CNN)One person was shot Wednesday during a second night of protests over a deadly police shooting in Charlotte, city officials said.
The person, who was not identified, is in critical condition and on life support, the city tweeted. Earlier, the city had tweeted that the person had died. The person was shot by another civilian, the city said.
One police officer was injured, according to a city tweet. The officer was transported to a hospital with undisclosed injuries.
The riot and protests came on a day in which the city's police chief gave more details on the shooting that took the life of Keith Lamont Scott.
Chief Kerr Putney addressed the Scott family's claim that he was reading a book in his vehicle when police officers approached and shot him.
Putney said Scott, an African-American, was armed and no book was found at the scene. He was shot by an African-American officer after refusing repeated demands to put down a gun, which was recovered from the scene, Putney said.
"It's time to change the narrative because I can tell you from the facts that the story's a little bit different as to how it's been portrayed so far, especially through social media."
The chief said he was not certain whether Scott pointed his gun at officers. Vinson, who was in plain clothes and wearing a CMPD vest, did not have a body camera. Three uniformed officers were wearing cameras, there is also dash cam recordings, and investigators are reviewing the footage, Putney said.
"You don't have to actually wait until a handgun is pointed at you because you're talking milliseconds of a decision as to whether you're going to pull your trigger, or that individual is going to pull their trigger," Roderick said.
"It breaks my heart to see something like this happen, and I have a really hard time believing that Brent shot a man in his car while waiting for his (son) for no reason," Marsh said.
"Keith was a loving husband, father, brother and friend who will be deeply missed every day," Rakeyia Scott said. "As a family, we respect the rights of those who wish to protest, but we ask that people protest peacefully. Please do not hurt people or members of law enforcement, damage property or take things that do not belong to you in the name of protesting."
"And it's perpetuated against people of color more than anything else," he said. "If it would have been in the reverse, if it would have been a Caucasian, it would have been totally different."