Sir Fred Goodwin, former RBS chief, obtains super-injunction
The existence of the draconian injunction - so strict it prevents Sir Fred being identified as a banker - was disclosed by John Hemming, a back-bench Liberal Democrat MP, in a question during a business debate at the House on Thursday morning. His comments are protected by parliamentary privilege.
He said: "In a secret hearing Fred Goodwin has obtained a super-injunction preventing him being identified as a banker.
"Will the government have a debate or a statement on freedom of speech and whether there's one rule for the rich like Fred Goodwin and one rule for the poor?"
Leader of the House Sir George Young said a forthcoming Westminster Hall debate would explore freedom of speech, adding: "I will raise with the appropriate minister the issue he has just raised."
The terms of the injunction are so strict that the Daily Telegraph cannot reveal the nature of the information that Sir Fred Goodwin is attempting to protect.
Sir Fred, nicknamed Fred "the shred" for his management style, presided over the near collapse of the Royal Bank of Scotland, which had to be bailed out by the taxpayer.
He left with a pension of £700,000 a year and a lump sum of nearly nearly £3 million. Following a public outcry he later agreed to reduce his payout by £200,000 a year.
Super-injunctions - under which even reporting the existence of the injunction is banned - are increasingly being used by powerful corporations and wealthy individuals to stop the media from publishing information.
Last month a sportsman known to have cheated on his partner with two women won an appeal to remain anonymous. The judge said his identity had to be protected because the fact he had conducted a previous affair would make it easier for people to work out the nature of the allegations.
Three days later Mr Justice Eady granted anonymity to a married TV personality identified only by the random initials OPQ. The judge asked the media to leave the court, saying that "to proceed in public would defeat the object of the application".