Two Sydney men charged in relation to Parramatta shooting
Raban Alou, 18, from Wentworthville, faces terrorism charges, while Talal Alameddine, 22, has been charged with supplying a weapon
Two men have been charged in relation to the murder of Curtis Cheng outside Parramatta police station earlier this month.
An 18-year-old man arrested eight days ago in connection to the fatal shooting of the police IT worker is facing terrorism charges and a 22-year-old man, arrested on Thursday morning, has been charged with providing a firearm, NSW police commissioner Andrew Scipione has said.
Raban Alou, an 18-year-old man from Wentworthville, has been charged with aiding, abetting, counselling and procuring the commission of a terrorist act under section 101 of the federal Criminal Code Act 1995.
He was refused bail and was due to appear at central local court in Sydney on Friday.
The 22-year-old man, Talal Alameddine, was arrested in Merrylands in western Sydney at 10.35am by officers from the Middle East organised crime squad and the joint counter-terrorism squad.
He was charged with supplying a firearm, breaching a firearm prohibition order, and hindering police.
He was also refused bail and was due to appear at Parramatta local court on Friday.
Speaking at a press conference in Sydney on Thursday, Scipione described the charges as “significant developments”.
But he would not be drawn into speculation that might jeopardise the case, telling the waiting media: “You will have far more questions than we can give you answers. That’s the reality.”
The Australian federal police commissioner, Andrew Colvin, was also at the press conference. He would not say which terrorism organisation the 18-year-old was alleged to have been involved with.
“As part of the charge we don’t need to link this to a terrorist organisation, we are not going to speculate on this,” Colvin said.
The justice minister, Michael Keenan, praised New South Wales and federal police for making progress on the case, saying it was, “another example of the world-class law enforcement that we have protecting us here in Australia”.
Keenan led a national counter-terrorism conference in Canberra on Thursday. He said the conference discussed the need for more teacher training, to identify young people at risk of radicalisation, as well as better intra-state coordination and training to help communities better use social media.
He said a report from Colvin that a 12-year-old was on police radar was “disturbing”.
“We unfortunately know that this is happening,” Keenan said. “Isil [Islamic State] is very sophisticated in the way they groom people once it identifies people who might be vulnerable to its message.”
Keenan said police would attempt to “save” young people who may be at risk of radicalisation without charging them, if possible, but urged people to report any concerns they had to national security authorities anyway.
“The earlier that we know the more likely that we are going to be able to work to save somebody,” he said.
Anti-terrorism coordinator, Greg Moriarty, said that messages put out by terrorist organisations had to be challenged.
“Isil propaganda needs to be contested,” he said. “Challenging those narratives is an absolutely vital part of that spectrum.”