Stranded Aussies tell of fears of being 'stuck' in Fiji
FOREIGN Minister Bob Carr has confirmed Qantas will increase capacity to ensure Australians stranded in flood-stricken Fiji can get home.
Senator Carr said he had spoken today with the airline's chief executive Alan Joyce, who told him, "Qantas will add capacity as required.''
The minister said it was welcome news.
"There are a lot of Australians who want to get home,'' he said.
"I am heartened by the message from Alan Joyce that there will be added capacity as required to bring them back,'' the minister added.
Senator Carr said it was also good news that no Australians had been injured in the flooding.
"The High Commission is performing a terrific consular duty, under circumstances of great pressure,'' he said.
"No Australians, to the best of their knowledge, have been injured and I'm comforted by that.
A state of emergency was declared in the South Pacific island nation yesterday as flash floods claimed at least three lives and forced 8000 people to seek refuge in evacuation centres.
Senator Carr said there is access to Nadi airport, on the western side of the main island of Viti Levu, and that within the three hours to 3.37pm AEST, flights had been getting in and out.
The minister said the people of Fiji had been undergoing "terrible suffering''.
A tropical depression tracking towards the main island of Viti Levu is expected to intensify and turn into a cyclone.
Australian Anna Dennis said she and her family were stranded at the Shangri La Hotel in Nadi.
“There is no water, food is running out, we are on generator power, the situation is critical,” the mother said. She called for helicopters to airlift travellers from isolated resorts before the cyclone hit. “We are planning on leaving here with our three sons under six in the morning to chance it at getting a chopper to the airport then getting any available flight out,” she said. “Please make people aware that we are here and we are stuck and we need help.” A Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade spokesperson said there were about 1400 Australians registered in Fiji, but there were more were hadn’t registered. “The Australian Government has been in contact with a number of Australians affected, the spokesperson said. "At this stage, we are not aware of any Australians who have been injured or whose safety is seriously at risk. "(We) understand people are anxious about the situation, and worried about how and when they will be able to return to Australia, and whether they have enough provisions for the current situation.”. The Australian Government urged travellers affected by the floods to follow the instructions of local authorities. The Fiji Interim Government has halted incoming flights bringing passengers to Nadi until further notice, but there are empty flights landing in Nadi to transport passengers back to Australia and elsewhere. New Zealand has also promised to send help. NZ Prime Minister John Key says the situation is very serious, and New Zealand will provide support if needed. "It's people in rural parts of Fiji - we've already had a number of lives lost, people's homes devastated - so that's really where support would come in, and emergency food and blankets and the like," he said. The government will get New Zealanders out of Fiji if "absolutely required", although many in tourist spots will be in "quite stable" conditions, he says. Most of Viti Levu is without electricity and rotating power blackouts are in place to allow most industries to operate during the day and domestic use in the evening. Fiji's Meteorological Service issued a tropical cyclone alert on Sunday, with more heavy rain expected and the possibility of more severe flooding. Damaging winds are likely to hit Viti Levu in the next 12 to 24 hours as the weather system, currently over Vanuatu, intensifies and moves southeast towards Fiji, the Fiji Village website reports.