Everest toll rises to 4 as 2 more climbers confirmed dead
Clinton-Patterson novel sells 250,000 copies its first week NEW YORK: Bill Clinton’s debut novel had the year’s biggest opening so far for a work of fiction. “The President is Missing,” the thriller he co-wrote with James Patterson, sold 250,000 copies its first week. Alfred A. Knopf and Little, Brown and Co., the book’s co-publishers, annou...
It’s difficult to understand why a car’s behaviour changes after a change of owners Many people believe that there is a soul in all living things and some even believe that there is a spirit in inanimate things like mountains, rocks or streams. Many people also develop such attachments ...
Kathmandu Although prefab was an option available in the market for construction since the year 2003, the demand for prefab structures skyrocketed after the Gorkha Earthquake in 2015. Fast forward two years later, private companies now have the consumers’ attention with the introduction of p...
Oprah to serve as godmother of new Holland America ship NEW YORK: Oprah Winfrey will serve as godmother of a new Holland America ship called the Nieuw Statendam (pronounced new STAHT-un-dam). In a video recorded with her pal Gayle King, Winfrey recounted “sailing to Alaska last year” on a Holland America ship, adding that she is “setting sai...
Kathmandu, June 27 Patients have been hit hard due to the ongoing protest of resident doctors at Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital. The doctors have been staging a protest for the past one week against the Ministry of Health and Population’s proposal to amend the Medical Education Act w...
Sit-in protest against land mafia continues into fourth day in Rautahat district Rautahat, June 27 Locals of Rautahat district headquarters Gaur continued their sit-in protest for the fourth consecutive day today demanding protection of property belonging to Gaur Rice and Flour Mills worth millions. They staged the sit-in protest in front of the office of Gaur Municip...