Amid unrelenting heat, frustrations rise for tens of thousands still without power
That was more than half those initially left in the dark Friday night and early Saturday. The total included about 410,000 in West Virginia, 400,000 in Ohio and 340,000 in Virginia. Power and government authorities said some may not get power back until week's end.
"While I want to thank them for their progress, they need to move faster," said Mayor Vincent Gray in Washington, where about 43,000 Pepco customers were without power.
"Pepco's pace of restoring power to me, anyway, is unacceptable. And the speed of their response is disappointing. How many times have we been through this before?"
At least 16 people were killed from Ohio to New Jersey in the derecho -- or massive storm usually with straight-line wind damage -- while another three in North Carolina died in fresh storms Sunday.
damaged his property and knocked out power "It was the scariest thing I've ever been through," CNN iReporter Mark Cohen said from Mays Landing, New Jersey, where the storms damaged his property and knocked out power . "Just to give you an idea, it was somewhere between a movie and a disaster ride at a park."
"The three windows that I can open, it doesn't help at all," he said. "So I slept downstairs, where it was cooler, and it was still bad."
And Josh Little, a crew supervisor for Dominion in Virginia, said his technicians have "been working around the clock doing storm restoration for almost six, seven days now."
"They get frustrated because they're not getting the lights on, as fast as they think they should," he said. "But they're only human beings. ... They're wearing down a little bit."
In and around Charleston, West Virginia, locals have been packing supermarkets and filling up nearby hotels in a bid to ride out the storm's aftermath and no electricity in homes, Mayor Danny Jones said.
"Up in the hills, there were so many trees down and the transformers were all tangled in the trees," said Jones, who is living in his garage with his two sons and still assessing the massive storm. "It was scary," Jones said.
Cities and towns in the Midwest, Mid-Atlantic and Southeast have endured temperatures in the high 90s and above 100 degrees since, in some cases, the middle of last week. It's all part of a system tied to the breaking or tying of more than 2,238 hot weather records nationwide between June 25 and July 1, according to the National Climatic Data Center.
And it won't necessarily let up anytime soon. The National Weather Service is warning of "dangerous heat" topping 100 degrees through Saturday in places including St. Louis, while it should still very much feel like summer for most of the country's eastern two-thirds through Independence Day and perhaps beyond.
"Hot and hotter will continue to be the story from the Plains to the Atlantic Coast the next few days," the weather service reported Monday. "Widespread excessive heat warnings and heat advisories have certainly decreased in coverage, but temperatures will remain well above average across a large portion of the U.S."
Yet many like Phi Ley, an Arlington, Virginia, resident who came back from a vacation to a roasting house with no power, are just trying to roll with the punches.