Drought stretches across America, threatens crops
Where there should have been tall, dark green, leafy plants, there now stand corn stalks that are waist high or, at best, chest high. They are pale in color and spindly. Fragile. Tired.
"It's emotionally draining," he said. "The crop got out of the ground very well. We were so optimistic. But maybe a few of us were counting our eggs before they were hatched."
The costs of America's worst drought in 24 years is obvious to Villwock, who has been farming for four decades. They are not so apparent to American consumers -- at least, not yet.
As of Tuesday, 61% of land in the lower 48 states was experiencing drought conditions -- stretching from Nevada to South Carolina -- the highest percentage in the 12-year record of the U.S. Drought Monitor.
Villwock says the drought is already larger in scope than in 1988, and he fears it will intensify to become worse. Many areas in the southern Midwest are reporting the poorest conditions for June since 1988.
He says 30% of the corn crop in the 18 primary corn-growing states is now in poor or very poor condition, up from 22% the previous week.
The sizzling conditions have also led to a dramatic increase in wildfire activity since mid-June, shortly after the High Park Fire ignited near Fort Collins, Colorado. During the past three weeks, acres scorched by wildfires went up from 1.1 million to 3.1 million.
At Bilskie's Market in Indianapolis, owner Jim Bilskie says he has offered customers local produce for 40 years. This year, he's paying more for fruits and vegetables and says he has to pass on the costs.
"I'm about 50 percent short of needed moisture," he said. "In parts of southern Indiana, southern Illinois, they have been much drier for a longer period. We looked good, compared to them."
At this stage, Miller needs 2 inches of rain right away to carry his corn crop as well as his soybeans, which will start aborting pods without adequate moisture.
Consumers will be hurting as well down the line when they feel the drought in their pocketbooks, says Miller, who is also the director of research and commodity services at the Iowa Farm Bureau.
"In the short run, that doesn't show up in the grocery store," he said, since most of this corn is used as livestock feed.
Harsh weather affects everyone, but farmers are especially at the whim of Mother Nature, he says.