NZ volcano Mt Tongariro erupts
NEW Zealand's Mount Tongariro volcano in the central North Island has erupted, sending a black plume of ash up to 2km into the air and forcing hundreds of hikers to be evacuated.
Hundreds of tourists - including 90 schoolchildren from Napier - were on the mountain when Tongariro erupted around 1.20pm local time.
Police are warning sightseers to stay away from the area in case of further volcanic activity.
The official GNS Science monitoring serviceissued a potential threat alert after the eruption at the volcano, which was the location for parts of The Lord of the Rings trilogy.
The volcano became active in August this year after lying dormant for more than a century.
Civil Defence advised people living in or near the Waikato, Hawke's Bay, Gisborne and Bay of Plenty areas to stay indoor.
Residents have complained that they are finding it hard to breathe due to the sulphur, according to New Zealand media reports.
Air New Zealand have cancelled flights between Wellington and Taupo due to the ash cloud.
GNS Science duty volcanologist Nico Fournier told APNZ the eruption, which lasted around five minutes, happened about 1.20pm.
"There was one eruption, essentially one explosion, and it was not sustained. It spewed some ash possibly a couple of kilometres up the air. The ash is now drifting to the east-southeast."
The department closed the popular Tongariro Alpine Crossing walking track and staff and police urged people hiking the crossing to leave the mountain as quickly as possible.
An eruption earlier this year sent rocks smashing into a trampers hut.
The crossing would reopen once GNS Science had given the all clear.
GNS Science said a plume of smoke from the Te Maari Crater, on the northern side of Tongariro, was captured on web camera about 1.30pm (1130 AEDT). A light wind was blowing it towards the Kaimanawa Ranges to the east.
The eruption prompted the volcanic alert level to be raised to "minor eruptive activity'' and the aviation colour code to red - "eruption is forecast to be imminent and significant ash emission into the atmosphere likely''.
A spokeswoman for Airways, the organisation responsible for air traffic management, said flights over the central North Island were being diverted away from the volcano.
There were clear skies in the area and pilots could see the eruption smoke.
Airways was waiting on more information from GNS before deciding if aircraft would be diverted even further from the volcano.
Last week, GNS warned there was increased activity underneath nearby Mt Ruapehu.
In August, the upper Te Maari Crater erupted for the first time in more than a century, sending rocks falling within 1km of the crater, damaging Ketetahi Hut - one of four hikers' huts on the mountain.
Light ash fell as far away as Taupo and Napier, while the smell of gas - similar to the "rotten eggs'' smell experienced in Rotorua - had drifted to Wellington.
TONGARIRO FACTS AND FIGURES November 21, 2012 - eruption, ash plume from Te Maari Crater August 6, 2012 - eruption, first since 1897. Rocks and ash ejected from Te Maari Crater with ash falling in Napier, 122km away The Tongariro volcano is a massive complex of volcanic cones formed by at least 12 vents erupting over more than 275,000 years Mt Tongariro itself is a complex of craters that have been active at different periods Mt Tongariro is the northern-most of three volcanoes that includes Mt Ngauruhoe and Mt Ruapehu Geologists describe Tongariro as an "active stratovolcano'', or composite cone, made up of alternating layers of ash and lava flow Tongariro in Maori means "fire carried away or seized by the cold south wind'' Popular walking track Tongariro Alpine Crossing bypasses the volcano Parts of the Lord of the Rings trilogy were filmed in the Tongariro National Park, where Mt Ngauruhoe was cast as Mt Doom Sources: GNS Science and Te Ara - The Encyclopedia of New Zealand.