Boat capsizes, crew missing
A massive search was set to continue through Monday night off Liverpool for five fishermen who were aboard a boat that reportedly capsized late Sunday.
An emergency beacon was set off just after 11 p.m., after the 14-metre vessel named the Miss Ally went down in heavy seas and near hurricane-force winds.
“The weather conditions were extremely poor,” said Lt. Peter Ryan of Maritime Forces Atlantic.
“Seas were reported at eight to 10 metres, up to hurricane force winds, zero visibility and blowing snow,” Ryan said.
George Hopkins, the father of one of the missing men, 27-year-old Joel Hopkins, said he was last speaking with those aboard at 10:30 p.m. Sunday.
SEE ALSO:Fishing community hopes for miracle at sea
The others on board are Steven Cole Nickerson, known as Cole, from Woods Harbour; Katlin Nickerson, the boat’s skipper, from Woods Harbour; Billy Hatfield from Cape Sable Island and Tyson Townsend from Woods Harbour.
A prayer vigil was held Monday evening at Calvary Baptist Church in Woods Harbour, in the midst of numerous power outages affecting the community.
Monday night, Capt. Doug Keirstead of the Joint Task Force Atlantic described plans to ramp up the search through the night and bring in more aircraft to supplement the ships and aircraft already out.
Six-metre seas were still making the search difficult late Monday, he said.
Ryan said two Canadian Coast Guard vessels — Sir William Alexander and Earl Grey — were dispatched to the area sometime after the signal was received at 11:06.
Also searching was a U.S. Coast Guard Falcon aircraft out of Cape Cod and a Royal Canadian Air Force helicopter that left Greenwood at first light.
The U.S. aircraft crew was able to spot a life-raft in the area “but nothing else,” said Ryan.
A U.S. Coast Guard spokesperson said the Falcon, a fixed-wing aircraft, left at 12:20 a.m., went out to the scene and didn’t get back until 3 a.m.
While over the area where the vessel reportedly went down, coast guard crews saw a life-raft but visibility was so poor they couldn’t tell if anyone was aboard or nearby, said the officer who answered the phone at the Cape Cod station.
“We saw the life-raft via a flare,” he said.
The crew dropped a marker in the water that provides “total water current information,” he said. “It … lets us know where the drift is going.”
After 20 minutes, the crew had to return to base because the weather was so bad, the spokesman said. The Canadian Coast Guard has not asked that U.S. crews go back out to the scene, he said.
George Hopkins said the Miss Ally’s crew is experienced.
“They are to a certain extent, but the captain is really young,” said Hopkins. “I don’t know how experienced you can be when he’s only 21 or so. … The oldest one is only about 32 or 33.”
Hopkins said the crew probably had survival suits aboard. However, he said fishermen don’t wear them while they’re working because they restrict movement.
Transport Canada records show the vessel is owned by Katlin Nickerson. The fishing boat, made from moulded reinforced plastic, was built by Hubbie’s Boat Builders Ltd. of Clark’s Harbour in 2006, the records say.
Eddie Nickerson, the warden of the Municipality of Barrington, said the community of 7,000 was waiting anxiously for any news.
“I know all of the boys that were on the boat,” he said. “It’s a fragile situation.
“I just can’t picture myself in the position of the families.
“(But) it’s good that much of the community is very supportive around here. Friends and family have gathered at the families’ homes. They’re all comforting each other and doing what they can do to make a terrible situation a little more comfortable.”