One dead and four injured after horrific German police helicopter crash
A police officer was killed and four others seriously injured when two helicopters crashed into each other during a riot training exercise above Berlin's Olympic Stadium.
Both vehicles were reduced to fiery hulks when they smashed into a field adjoining the stadium during a snowstorm.  Reports suggest that the vehicles flew too close to one another while one was descending and their rotors clashed.
The helicopters, thought to be carrying up to 25 police officers each, were taking part in a training exercise dealing with football violence and crowd control.
The Olympic Stadium, which is now home to the Hertha Berlin Bundesliga football club, was the focal point of the Olympic Games in 1936, dubbed Hitler's Games. It also hosted the World Cup final in 2006.
Fireworks were reportedly being let off to create riot conditions when the collision occurred.  One pilot was pictured walking away from the wreckage of his craft with blood streaming down his face from a head wound.
As well as the serious injuries and fatality, media reports spoke of 'many others' being hurt.
The crash between the Puma helicopters happened at 10.40am this morning. Some 400 police officers were on the ground and dashed to the nearby fields to help their stricken comrades when they saw the aircraft go down in flames.
Reports suggest that the crash happened when one helicopter was preparing to land and did not notice the other beneath it.
The machines were no more than 100 feet off the ground when they collided, while it is understood that the dead pilot was at the controls of the lower aircraft.
Alex Lier, a reporter for the Bild newspaper who was at the scene, said: 'Everyone is in shock. Three helicopters were airborne in a real snowstorm. 
'Then one heard a loud bang and someone shouted: 'Everyone get down!' There was blood and wreckage everywhere.'
The helicopters are part of a fleet operated by the Federal Police - the national force - as opposed to the local Berlin police.  An immediate inquiry is underway into the cause of the crash as local hospitals deal with the casualties.
One of the helicopter pilots died at the scene, fire service spokesman Stephan Fleischer said, who confirmed that five people were injured, four of them seriously.
A female police officer is among the four severely wounded in the crash.
Federal Police spokesman Frank Brochert confirmed there 'was an incident during an exercise' and that emergency crews were on the scene. He had no details about the accident.
Fire service spokesman Sven Gerling said his initial information was that two helicopters crashed, but he had no further details on the accident.
It was not immediately clear whether the injured people were in the helicopters, Mr Fleischer said.
Pictures from the scene showed one of the helicopters lying on its side in the snow in a field behind the stadium and the other next to it, still upright.
Eyewitness Johannes Malinowski said on n-tv television that he saw three helicopters approaching and that the snow on the field was being kicked up by the aircraft, so 'you couldn't see a whole lot anymore'.
There was then 'a big bang' he said, 'and then we looked up and there was blood on the ground'.
The training exercise being conducted was thought to have related to football violence.
Germany's main police union is calling for clarification why the training exercise was green-lighted when the weather was so bad in Berlin.
The president of the GdP union said: 'We need answers.  But immediately our sympathies and concern lie with the survivors and for the family of the dead officer.  We wish a speedy and full recovery to our injured colleagues.'