Bangladesh: Rescuers use massive strips of cloth as escape chutes after textile factory collapses killing at least 275 people
At least 275 people died yesterday when a factory building which supplies clothes to Primark collapsed in Bangladesh.
The clothing chain offered condolences to the dead and their families.
Matalan also took orders from one of the factories in the building until two months ago, while campaigners said the brands Benetton and Mango also used suppliers in the block – although this was denied by the retailers yesterday.
Around 2,000 workers were in the eight-storey building when it collapsed without warning yesterday morning. The Rana Plaza in Savar, near the capital Dhaka, housed five garment factories.
More than half of the 1,000 injured are understood to be women, while some are children as the building also housed a crèche.
Today the death toll stood at 275. Doctors at local hospitals said they were unable to cope with the number of victims arriving from the disaster site.
Police said factory owners appeared to have ignored a warning not to allow their workers into the building after a crack was detected on Tuesday.
'It looks like an earthquake has struck here,' said one resident as he looked on at the chaotic scene of smashed concrete
Survivor Shaheena Akhter, 23, said: ‘Some of us did not want to work fearing something might happen, but the garment factory people told us that we had to join our work otherwise we will lose our jobs.’ The tragedy highlights the unsafe conditions many endure in factories making clothes for Western companies.
Tessel Pauli, a spokesman for the Clean Clothes Campaign, said: ‘These accidents represent a failure of these brands to make safety a priority.’
A Primark spokesman said: ‘Primark has been engaged to review the Bangladeshi industry’s approach to factory standards.
‘Primark will push for this to also include building integrity.’ Two factories in the building – New Wave Style and New Wave Bottoms – were making clothing for Mango of Spain and Benetton of Italy, according to campaign group Bangladesh Center for Workers Solidarity. But the companies denied their clothes were being made in the building.
Matalan received supplies from New Wave Style up until February. A spokesman said last night: ‘We are deeply saddened by the news.’