Party bus collides with a crashed car on Highway 101 in Burlingame – The Mercury News
BURLINGAME — A 36-year-old San Mateo woman died after the car she was in as a passenger crashed on Highway 101 and was run into by a party bus early Sunday, according to the California Highway Patrol. Ten people were injured and sent to hospitals.
According to a CHP collision report, the unidentified woman was riding in a 1995 Honda coupe driven by Raul Padilla, 43, of Oakland, about 2 a.m. The coupe was traveling south near the Broadway exit in Burlingame when the driver lost control. Officers said the car may have hit the center divider and came to rest facing oncoming traffic. Moments later, according to the CHP, the party bus — a 1998 Ford — crashed into the stranded car.
Investigators believe the coupe’s driver and the victim had been drinking alcohol that evening. However, their blood-alcohol levels were not available. The dead woman was not wearing a seat belt, according to the CHP. Padilla was transported to Stanford Hospital with major injuries.
The collision report listed the party bus driver as Anderson Davis, 67, of Berkeley. Officers said he suffered moderate injuries but refused medical attention at the scene.
Two other cars were involved in the accident, a Lexus and a Honda Civic. The drivers were not injured. No arrests have been made.
Eight passengers from the party bus were hospitalized, two with moderate injuries and six with minor injuries.
Those taken to Stanford Hospital included Jeckrie Unabia, 28, and Haydee Martinez, 27, of Santa Clara; Julienne Sagun, 22, and Joshua Tan, 28, of Mountain View; and May Ann Granale, 45, and Carlos Cambia Jr., 30, of San Jose.
San Francisco General admitted Tola Magee, 30, of San Rafael; Mariel Joy Garnace, 21, of San Jose; and Herland Martinez, 24, of Santa Clara.
The freeway was closed to southbound traffic for about two hours.
The CHP is asking witnesses to the accident to call 650-369-6261.
David DeBolt covers breaking news. Contact him at 925-943-8048. Follow him at Twitter.com/daviddebolt.