2 die, 305 survive after airliner crash lands at San Francisco airport
A fireball erupted after the Boeing 777 airliner hit the runway hard around 11:30 a.m., rocked back and forth, spun around, shearing off the plane's tail. Scores of passengers and crew climbed out -- some jumping, others sliding down evacuation chutes as flames and smoke billowed from the aircraft's windows.
Two people were found dead outside the plane, according to San Francisco fire Chief Joanne Hayes-White. "My understanding is that they were found on the runway," she said. The airline identified the dead girls as students Wang Linjia and Ye Mengyuan, both 16.
one posted online by David Eun That's an understandable sentiment for anyone who heard passenger and eyewitness accounts, or saw the distressing, distorted images showing what remained of Asiana Airlines Flight 214. Some photos painted an almost otherworldly scene -- like one posted online by David Eun of passengers walking from the burning plane. Some dragged their carry-on bags. One man held his hands steady to snap a picture.
Elliott Stone was one of them. He was "10 seconds away from being home" when the airplane dipped "kind of sharp," followed by another adjustment "and then just boom, the back end just hit and flies up in the air and everybody's head goes up to the ceiling."
The first announcement "was everybody calm," Stone said, but he and others unbuckled anyway. He told CNN he jumped out a door, before slides had deployed and before first responders had arrived. When they did, they saw some people climbing out of San Francisco Bay around the airport, Hayes-White said.
Members of South Korea's Aviation and Railway Accident Investigation Board will travel to San Francisco, that agency said. They'll be joined by a "go-to" team from the United States' National Transportation Safety Board, led by chairman Deborah Hersman. Right now, they're not sure what they'll find, though a U.S. national security official has said there are no signs of terrorism.
Fifty-two of them are at San Francisco General Hospital, including five patients in critical condition, hospital spokeswoman Rachael Kagan said. Another 45 have been treated at a Stanford University hospital, some of them suffering from "life-threatening injuries," said Dr. David Spain, the chief of trauma.
By 3:30 p.m., though, two of the San Francisco airport's four runways were open -- though the other two were still closed over eight hours later.
One of South Korea's two major airlines, the other being Korean Air, it flies to 23 other countries. Many of the 25-year-old airline's flight go out of Incheon International Airport, which is the largest airport in South Korea and considered among the busiest in the world.
What happened to the flight is one part of the story. But there are 307 more personal stories out there -- of people who were moments from wrapping up a long flight, but instead endured a nightmare.
Some who weren't on board also have stories to tell -- whether they saw the horror from an aircraft, tried to track down family members, or counted their blessings in other ways.
Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook's chief operating officer and author of the book "Lean In," is in the latter category. She was supposed to be on Flight 214, but switched to a United flight, arriving about 20 minutes before the Asiana flight crashed.