Tornadoes rip through towns in US south-west; at least 17 killed in Arkansas, Oklahoma, officials say
Tornadoes have ripped through the central and southern United States, killing at least 17 people.
Authorities in Arkansas said at least 10 people had died in Faulkner and six more across the state - the first reported fatalities of this year's tornado season.
Another person was killed in neighbouring Oklahoma, the sheriff's department said.
The small town of Vilonia, home to about 4,000 people in central Arkansas, was badly hit and rescuers are searching debris for survivors.
A death was also reported in nearby Mayflower, 35 kilometres north-west of state capital Little Rock, and three people were killed in western Pulaski County, according to the sheriff's department.
Local television footage has showed houses ripped off their foundations, with cars on top of the rubble.
"Tonight, I walked around what was only hours earlier a thriving neighbourhood that is now gone," said congressman Tim Griffin.
"An entire neighbourhood of 50 or so homes has been destroyed - many homes are completely gone except the foundation, and there is more devastation like this in other parts of Arkansas."
About 45 homes were destroyed and a lumberyard was damaged at Mayflower, according to Will Elder, an alderman in the town of 2,300 people.
The tornado passed through the east side of town, tearing up trees and bringing down powerlines, making it difficult for the emergency services to find stricken areas in the darkness.
"It's extremely hazardous here right now," Mr Elder said. "The power lines are down, roads are blocked, and they will have to proceed with caution."
Just over three years ago, parts of Vilonia were destroyed by a tornado, killing four people.
Vilonia mayor James Firestone told CNN the tornado was much stronger than the 2011 tornado and had caused a lot more damage.
"Good grief ... I can't even tell what this is," Mr Brusk said in comments reported on Twitter. "It's chaos right now."
A storm spotter in Mayflower reported an 800-metre-wide tornado crossing Interstate 40 about 7:30pm (local time), the National Weather Service said.
An Ottawa County, Oklahoma, police dispatcher said a search and rescue effort was underway in Quapaw.
That twister was spotted in Quapaw, 322 kilometres north-east of Oklahoma City at about 5:45pm (local time), according to the weather service.
Tornadoes were also reported in parts of Iowa, Kansas, Nebraska and Missouri, causing some damage but no known injuries, according to local officials and the weather service.
Trained spotters reported several tornadoes, with at least one touching down in southern Bates County, Missouri, said Brad Vermaas, the county's deputy director of emergency management.
Debris, apparently mostly trees, were left in the tornado's path, he said.