Typhoon Phanfone leaves one US military official dead, three missing as it passes Tokyo
At least one US military official is dead and two are missing after being swept away by big waves when Typhoon Phanfone made landfall in Japan.
The three officials were swept away by high waves lashing the south-western island of Okinawa on Sunday.
One was found dead and two are still missing. A surfer was also swept out to sea.
About 10 people have been injured across the nation in storm-related accidents.
The storm brushed past Tokyo on Monday morning, and by noon was moving rapidly north-east, clearing skies enough that Mount Fuji was clearly visible to the south-west of the city.
More than 600 domestic flights have been cancelled, with Japan Airlines saying it had cancelled 19 international flights. Service west on the Shinkansen bullet train has been suspended and commuter train services have been delayed or suspended in the capital, affecting millions of commuters.
Close to 200,000 households throughout eastern Japan were urged to evacuate due to fears of landslides or flooding as rivers threatened to burst their banks. This included 20,000 in Tokyo.
Some areas were forecast to see a month's worth of rain before the storm weakened and headed out to sea.
One city in the central area of Shizuoka had 9cm of rain in an hour.
Phanfone made landfall near the central city of Hamamatsu, prompting Honda to halt production at its Hamamatsu and Suzuka plants, while Nissan said it was halting production at its Oppama plant.
Meanwhile, the storm has forced Japanese authorities to suspend the search for the bodies of those still missing at Mt Ontake, more than a week after the volcano erupted.
Authorities are still searching for the bodies of at least 12 hikers believed to be lying on the still-smouldering Mount Ontake, from where 51 have already been retrieved.
The volcano was packed with walkers when it burst angrily to life on September 27, with many there to witness the spectacular colours of the countryside at the arrival of autumn.
The eruption is Japan's deadliest in almost 90 years and nearly 1,000 troops, firefighters and police have participated in a search made treacherous by the gases still rising from the peak, as well as a knee-deep layer of sticky ash.
"We want to resume operations as soon as possible when weather permits," said an official of the crisis management office of Nagano, where the volcano sits.