Hudhud: Three killed as cyclone Hudhud crosses AP coast with wind speed of 195-200kmph
HYDERABAD: Three people were killed in rain-related incidents as cyclone Hudhud crossed the Visakhapatnam coast on Sunday uprooting trees and damaging power lines. "Three deaths have been reported due to the impact of Hudhud cyclone. Two died after trees fell on them and one in collapse of compound-wall in Visakhapatnam and Srikakulam districts, respectively," Andhra Pradesh chief secretary IVR Krishna Rao said. During the cyclone, winds with 195-200kmph speed have been reported causing uprooting of a lot of trees. The wind has also damaged electrical poles and mobile towers. Due to fall of electric poles, electricity and communication network have been effected in the area, he said. People of Visakhapatnam, Srikakulam and Vizianagaram districts have been asked to stay back in their houses and if the walls of their houses are weak they can shift to cyclone relief centres, Rao said. The cyclone, which crossed the Visakhapatnam coast, seems to be in a period of lull in the first hour, but people should follow the advisory as it may suddenly aggravate later, officials said. NDRF teams have been deployed in affected areas, the chief secretary said. Strong winds batter Visakhapatnam as cyclone Hudhud makes landfall in city. (Photo: ANI/Twitter) Uprooted trees, torn roofs of hutments and sheds and snapped electric cables bore testimony to the impact of severe cyclonic storm Hudhud. Normal life was thrown completely out of gear as winds with a speed of 170 to 180 kmph battered Visakhapatnam, Srikakulam and Vizianagaram districts. The very severe cyclonic storm made the landfall in Visakhapatnam before noon on Sunday. The gale, accompanied by heavy downpour, resulted in trees being uprooted and roofs of thatched huts and sheds swept away. Electric poles, cables and hoardings fell on the roads at many places in Visakhapatnam and Srikakulam districts. The impact of the gale was the most in Visakhapatnam. "Windows are broken due to the wind. We are feeling the impact even if the windows are closed," said many a residents of Visakhapatnam. Communication systems were badly affected in Visakhapatnam and Srikakulam districts. Roads wore a deserted look in the affected districts as the government has appealed to the people to remain indoors till the intensity of the cyclonic storm is weakened. Agriculture crops have also suffered damages in Srikakulam, Visakhapatnam and Vizianagaram districts, but the exact details would be known later.