AirAsia QZ8501: Indonesian Navy confirms plane's cockpit voice recorder has been retrieved
The Indonesian Navy has confirmed it has found and recovered the second piece of the crashed AirAsia plane's flight recorder.
Earlier, divers reported having retrieved the cockpit voice recorder from the wreck of the AirAsia plane that crashed into the Java Sea last month, killing all 162 people on board.
Santoso Sayogo, an investigator at the National Transportation Safety Committee (NTSC), told the AFP news agency the device was found among wreckage on the seabed near where the flight data recorder, which constitutes the other half of the plane's "black box", was found on Monday.
He said the voice recorder was taken on board an Indonesian navy vessel and was expected to be sent to Jakarta for analysis.
But the claims were not officially confirmed by the NTSC or the National Search and Rescue Agency BASARNAS.
However, Rear Admiral Widodo, who only goes by one name, has now officially confirmed the cockpit voice recorder has been recovered.
He said the navy will keep working to find the main section of the plane.
"We predict that there would [be] some bodies in that part of the plane, so we are doing our best to continue our efforts in searching, finding and retrieving the main body," he said.
Dozens of Indonesian navy divers have been taking advantage of calmer weather as they attempt to find the main body of the aircraft.
Analysis of the recorder could provide an explanation as to what happened to the ill-fated flight, which lost contact with air traffic control in bad weather on December 28, less than halfway into a two-hour flight from Indonesia's second-biggest city of Surabaya to Singapore.
Earlier the flight data recorder was brought by helicopter to Pangkalan Bun, the southern Borneo town that has been the base for the search effort, and then flown to Jakarta for analysis.
Officials said it would undergo a lengthy analysis in the capital with the help of a team of experts including from France and manufacturer Airbus.
The head of the transport safety committee Tatang Kurniadi said the flight data recorder looked to be in good condition.
But investigators may need up to a month to get a complete reading of the data.
"The download is easy, probably one day," the NTSC's head investigator, Mardjono Siswosuwarno, said.
"But the reading is more difficult ... could take two weeks to one month."
The committee said a preliminary report on the accident would be produced within a month and a final report after a year.
Forty-eight bodies have been retrieved from the Java Sea and brought to Surabaya for identification.
Searchers believe more bodies will be found in the plane's fuselage.
Relatives of the victims have urged authorities to make finding the remains of their loved ones the priority.
Search and rescue agency operations coordinator SB Supriyadi said the distribution of the wreckage of the plane indicated it probably "experienced an explosion" due to a significant change in air pressure before hitting the water.
He said the left side of the plane seemed to have disintegrated, pointing to a change in pressure that could have caused an explosion.
"It exploded because of the pressure," Mr Supriyadi said.
"The cabin was pressurised and before the pressure of the cabin could be adjusted, it went down - boom."
Mr Supriyadi said the fact that fishermen in the area had reported hearing an explosion and saw smoke above the water supported this theory.
But another official disputed the likelihood of a blast.
"There is no data to support that kind of theory," said the NTSC's Santoso Sayogo.