Morley Galleria explosion at Woolworths in Perth shopping centre
THERE are reports one person is dead and up to nine people have been injured after an explosion at Galleria shopping centre in Morley, in Perth’s northeast.
TWO people are dead and up to eight more are injured after an explosion at Galleria shopping centre in Morley, in Perth’s northeast.
Witnesses say they saw people “burning from head to toe” as they ran from the blast.
It is believed that a transformer exploded near a Woolworths at about 9.30am, although police said the cause of the explosion is unknown.
Three men were taken to Royal Perth Hospital with serious burns, with one suffering burns to 80 per cent of his body. Two of the men remain in critical condition.
St John Ambulance said half a dozen people were treated at the scene for smoke inhalation and shock. Some of the injured were electrical contractors who had been inside the Woolworths.
A woman who was trying to assist the injured was taken to Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital for smoke inhalation.
A spokesperson for the ambulance service said the man with burns to 80 per cent of his body was conscious and breathing when paramedics arrived. “All of these people are in for a long stint in hospital,” the spokesman added.
One witness, Christine Saarinsen, told Perth Now she had seen “a wall of flames’’ coming out of the side of the Morley Galleria and at least three people on fire. She said she heard an expolsion like a gas bottle going off.
“We ran out and saw the flames coming out of the building,” she said. “We saw these three guys burning, one guy was trying to strip his clothes off, another was rolling on the ground.
“Another ran and collapsed under a tree on his stomach. Some of the doctors ran out with blankets. The guy under the tree was screaming his head off. It was not a nice sight.”
Police commissioner Karl O’Callaghan also told Fairfax radio that police received a report that two people were on fire.
WA Police said in a statement: “One person is confirmed deceased, and three others are being treated for injuries they received, one of which is in a critical condition. It is believed all four persons were working in an area near the electrical transformer.
“The cause of the explosion is unknown and WA Police will be working with WorkSafe and EnergySafety personnel as part of the investigation. A report will be prepared for the Coroner.”
Police have ruled out lightning from a severe electrical storm as the cause.
A Royal Perth Hospital spokeswoman confirmed to news.com.au that three people had been admitted and were in critical condition.
Another six people were reportedly treated at scene and may also require hospital treatment.
Witness Chris Spencer, a primary school teacher from Perth’s Northern Suburbs, told the Eastern Reporter he had arrived at the the Galleria shortly after the blast. He said sections of the shopping centre near Target and Woolworths had been completely blocked off.
“There were four or five people in high-vis vests looking very sombre and not allowing people to go through,” he said. “All the shops around have been closed and the owners are out on their phones and sort of looking a bit nervous and anxious, and there was one lady who was in tears outside the shop near where it happened.”
Shopping centre worker Jody Turner said she felt the vibration of the explosion from her nearby home. She rushed to her workplace, Barbecues Galore, and said she was horrified by the scene.
Tegan Chick, 24, was in a nearby car park when she heard screaming. “By the time I came around there was a large number of members of the public and doctors from the surgery helping,” she told Perth Now. “There were a few people lying on the ground with burns ... some people got the fire hydrant open. I was filling up water bottles and directing traffic away. Everyone worked really well together.”
An ABC journalist tweeted that even mothers with prams sprang into action to help the injured, with bystanders using soaked clothing to treat burn victims.
Twitter user @lilmissatheist said her husband saw people on fire. She tweeted: “My husband just witnessed the horrific aftermath of the Morley Galleria explosion. Poor men on fire. Much sympathy to the victims.”
Woolworths has released a statement saying that the store was evacuated following an explosion.
“This incident occurred on Morley Galleria property controlled by Federation Centres,” the statement said. “It did not occur in the Woolworths store or area managed by Woolworths.
“Our thoughts are with those injured in the incident. Unfortunately we understand WA Police have confirmed there has been a fatality and our thoughts are with family and friends.”
The Department of Fire and Emergency Services has cordoned off the scene. A spokeswoman for the department told news.com.au a “large number” of fire crews were at the scene. At least 10 crews rushed to the shopping centre at 9.37am (Perth time) and the fire was extinguished by 10am. EnergySafe and WorkSafe will investigate the incident.
MORE TO COME.