Nepal earthquake collapses buildings in Kathmandu and northern India killing more than 1,300, officials say
A massive earthquake has hit Nepal and north India, killing more than 1,300 people, collapsing a nine-storey tower in Kathmandu and triggering a fatal avalanche on Mount Everest.
A police official said the death toll in Nepal alone had reached 1,341, more than half of them in the Kathmandu Valley, making it the country's worst earthquake in more than 80 years.
A further 36 fatalities were reported in northern India, 12 in Chinese Tibet and four in Bangladesh.
At least 10 of those killed in Nepal were people at Mount Everest base camp, part of which was buried after an avalanche triggered by the earthquake.
"An avalanche from Mt Pumori has hit the base camp, burying a part of it," tourism official Gyanendra Shrestha said.
"We don't have the details yet, but 10 have been reported dead so far, including foreign climbers," he said.
The US Geological Survey said the magnitude-7.9 quake struck 77 kilometres north-west of Kathmandu at lunchtime (local time), with walls crumbling and families racing outside their homes.
Rescue workers were seen dragging bodies from the rubble and TV footage showed chaotic scenes at the site, as people desperately tried to dig through piles of bricks and dust with their bare hands.
Among the Kathmandu landmarks destroyed by the quake was the historic 60-metre-high Dharahara Tower, built in 1832 for the queen of Nepal.
A jagged stump just 10 metres high was all that was left of the lighthouse-like structure.
As bodies were pulled out of the ruins, a policeman said up to 200 people had been trapped inside.
Dharmu Subedi, 36, was standing outside the tower when it collapsed.
"It was difficult to breathe, but I slowly moved the debris. Someone then pulled me out. I don't know where my friends are," said Mr Subedi from a hospital bed.
The tower had been open to visitors for the last 10 years and had a viewing balcony on its eighth floor.
ABC reporter Siobhan Heanue was in the old part of the capital, and experienced the quake first hand.
She said the quake sent thousands of people running for their lives.
In the capital Kathmandu, old temples — many World Heritage-listed and some dating back to the Middle Ages — have been destroyed or damaged.The three Royal Squares, Patan Bhaktapur and Kathmandu Durbar Squares, suffered significant damage.In Patan, several temples collapsed, sending thousands of people running for their lives.The square was packed with tourists and locals out enjoying a Saturday afternoon relaxing on temple stoops and wandering through the historic buildings.The built-up surrounds of the square left people with few options for safe harbour when the quake hit.People screamed in terror as the shaking intensified and historic buildings crumbled.The earthquake, measuring 7.9 in magnitude, lasted for over a minute and was followed by several strong aftershocks.Locals rushed to clear piles of rubble, searching for survivors with their bare hands, picks and shovels, amid a minimal police presence.The rescuers sometimes tossed, sometimes gingerly lifted priceless cultural relics from the ruins as they scrambled to unearth any survivors.At least 12 bodies were pulled from the rubble at Patan Durbar Square with no reports of survivors from under collapsed buildings in the temple complex.The city of Kathmandu was encircled in clouds of dust, with injured people sitting bandaged in the street and many being stretchered out of buildings by neighbours or dragged from under the rubble of collapsed homes and businesses.The taxi and bus system disintegrated, leading to an exodus of thousands of people walking through the streets of the capital to get home, many stopping to gawk at destroyed temples and houses.People converged in open spaces like wide streets and parks as aftershocks continued into the night, huddling amid mounds of concrete and bricks removed from the site of collapsed buildings nearby.The healthcare and emergency infrastructure of the developing nation already appears severely stretched by the magnitude of this natural disaster.Compounding the crisis for Nepal, mountaineering season has just begun and many thousands of trekkers in the mountains may not be able to be contacted for days.
"At the ancient temple complex near Patan in the south of the city called Durbar Square several temples collapsed to the ground as people fled," she said.
"Shortly after rescue crews swung into action, locals and tourists even have been helping to clear the rubble.
"There were several violent aftershocks and Nepalese people have fled into open squares for safety."
A Reuters reporter in Kathmandu said he had seen some buildings collapse and walls of several houses reduced to rubble.
"Everyone is out in the streets, people are rushing to the hospital," the reporter said.
Victorian aid worker Wes Pryor was in Kathmandu when the earthquake struck, but said he had heard of more destruction elsewhere.
"There's reports of landslides blocking roads, whole parts of neighbourhoods being pushed down the valley and very significant casualties in those areas," he said.
"There are reports coming in from further west in Nepal, from Pokhara, where the epicentre of the earthquake was nearby, that there are villages there that are not there any more."
He said people were calm, but expecting more chaos overnight.
"We expect it to rain so people are finding temporary shelter, rushing back into their homes — when it's safe to do so — to get cooking equipment and water, so by and large the city is now pretty stable, people are calm," he said.
"But as we have aftershocks and we see houses move a little bit we anticipate that there might be some more chaos going into the night."
It tore through the middle of highways in the capital and also caused damage to the country's only international airport, in a potential blow to relief efforts.
The airport's general manager, Birendra Prasad Shrestha, said it would remain closed "for safety reasons".
Metropolitan police spokesman Dinesh Acharya said the rescue efforts would be focused on the areas with the highest populations.
Strong tremors were felt as far away as New Delhi and other northern cities in India.
At least 34 people were known to have died in India, including 23 in the eastern state of Bihar, while buildings in the capital New Delhi had to be evacuated.
Laxman Singh Rathore, director-general of the Indian Meteorological Department, told reporters that the impact had been felt across large areas of the country.
"The intensity was felt in entire north India. More intense shocks were felt in eastern UP (Uttar Pradesh) and Bihar, equally strong in sub-Himalayan West Bengal, Sikkim," he said.
Mr Rathore said that a second tremor of magnitude 6.6 had been recorded around 20 minutes later and centred around the same region.
Indian prime minister Narendra Modi said in a tweet: "We are in the process of finding more information and are working to reach out to those affected, both at home and in Nepal".
A police officer in the control room of the Indian state of Bihar said the phone lines were jammed with callers from across the heavily populated state.
"We don't know about the casualties, we are flooded with calls," the officer said.
China's official Xinhua news agency said that two people, including an 83-year-old woman, were killed in the Tibet region as a result of the quake.
The earthquake was also felt across large areas of Bangladesh, triggering panic in the capital Dhaka as people rushed out onto the streets.
In the garment manufacturing hub of Savar, on the outskirts of Dhaka, at least 50 workers were injured after the quake set off a stampede in a garment factory, according to the private Jamuna television.
The United States said it would send a disaster response team to Nepal and has authorised an initial $US1 million to address immediate needs, the US Agency for International Development said on Saturday.