Video: Military plane crashes during test flight near Seville
A military plane has crashed near Seville, coming down in a field 15 minutes after take off and bursting into flames, killing four people and leaving the other two passengers seriously injured.
Spain's air traffic controllers said on their Twitter account that the pilots had communicated just before the impact that a fault was affecting the flight. The impact occurred a mile north of Seville airport, they said.
Mariano Rajoy, the Spanish prime minister, said all of those on board were Spanish employees of Airbus.
Spain's defence ministry said that the plane was not being flown by the Spanish military, and was under trial. The accident is the first since the aircraft, which was fraught by development and shipping delays, went into service.
Photos on social media showed a thick plume of black smoke from the crash site, and firefighters dousing the area in power to put out the blaze.
An Airbus spokesman said: "Airbus is devastated to confirm that of a total crew of six on board we have lost four of our crew members in the accident. Two other crew members are currently in hospital in a serious condition.
"All crew members are Airbus Defence and Space employees of Spanish nationality. Our thoughts are with the families and friends of those affected by this tragic accident and we are providing all our care and support."
The plane was an A400M - described by the Spanish website Airbus Defence and Space as "the most versatile airlifter currently available responding to the most varied needs of world Air Forces and other organisations in the 21st century."
The A400M's maiden flight was in December 2009, and it is used by seven European countries and Malaysia - Belgium, France, Germany, Luxemburg, Spain, Turkey and the UK.
Britain said that it was grounding its two A400Ms as a precaution.
An MoD spokeswoman said: "We are aware of reports that there has been an A400M crash in Seville. As a precaution, the UK's A400M aircraft are temporarily paused."
The plane was developed at a cost of 20 billion euros ($22.4 billion), in Europe's largest joint defence project. It entered service in 2013 after a delay of more than three years.
An Airbus A400M plane similar to the one that crashed
The plane is able to perform both tactical missions directly to the point of need, and long range logistic flights. It can also serve as an air-to-air refuelling tanker.
Spain's airport authority AENA confirmed that Seville airport has been closed because its fire crews have gone to attend a plane crash outside its perimeter fence. All flights to Seville are being diverted to Malaga and Jerez airports, AENA says.
An industrial estate near where the Airbus came down, in the suburb of Carmona, has lost electrical power as a result of the crash.