Typhoon Noul: Storm weakens after making landfall in north-east Philippines, heads north towards Japan
A powerful typhoon has weakened after slamming into the Philippines' north-eastern coast as a "super typhoon", before moving further north-east from the mainland.
Typhoon Noul, also known as Dodong, packed winds of up to 200 kilometres per hour near the centre, with gusts of up to 195 kilometres per hour.
The Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration said the typhoon made landfall over Pananapan Point in Cagayan province on Sunday about 4:45pm local time (6:45pm AEST).
Since making landfall, the eye of the storm travelled to the northern-most Philippines island of Batanes and was headed towards Japan.
Officials warned of landslides and called on residents along the coast to evacuate to safer ground.
"We strongly advise pre-emptive evacuation while we still have time, and we expect there will be a confluence of events — a high tide, heavy rainfall in the mountains, the possibility of a storm surge and strong winds," national disaster agency head Alexander Pama earlier told a news briefing.
"Even as we speak, our armed forces are already moving ... to help in the evacuation.
"So too are our police forces who are conducting evacuations in their municipalities."
About 3,000 people were evacuated from coastal towns in Isabela and Cagayan provinces.
Some evacuees in Cagayan had complained of insufficient food in temporary shelters, although authorities said they had prepared relief supplies ahead of the typhoon's arrival.
Disaster management officials said two people were electrocuted during the powerful storm.
The typhoon was expected to trigger landslides, flash flooding and storm surges of up to two metres in parts of the Cagayan Valley, the weather bureau said, adding that heavy to intense rainfall was likely within the typhoon's 150-kilometre diameter.
The disaster agency said there could be landslides in at least 21 areas of Santa Ana in Cagayan Valley province and nearby Gonzalo town.
More than 5,000 passengers and about 100 vessels were stranded in various ports in the country as of Saturday, mostly along its eastern seaboard.
Airline Cebu Pacific cancelled at least six domestic flights to the northern Philippines.
Officials in northern Philippine provinces have alerted rescue units and positioned relief goods.
The government readied trucks to ferry people away from low-lying and flood-prone areas.
In Taiwan, which is also in the storm's predicted path, authorities warned sailors of strong winds and high waves and evacuated almost 1,000 tourists from an island off the south-east coast.
"This is a very dangerous storm," Philippines marine weather division head Rene Paciente said.
"It is the strongest so far this year."
An average of 20 typhoons cross the Philippines each year, with the storms becoming fiercer in recent years.
More than 8,000 people died or went missing and about 1 million were made homeless by Haiyan, a category-five typhoon that struck the central Philippines in 2013, bringing five-metre-high storm surges.