Evacuations after heavy rain, floods and slips in Wellington region: Live blog
The Wellington region was battered on Thursday with torrential rain that caused slips, travel disruptions and left one person dead. Follow a recap of our coverage through the day below.
An elderly man was found dead in floodwaters after torrential rain brought chaos to the Wellington region. Police discovered the body of the 80-year-old man near Sladden Park, in Bracken St, Petone. More heavy rain and traffic disruptions are expected on Friday after the deluge that left homes flooded, roads turned to rivers, and trains cancelled. Thousands of commuters were stranded in Wellington, once again highlighting the fragility of the road network. The region was hit by a deluge of rain overnight causing slips and flooding, with 117.4mm falling in Paraparaumu and 96mm in Lower Hutt in the last 24 hours. More heavy rain is forecast for Friday. Residents are being advised by Civil Defence to stay out of floodwaters because of potential sewage contamination and electrical danger. Follow the latest updates on the weather and closures in the live blog below. State Highway 1 has re-opened but is restricted by flooding. SH2 has also partially re-opened. All commuter train services across the Wellington region have been cancelled until Friday afternoon at the earliest. Schools, businesses and homeowners have all been affected, with 18 homes evacuated.
NEED TO KNOW:  * 18 homes have been evacuated in Waikanae, Wharemauku Stream and Paekakariki. * SH1 is open. SH2 is open with one lane between Ngauranga Gorge and Petone, but is still closed northbound from the Dowse interchange. Paekakariki Hill Rd closed due to flooding. * All commuter train services across the Wellington region are cancelled until Friday afternoon. Wellington Railway Station is closed. * Heavy rain warning in place for Kapiti, Tararua Ranges and Horowhenua, south of Foxton. Heavy rain watch also in place in Wellington, Hutt Valley, Taranaki, Waikato and eastern Bay of Plenty. * Schools closed: Paraparaumu College, Kapiti College, Raumati Beach School, Wellington High School, Wellington Girls' College and Pukerua Bay School, Tawa College, Porirua East School. *Kenepuru Hospital cannot be accessed. READ MORE:  * Inside flood-hit homes* Homes evacuated as region braces for deluge* Flooding claims Kapiti resident's bed, clothing* Wet and wild week continues