Govt efforts lag, heat death toll crosses 800 in Andhra, Telangana
NEW DELHI: Despite Andhra Pradesh and Telangana's best efforts to tackle heatwave deaths with awareness campaigns and makeshift medical camps, at least 39 more people in the area's poorest regions fell to the fierce sun on Tuesday. Though officials in the two states were silent on the exact toll, unofficial figures put the number of deaths in the past week at over 800. The governments have launched campaigns in villages asking people to wear light clothes and not to step out of their houses between 9am and 4pm unless absolutely necessary. Thousands of ‘water camps' have been set up to provide drinking water to people. Oral rehydration salts and intravenous fluids have been made available at bus and railway stations across Andhra and Telangana, the two states where many passengers have suffered from dehydration. Experts blame the unseasonal rainfall from March till the second week of May for the high number of deaths. They said the rain meant there was no gradual rise in temperature — like in most years — and many people could not take the sudden jump in temperature seen in the past 10-odd days. "There may be many causes behind the heavy heatwave toll this year," said Aftab Ahmad, internal medicine expert, Apollo Health City, Hyderabad. "The prime among them is what is called climatic acclimatization. This year the temperature changed suddenly. This disturbs the defence mechanism of the body. The elderly, those involved in physical labour, young children and pregnant women easily suffer from sunstroke if there is poor climatic acclimatization. There will be no problem if there is gradual increase in the temperature. Other reasons could be delay in availability of medical facilities, no access to drinking water, severe dehydration, and electrolyte imbalance." On Tuesday, severe heatwave (seven degrees Celsius above normal) to heatwave (five degrees above normal or 45 degrees) conditions prevailed over many parts in Vizianagaram, Visakhapatnam, East Godavari, West Godavari, Krishna, Guntur, Prakasham and Nellore districts of coastal Andhra Pradesh. The temperature in most Telangana towns was above 42 degrees. Khammam in Telangana remained on the boil. On May 23, the mercury had touched 48 degrees, the highest in the past 68 years. Over the past couple of days, the temperature has dipped by a degree or two, but most people have locked themselves up indoors to escape the intense heat. Elsewhere in the country, too, there was little respite from the mercury's upward march. A boy splashes water outside a restaurant in Amritsar on Tuesday even as the Andhra Pradesh and Telangana governments launched campaigns in villages asking people to wear light clothes and not to step out of their houses between 9am and 4pm unless absolutely necessary. The government in Odisha has been flooded with reports of suspected sunstroke deaths. Though the government has so far received 65 such complaints this season, it has confirmed just four deaths in the past one week. One of the dead was a CRPF assistant sub-inspector. "The deceased, Pramod Kumar Sasmal (50), was returning with colleagues from an anti-Maoist combing operation at Gudari forest in Rayagada district when he collapsed on May 22 due to scorching heat," said Rayagada district collector Jagannath Mohanty. "He was immediately rushed to hospital, but he died," said Rayagada district collector Jagannath Mohanty. The day temperature in Rayagada that day was 43.5 degrees. In Ahmedabad, seven people have died due to the heatwave this month. "Hospitals in the city have registered 18 cases of heat-stroke so far this month," said Bhavin Solanki, in-charge health officer, Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation. "Of these, seven died." In Himachal, the maximum temperature fell by one to two degrees, with rainfall occurring in many parts. Una town (40 degrees) remained the hottest place in the state. The maximum temperature in Shimla was 29.3 degrees and in Manali, 19.2 degrees. In Punjab, the mercury climbed to 44 degrees in Amritsar and 43 degrees in Ludhiana and Patiala. Gwalior, Chambal region and Bundelkhand area of Madhya Pradesh continued to reel under extreme heatwave conditions as the mercury hovered around 46 degrees. In Chhattisgarh, Durg was the hottest (46.4 degrees), followed by Raipur (46.1 degrees). In Uttar Pradesh, heatwave conditions prevailed at isolated places. The day temperature was appreciably above normal in Allahabad, Kanpur, Lucknow, Bareilly, Agra, Jhansi and Meerut divisions. The highest maximum temperature was recorded in Allahabad (46.4 degrees).