Death toll jumps to 65 after China river cruise capsize as rescuers slice hull
Rescuers cut into upside-down hull of capsized Eastern Star in the Yangtze river, which a maritime agency found was cited for safety violations in 2013
Rescuers cut into the upside-down hull of a river cruise ship and pulled out 39 drowned passengers early on Thursday, bringing the death toll to 65 since the Eastern Star capsized on Monday night in the Yangtze river with more than 450 people aboard.
The Chinese state broadcaster, CCTV, said rescuers had used a crane to stabilise the ship and planned to cut into at least one other part of the hull.
Authorities say at least 14 people survived, some by jumping from the ship moments after a heavy storm sank it and swimming or drifting ashore. Three survivors were pulled by divers from air pockets inside the overturned hull on Tuesday after rescuers heard their yells for help.
The sudden overturning of the Eastern Star is on track to become the country’s deadliest maritime disaster in seven decades, and Chinese authorities have launched a high-profile response but have tightly controlled media coverage.
The premier, Li Keqiang, travelled to the disaster site in the Hubei province county of Jianli, where he urged “all-out”, around-the-clock efforts. But most of those on board remain missing. Many were elderly tourists on a cruise from Nanjing to the south-western city of Chongqing.
Records from a maritime agency show the capsized ship was cited for safety violations two years ago. Authorities in Nanjing held the ship and five other Yangtze cruise vessels after it found them violating standards during a safety inspection campaign in 2013, according to a report on the city’s maritime safety website. It did not specify the Eastern Star’s violations.
The shallow-draft boat, which was not designed to withstand heavy winds as an ocean-going vessel can, overturned in what Chinese weather authorities have called a cyclone with winds up to 130km/h (80mph).
“The river ships tend to have a lower standard on wind-resistance and wave-resistance than ocean ships,” Zhong Shoudao, president of the Chongqing boat design institute, said at a news conference with weather and transportation ministry officials.
“Under the special circumstance of cyclone, the pressure on the one side of the boat went beyond the standard it was designed for, resulting in the overturning of the boat.
“The boat had lifejackets and lifeboats, but due to the sudden capsizing, there was not enough time for people to put on lifejackets or for the signals to be sent out.”
More than 200 divers were working in shifts almost around-the-clock. The last survivor was found on Tuesday afternoon.
A transport ministry spokesman, Xu Chengguang, said divers would search the ship for as long as possible.
“Until all hope is lost and more accurate information becomes available, we will not give up on our final efforts, although I know that our colleagues at the scene are facing a great many difficulties,” Xu said.
Access to the site was blocked by police and paramilitary troops stationed along the Yangtze embankment, and local Communist party officials and the foreign ministry organised a boat trip for about four dozen journalists to a spot about 100 or 200 metres from the overturned hull.
The rescue and salvage efforts are being run from a massive barge tethered a few kilometres upstream of the wreckage. Reached through a watery wasteland of flooded crops and trees torn in half by high winds, it was a hive of activity where rescuers, paramilitary troops and army and navy specialists arrived and left by smaller boat.
The survivors included the ship’s captain and chief engineer, both of whom have been taken into police custody. Some relatives have asked whether everything was done to ensure passengers’ safety and have demanded help from officials in Nanjing and Shanghai in unruly scenes that have drawn a heavy police response.
CCTV said most of the passengers were aged between 50 and 80.
The Eastern Star was 76.5 metres (251 feet) long and 11 metres (36 feet) wide, and could carry a maximum of 534 people. It is owned by the Chongqing Eastern Shipping Corp, which focuses on tourism routes in the popular Three Gorges river canyon region. The company could not be reached for comment.
China’s deadliest maritime disaster in recent decades was when the Dashun ferry caught fire and capsized off Shandong province in November 1999, killing about 280.
With 65 dead and more than 370 people still missing, the Eastern Star disaster could become China’s deadliest since the sinking of the SS Kiangya off Shanghai in 1948, which is believed to have killed between 2,750 and nearly 4,000.