Sabah earthquake: Singapore students among 16 Mount Kinabalu dead as crews search 'river of stones'; rescuers criticised for slow response
Six Singapore primary school students and one teacher are among the 16 people so far confirmed killed by an earthquake that rocked Malaysia's Mount Kinabalu, Malaysian officials said.
Singaporean foreign minister K Shanmugam confirmed the bodies of six students, aged 12 and 13, had been identified.
The government also said a teacher and a Singaporean adventure guide perished, while another student and a teacher remained missing.
"Looking at the photos of these children, such young lives, full of promise, snuffed out," Mr Shanmugam said in a Facebook posting.
Twenty-nine Singaporean and international students and eight teachers from Singapore's Tanjong Katong Primary School (TKPS) were on a school excursion, climbing the popular peak, when Friday's magnitude-6.0 quake triggered massive landslides on the mountain.
The earthquake on South-East Asia's highest peak triggered a "river of stones" set loose by the large tremor.
An 80-member rescue team was dispatched on Sunday morning to search a section of trail on the popular climbing peak that was obliterated in rockfalls.
Authorities have so far given few details on the victims or the scenes encountered by search crews on the mountain in Malaysia's Sabah state on Borneo island, saying the poor state of some remains made identification difficult.
But Malaysia's The Star Online has released a photograph it claims is a list of the dead and missing, "posted in the search and rescue operations room", which displays the details of seven Malaysians, nine Singaporeans, and one each from the Philippines, Japan and China.
The details of a severely injured Singaporean is also separately listed.
Singapore's Straits Times newspaper said some of the Singaporean students were taking a route to the summit, known as the Via ferrata, that traversed a steeply sloping rock face in which climbers are tethered to ropes attached to the surface.
The quake would have left people on that section exposed to a hail of stones and boulders.
The Times said 19 TKPS pupils arrived home from Kota Kinabalu on Saturday afternoon to the relief of relatives and friends.
Singapore's education ministry said two other pupils and one teacher, who require more medical attention in regional capital Kota Kinabalu, will return to Singapore shortly.
The local Kinabalu Today news portal quoted rescue personnel saying that full recovery of remains could be impossible as some were pinned under massive boulders, or possibly swept to their deaths from the peak.
Australian climber Vee Jin Dumlao, who is now safe after being stranded on Kinabalu, told the ABC that the sight of death was in plain sight during their perilous descent.
"When I saw the corpses, lying uncollected in the rock fall, that was probably the point when I realised that things were actually very, very bad," she said.
Masidi Manjun, tourism minister for Sabah state, said on Twitter that search teams would focus on the section that he said has been "dubbed 'river of stones' when [the] earthquake struck early Friday which rendered the track impassable, trapping climbers".
Crews and officials engaged in search and rescue efforts have been kept on edge by aftershocks, including a Saturday afternoon tremor that Malaysian officials rated at magnitude-4.5.
The Sabah minister has also had to field criticism from climbers that search and rescue efforts were ineffective for hours after the Friday quake.
She said stranded climbers had to wait nine hours for help, with bad weather being an obstacle for only some of that time.
She said despite the clear weather, rescue officials told the group they would not be lifted out until the next day.
"At 4:30pm, it was decided that even though the tremors were still continuing, they were not as strong and we just had to take the risk and make our way down the mountain with the guides' help," she said.
Mrs Dumlao said the group guides were far more helpful than government rescue teams.
"The mountain guides were the heroes. They risked life and limb and made some difficult decisions that ultimately saved our lives, and had neither help nor recognition from the authorities," she told the ABC.
Mr Manjun responded to criticisms Sunday afternoon on Twitter saying, "It's easy to pick on weaknesses of search and rescue effort and I'm sure they are many. We'll talk about them during post-mortem. Now is not the time to blame."
Climbing has been suspended at Mount Kinabalu for at least three weeks so authorities can make repairs and assess safety risks.
Around 20,000 people complete the relatively easy climb each year.