Mecca's Grand Mosque crane collapse leaves 107 people dead
Authorities issued extreme weather warnings and earlier photos capture mosque being struck by lightning 
Crane is part of massive project to increase the area of the mosque to 
A Saudi official has confirmed that the annual hajj to Mecca will go ahead, despite the horrific crane disaster that killed 107 people and wounded 238 in the city yesterday.
The tragedy occurred when a crane crashed through the ceiling of the Grand Mosque of Mecca, the largest mosque in the world, amid high winds and thunderstorms on Friday afternoon. 
An investigation has been launched today, to probe claims that the health and safety standards at the mosque were insufficient. 
Some critics have claimed that the authorities were negligent in allowing a series of cranes to tower over the site, as hundreds of thousands of Muslims converge at the holy site for the annual hajj pilgrimage.
It has been confirmed today that this year's hajj will still go ahead despite the disaster, and is expected to begin on September 21. 
The annual pilgrimage is one of the largest religious festivals in the world, and last year drew two million worshipers.  
One of the five pillars of Islam requires every able-bodied Muslim to perform the Hajj pilgrimage at least once in their lifetime.
Muslim faithful from about 160 countries converge on the Islamic city and other locations in western Saudi Arabia to complete the holy journey.  
A Saudi official, who declined to be named, said: 'It definitely will not affect the hajj this season and the affected part will probably be fixed in a few days.'   
The giant Saudi Arabian mosque was full of people preparing for the 6.30pm Friday evening prayer session, which is one of the busiest times of the week, when the crane toppled in the heavy rain.
Dramatic footage shows the moment the crane struck the building, with another video capturing the chaos and confusion inside as people ran for shelter from the devastating impact.   
Photos posted on social media sees the polished tiled floor of the mosque covered in rubble, bodies and pools of blood, and people fleeing the area bleeding and covered in soot. 
The crane fell into the east side of the mosque, with its boom crashing through the roof, killing at least 107 people - with nine Indian citizens, 16 Pakistanis and 15 Iranians reportedly among the dead.
It is not yet known whether all those that died were killed by the crane's collapse, as some reports claim some were killed in a subsequent stampede. 
The governor of Mecca region, Prince Khaled al-Faisal, was seen talking with police at the mosque a few hours after the tragedy. 
Irfan al-Alawi, co-founder of the Mecca-based Islamic Heritage Research Foundation, compared the carnage to that caused by a bomb.
He suggested authorities were negligent by having a series of cranes overlooking the mosque.
'They do not care about the heritage, and they do not care about health and safety,' he said. 
Alawi is an outspoken critic of redevelopment at the holy sites, which he says is wiping away tangible links to the Prophet Mohammed. 
Online activists created a hashtag on Twitter last night urging Mecca residents to donate blood at hospitals in the area, and queues of locals hoping to help the effort formed at hospitals and medical centres across the city.
The crane belongs to a German crane company operated by the Bin Laden family's consortium, who are heading the expansion of the Holy Mosque.
Saudi BinLaden Group was founded by Osama's Bin Laden's billionaire father Mohammed and the sprawling construction conglomerate runs a large amount of major building contracts in the Sunni kingdom.   
A massive £14billion project is currently underway to increase the area of the mosque by 4.3million sq ft - so that it can accommodate up to 2.2 million people at once.
Pictures taken before the disaster show the crane being struck by a bolt of lightning and authorities are in little doubt extreme weather was to blame.
Earlier, the Civil Defence had issued thunderstorm, heavy rain and wind warnings in the area. 
Following the collapse, hundreds of rescue medical workers rushed to the scene and were pictured stretchering bodies away, while many walking wounded stumbled out of the building.
'All those who were wounded and the dead have been taken to hospital. There are no casualties left at the location,' General Suleiman al-Amr, director general of the Civil Defence Authority, told al-Ikhbariya television. 
The general disputed reports that a bolt of lightning hit the crane just moments before it fell, and reports that some of those who died were killed in a following stampede.
Strong wind and rains had uprooted trees and rocked cranes in the area, he said.
The Prime Minister has offered his 'thoughts and prayers' to the families of those killed.
Tweeting from his Number 10 office account: 'My thoughts and prayers are with those who have lost loved ones at Mecca today.'
Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond said: 'I'm shocked and saddened to hear of the accident in Mecca involving a large number of fatalities amongst those attending the Hajj. My thoughts are with the families of those affected.'
The Grand Mosque, or Great Mosque of Mecca, surrounds Islam's holiest place, the Kaaba, in the city of Mecca.
A spokesperson for the administration of the mosques in Mecca and Medina said the crane collapsed onto the part of the Grand Mosque where worshippers circle the Kaaba - the black-covered cube towards which Muslims direct their prayers. 
The mosque is usually at its most crowded on Fridays as it is the Muslim weekly day of prayer, when Muslims face in the direction of the Kaaba while performing their obligatory daily prayers. 
Abdel Aziz Naqoor, who said he works at the mosque, told AFP he saw the massive construction crane fall after being hit by the storm.
'If it weren't for Al-Tawaf bridge the injuries and deaths would have been worse,' he said, referring to a covered walkway that surrounds the holy Kaaba, which broke the crane's fall.  
The hajj pilgrimage has been prone to disasters in the past, mainly from stampedes as pilgrims rushed to complete rituals and return home. Hundreds of pilgrims died in such a stampede in 2006.
Saudi authorities have since lavished vast sums to expand the main haj sites and improve Mecca's transportation system, in an effort to prevent more disasters.
Security services often ring Islam's sacred city with checkpoints and other measures to prevent people arriving for the pilgrimage without authorization.
Those procedures, aimed at reducing crowd pressure which can lead to stampedes, fires and other hazards, have been intensified in recent years as security threats grow throughout the Middle East. 
Last year, the kingdom reduced the numbers permitted to perform haj for safety reasons because of construction work to enlarge the Grand Mosque.  
Al Jazeera's Hasan Patel, reporting from Mecca, said witnesses told him that a crane fell on the third floor of the Grand Mosque around 5.45pm.
The correspondent said the mosque was packed, even though the incident happened shortly before the 6.30pm prayer.
'Dozens of ambulances are heading to the site. The authorities closed off the area shortly afterwards,' he said.
'This whole place is already a construction site. What made it worse is that around 5.30pm there was severe rain and it's just gushing down the road,' he said.
'I am surrounded by people who are grieving. The mood here is of sadness.'
Al Jazeera's Omar Al Saleh said bad weather was thought to be the cause of the accident - western Saudi Arabia has been hit by strong sand storms in the last few days.
Khaled Al-Maeena, editor at large at the Saudi Gazette in Jeddah, said the incident happened during a strong thunderstorm.
'The scene is of shock ... and people are wondering what happened,' he said.
'Many of the (Hajj pilgrims) go to Medina first. If this was one or two days before the actual Hajj ... I would have expected that the death toll and the injured and the casualties would have been much higher,' Al Maeena said.
Many high-profile figures took to Twitter to offer their condolences to grieving families. 
Imran Khan wrote: 'Saddened to learn of the death of pilgrims as a result of the crane accident in Haram Sharif.Condolences & prayers go to families of victims.'
And the President of India Pranab Mukherjee posted: 'Heartfelt condolences to families of deceased due to crane crash in Mecca, prayers for speedy recovery of the injured.' 
Several cranes surround the mosque to support the ongoing expansion and other construction work that has transformed the area around the sanctuary.
Steep hills and low-rise traditional buildings that once surrounded the mosque have in recent years given way to shopping malls and luxury hotels - among them the world's third-tallest building.
The mosque stands at 3.84 million square feet and can hold up to 820,000 worshippers, but this latest renovation will increase it to 4.3 million square feet, allowing it to accommodate up to 2.2 million at a time.