UK weather to see storms as Hurricane Joaquin  turns away from US
The US National Hurricane Center said it measured winds of 130mph 
The storm passed directly over the Bahamas and turned into the Atlantic
Forecasters believe Joaquin's tail might reach the UK by next weekend
Hurricane Joaquin has turned away from the United States and is feared to be heading across the mid Atlantic over to the UK.
Forecasters have warned that Britain faces stormy weather next week with rain and winds of up to 50 miles-per-hour in exposed Western areas.
Experts at the US National Hurricane Center have been tracking the storm, which has had winds of up to 130 miles-per-hour along the East Coast.
Leon Brown, forecaster for the Weather Channel UK told : 'The latest forecasts suggest it will run near the US east coast and past Newfoundland so arriving to our west as a large low pressure system at the end of next week and over next weekend.'
He said the impact this will have on British weather depends entirely on the track of the hurricane.  
According to the National Hurricane Center, winds have dropped to 125mph after the storm passed San Salvador. It is currently heading north, off the coast of Florida at a speed of approximately seven miles per hour.
By the time Joaquin passes off the coast of Boston on Tuesday morning, it will have dropped to about 75 miles per hour. 
According to the Met Office, the UK is facing unsettled weather over the coming days with storm-force winds of around 50mph expected later next week. 
A spokesman said: 'We won't be experiencing anything out of the ordinary for October. It will be wet and windy with some dry spells.'
However, residents across the East Coast of the United States are bracing themselves for heavy rain storms following the hurricane. 
Some places are expecting 15 inches of rain in places, with the possibility of landslides in mountainous areas. 
New Jersey governor Chris Christie said: 'It looks like we dodged a bullet this time. Let's keep our fingers crossed.' 
However, the storm destroyed houses and uprooted trees as it went through the Bahamas. 
Also the US Coast Guard is trying to locate a 224 metre cargo ship called El Faro which has been damaged by the storm, threatening the 33 lives on board. 
Captain Mark Fedor of the USCG said: 'This vessel is disabled basically right near the eye of Hurricane Joaquin. We're going to go and try and save lives. We're going to push it to the operational limits as far as we can.'
The Coast Guard said they had lost communication with the vessel which had been travelling between Jacksonville, Florida to San Juan, Puerto Rico.
Before losing contact, the Coast Guard said the crew were trying to contain on-board flooding. 
As the search continued, the U.S. National Hurricane Center said Joaquin's threat to the U.S. East Coast was fading as new forecasts showed it likely to curve out into the Atlantic while moving north and weakening in coming days.
But the slow-moving storm continued to batter parts of the Bahamas, cutting communication to several islands, most of them lightly populated. There had been no reports of fatalities or injuries, said Capt. Stephen Russell, the director of the Bahamas National Emergency Management Agency.
Officials were investigating reports of shelters being damaged and flooded, as well as two boats with a total of five people that remained missing.
About 85 per cent of homes in one settlement of a couple dozen houses on Crooked Island were destroyed, said Marvin Hanna, an Acklins representative. He said he has had no communication with Acklins since late Thursday morning.
He said 'At that time, vehicles were floating around and the water level was up to the windows of some homes.' 
The storm was expected to continue north, with some weakening expected on Saturday as if follows a projected path farther from the U.S. East Coast than originally predicted.
Rick Knabb, director of the Center, said Joaquin is expected to pass well offshore from the eastern seaboard.
He said: 'We no longer have any models forecasting the hurricane to come into the East Coast. But we are still going to have some bad weather.' 