Nine Australians missing on Southern Cross boat
AT least nine Australians are missing after a powerful undersea earthquake struck a popular surfing area in Indonesia's west.
The Sumatran Surfarii's charter boat company has not been able to contact the Southern Cross since the 7.7-magnitude quake hit Kepulauan Mentawai, off Sumatra's west, at 1.42am (AEDT) today.
The boat is skippered by Melbourne man Chris Scurrah and Japanese man Akinori Fujita. Also missing are former New South Wales MP and Mayor of Pittwater Alex McTaggart, Gary Mountford, Chris Papallo, Jeff Annesley, Chris Scurrah, Colin Steele, Steve Reynolds, Neil Cox and several crewmen. Chris Scurrah's dad, Hal Scurrah, said he hoped to have contact soon. "My feeling is that he's possibly out of range, and hopefully he's all well," Mr Scurrah said. "I keep watching news, and I keep trying to text him or contact him on Facebook. He'll have a laptop with him. "Generally he's not out of contact for a long time because often they will go into a sheltered spot or into a local town for supplies. That's when they can make contact, too." Chris Scurrah survived last year's 7.6-magnitude earthquake in Indonesia, texting his family that he was running inland after the quake hit Padang, home to nearly a million people on the coast of Sumatra. More than 1100 people were killed during the quake last October. Mr Scurrah said the family was used to his son being in dangerous situations. "(It's) something we sort of live with," Mr Scurrah said. "We're always on our toes." Mr Scurrah said he hoped his son was north of the area hit by the quake, as that was generally the direction he headed on surfing adventures lasting between 12 and 14 days. Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd said the government was monitoring events very closely, adding that authorities were also "very concerned" about the whereabouts of Southern Cross.Meanwhile, another Australian surf charter boat skipper has described how the tsunami hurtled towards him, lifted his boat 4m into the air and tossed it into a nearby boat, which burst into flames.
Ten villages on a remote island chain in Indonesia were reportedly swept away by the tsunami overnight.
The death toll from the 7.7-magnitude quake had already hit 23 by 8pm (AEST). A further 167 people are missing and the toll is expected to climb.