Mass fatality plan underway to recover Akron plane crash victims
A small plane crashed into a four family apartment complex Tuesday in Akron, going down in a plume of black smoke and setting the apartment on fire, Ohio State Patrol officials said.
A small plane crashed into a four family apartment complex Tuesday in Akron, going down in a plume of black smoke and setting the apartment on fire, Ohio State Patrol officials said.
This is an example of a Hawker25 private jet.
Get emails and text alerts for breaking news, severe weather and more.
Get emails and text alerts for breaking news, severe weather and more.
Authorities will begin a recovery operation at daybreak Wednesday after a deadly plane crash in Akron.
The Ohio State Highway Patrol says there were no survivors of the crash Tuesday afternoon. 
Danny Lewkowicz, the owner of ExecuFlight, the company that leased the aircraft, tells us there were nine people aboard the plane: a pilot, copilot and seven passengers.
The FAA says the 1979 Hawker H25 twin-engine business jet left Dayton and was on approach to Akron Fulton International Airport just before 3 p.m.
The OSHP says the plane clipped a telephone wire, hit an apartment building on Mogadore Road at Skelton Road, then crashed into an embankment behind that building. It was just two miles from the airport.
OSHP Lt. Bill Haymaker says authorities have been in touch with the owner of the building, who confirmed that no one was home at the time of the crash. He also says no one else on the ground was injured.
According to the FAA registry, the plane is registered to Rais Group International NC LLC out of Charlotte, North Carolina. It was hangared in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida.
Here’s its two-day flight schedule, according to FlightAware.com
WITNESSES DESCRIBE WHAT THEY SAW AND HEARD:
"All of a sudden this plane just dropped out of the sky, just veered sideways and just plowed right into the duplexes there," said Roberta Porter. "It was just instant boom and flames and smoke, it was horrific."
"I told my coworkers at the time when I heard the engine cut out and then I heard the explosion, a plane just crashed. I ran outside," Scott Ferrell said.
One witness, Mike Patton, says it seemed like the plane was trying to pull up before the crash.
"You just heard this real loud roar and he just continued to drift down. And then I saw a blue flash from the power lines, and then not a second or two later, a big plume of smoke. There were a couple of explosions, and some smaller explosions, then you could literally hear the trees crackling," Patton described.
Summit County Medical Examiner Dr. Lisa Kohler says a mass-fatality plan is in place to identify the victims and will begin Wednesday at daybreak.
The FAA has two investigators on the scene right now, with two more on the way.
Aviation expert Jamie Lebovitz, a senior partner at Nurenberg Paris, says there could be several preliminary reports released about the crash, but he speculates that it could take at least one year before the FAA releases its factual report.
WHAT WE DON'T KNOW:
Right now there is no word on whether any distress calls came from the aircraft before the crash.
Officials would not speculate on what may have caused the deadly crash. The weather in the Akron area Tuesday was overcast and rainy.
Several roads will be closed as investigators begin the task of sifting through the crash scene.
You can check the latest situation by CLICKING HERE.
Check back for updates on this developing story.