Acid train derailment near Julia Creek blocks track, floodwaters close Flinders Highway
It could take more than a week to recover a freight train carrying 200,000 litres of sulphuric acid that derailed in north-west Queensland, with floodwaters hampering efforts.
Police declared a two-kilometre exclusion zone around the crash site after the locomotive and 26 carriages derailed about 10:30am on Sunday.
Inspector Trevor Kidd said there was soft mud at the site and floodwaters had cut the nearby Flinders Highway.
"We have our teams of experts - the Hazmat specialists and all the other specialists are endeavouring to make an assessment of what's going on there," he said.
"You have to take into account it's remote, it's impacted heavily by weather, access is quite difficult, and these are the challenges the responders are facing at the moment."
Interim arrangements have been put in place to contain a small amount of spilled sulphuric acid and diesel fuel.
Inspector Kidd said it was too early to say whether the spill had affected the environment or water supplies.
"That's what we're assessing - geography is in our favour due to that remote location," he said.
"It is some significant distance from major waterways and any major infrastructure, so we do have something going our way as far as that goes, but it is certainly challenging to make an effective assessment at this stage."
Engineers were trying to figure out what went wrong and whether floodwaters played a part.
The nearby Flinders Highway has been closed in both directions between Julia Creek and Richmond.
Queensland Rail (QR) said there were eight to 12 services a day using that line, including freight and passenger services.
There was no alternative route other than road.
A Queensland Rail spokesperson said QR was working closely with police and other emergency authorities.
"One locomotive and all 26 wagons are on their side following the incident," the spokesperson said.
"Emergency services attended the scene, however Queensland Rail crews have been unable to access the site as the Flinders Highway is currently cut off due to flooding in the region.
"Safety is Queensland Rail's number one priority and we are investigating the cause of the incident and will work closely with relevant authorities on the environmental response as required.
"The extent of damage to the track is yet to be determined, but it is expected the track will remain closed for several days.
"This will impact the Inlander passenger service, as well as freight trains."
The Inlander provides a 20-hour service that runs 977 kilometres between Townsville and Mount Isa twice a week.
It usually departs Townsville on Sundays and Thursdays, and travels back from Mount Isa on Mondays and Fridays.
Aurizon said yesterday three drivers from the freight train sustained minor injuries in the accident and attended the Julia Creek hospital.
"Two drivers have been released and the third is expected to be released later today," an Aurizon spokesperson said on Sunday.
"At this early stage, the cause of the incident is not known.
"Both Aurizon and Queensland Rail will investigate the incident and determine its cause.
"At this time the focus is on recovery of the incident site."