6.7 magnitude quake hits India's northeast, leaves 4 dead
GAUHATI, India (AP) — A 6.7 magnitude earthquake hit India's remote northeast region before dawn on Monday, killing at least four people, injuring more than 100 others and causing damage to several buildings.
The death and injuries were caused by falling debris in and around Imphal, the capital of Manipur state, police said.
The powerful tremor left large cracks in walls and a portion of a popular market building collapsed in the state capital. The area is dotted with small houses. There are few tall buildings in the region, although a newly constructed six-story building collapsed in Imphal, the police control room said.
India's Meteorological Department said the epicenter of the quake was in Tamenglong region of Manipur state. It struck before dawn on Monday at a depth of 17 kilometers (about 10 miles) in the India-Myanmar border region.
Police officer L. Ragui said dozens of homes were slightly damaged in Tamenglong.
No deaths had been reported so far, but four people suffered injuries when a wall collapsed on them, Ragui said by the telephone.
Shangthon Kamei, a teacher in Tamenglong, said the earthquake rattled buildings.
"It lasted for around one minute. We were sleeping and were woken up by the earthquake," he said.
Telephone and electricity connections were disrupted in some areas.
The epicenter of the earthquake was 35 kilometers (20 miles) northwest of Imphal. The area is remote with poor cellphone and Internet connections, and information about conditions outside of major cities may take time to emerge.
Nearly 90 members of the National Disaster Response Force, a specialized federal force for natural disasters, have left to check on remote areas, police said.
People panicked and rushed out of their homes in Gauhati, the capital of neighboring Assam state, as they felt massive shaking at least twice within 60 seconds.
In Imphal, residents said furniture was knocked over and books fell off shelves.
"The ground swayed for almost a minute, jolting people awake in their homes," said one resident, Apem Arthur.
The tremors were also felt in Kolkata, the capital of West Bengal state.
Writer Muneeza Naqvi contributed to this report from New Delhi.