Storm menaces East Coast, with heavy snow expected
• More than 4,500 flights have reportedly been canceled for Friday and Saturday ahead of the expected storm, according to the flight-tracking website flightaware.com.
• Amtrak also announced a modified schedule in the Northeast because of the impending storm.
• Gov. Tom Wolf has declared a state of emergency in Pennsylvania, joining Tennessee, Maryland, Virginia and North Carolina. "We cannot control the weather, but we can all be prepared for whatever the weather brings us," he told reporters Thursday.
"We believe that we did not provide adequate resources at a time when it could (have made) a difference in last evening's commute," she told reporters. "We should have been out with more resources."
Barack Obama Even the commander in chief had to reckon with the wintry mix. Video shows President Barack Obama 's motorcade using hazard lights Wednesday as it made its slippery way from Joint Base Andrews to the White House. Obama was unable to fly on Marine One because of the weather.
States from Oklahoma east to the Atlantic Coast hunkered down Thursday as ice and snow rolled through. Ward, the CNN meteorologist, warned that 1 to 2 feet of snow could fall "from eastern Kentucky across West Virginia, Virginia, Maryland and into southern Pennsylvania and New Jersey."
have been postponed Garth Brooks' concerts have been postponed Friday and Saturday at Baltimore's Royal Farms Arena "for the safety of all fans and all personnel involved." The postponement is among dozens of cancellations of shows, classes and more because of the storm.
according to the National Weather Service For many, it's still up in the air what will fall: Little Rock, Arkansas, for instance could see rain, sleet and even snow thunder overnight in addition to heavy snow, according to the National Weather Service
according to CNN affiliate WRAL-TV North CarolinaGov. Pat McCrory said his state is doing "everything we can" to get public safety personnel ready in case the worse-case scenarios come true. Several schools, churches and courts around North Carolina had been ordered closed Friday, according to CNN affiliate WRAL-TV . The Panthers Pride Rally scheduled for Friday in Charlotte was canceled.
"The actions we are taking today are all in the interest of our customers' and employees' safety, and will help us return to service once the storm passes and the snow is cleared."
"Knickerbocker Storm" For the weekend storm to be of historic proportions, snow accumulations in Washington would have to top 28 inches. That would exceed the calamitous "Knickerbocker Storm" of 1922, which dumped 28 inches and killed nearly 100 people when the roof of a theater by that name collapsed under the weight of snow.
CNN affiliate WJLA-TV "They know (the storm is) coming," manager Roy Washington told CNN affiliate WJLA-TV . "They hear the forecast, and they want to be prepared for it."
Washington appears to be in the storm's bull's-eye, but most of the Mid-Atlantic states -- and a few points west -- will also take a hit. There's more uncertainty for Philadelphia and New York, though the latter city's mayor has ordered some 4,800 sanitation workers charged with clearing streets to go on to 12-hour shifts Friday.
"The men and women of the Sanitation Department and all our agencies are getting ready right now," Mayor Bill de Blasio said. "We're bracing for the first big storm of the winter."