At least 42 killed in snowstorm-related deaths
At least 42 people have died as a result of the mammoth snowstorm that pounded the eastern U.S. The deaths occurred in car accidents, from carbon monoxide poisoning, and from heart attacks while shoveling snow:
—An 82-year-old man who died after going into cardiac arrest while shoveling snow in front of his home.
— A U.S. Capitol Police officer, 44-year-old Officer Vernon Alston, died of a heart attack after shoveling snow at his Magnolia home.
— Billy R. Stevens, 59, of Williamsburg, died in southeastern Kentucky when his car collided with a salt truck Thursday.
— A 49-year-old man suffered cardiac arrest while shoveling in Abingdon on Saturday.
— Officials in Prince George's County said a man collapsed and died Saturday while shoveling snow in Fort Washington.
— Twenty-three-year-old Sashalynn Rosa, of Passaic, and her year-old son, Messiah Bonilla, died of carbon monoxide poisoning while sitting in a running car that had its tailpipe covered in snow. Rosa's 3-year-old daughter, Saniyah Bonilla, remains hospitalized in critical condition.
— Police said Mary Wall, 64, died while shoveling snow on Saturday, but was not found until Monday afternoon when children returning home from school found her snow-covered body in Mahwah.
— Al Mansoor, 66, was struck and killed by a snow plow clearing his driveway just after 2 p.m. Sunday.
— Three people died while shoveling snow in New York City — one person on Staten Island and two people in Queens. Police announced the deaths but released no further details.
— Six people have died in car accidents during the storm, authorities have said, including a 4-year-old boy who died Friday afternoon after the pickup truck carrying his family on Interstate 77 near Troutman spun out of control and crashed.
— A teenager sledding behind an all-terrain vehicle was hit by a truck and killed Friday, the State Highway Patrol said.
— Authorities in eastern Pennsylvania say David Perrotto, 56, died of carbon monoxide poisoning, apparently after his car was buried in snow by a passing plow.
— Cesar Bourdon, 54, collapsed while shoveling in Allentown on Saturday night.
— Geneva College soccer player Nate Ferraco was killed in a crash on an icy road near Evans City.
— Richard Lapham, 70, died of cardiac arrest while using a snowblower at his Lancaster home.
— Ronald Bernhard, 74, died of cardiac arrest while driving a tractor with a snowplow at his home in Elizabethtown.
— Briahna Gerloff, 18, who was 8 months pregnant, died after shoveling snow in Pottstown. A family friend said Gerloff previously suffered from a heart ailment.
— Ruby Bell, 86, and her husband, 87-year-old Robert Bell, died in Greenville of probable carbon monoxide poisoning because of a generator filled the house with carbon monoxide.
— The South Carolina Highway Patrol says a 44-year-old man was killed after being struck by a vehicle that slid out of control after hitting a patch of ice.
— Jimmy B. Thomas, 61, was driving a car that ran off a road near Jonesville early Saturday afternoon, hitting a ditch and then a tree.
— A car slid off the roadway due to speed and slick conditions, killing the driver and injuring a passenger, the Knox County sheriff's department said.
— A couple in a vehicle slid off an icy road and plummeted down a 300-foot embankment Wednesday night, killing the woman who was driving, said Carter County Sheriff Dexter Lunceford.
— A man was killed on Saturday in a single-vehicle crash in Virginia Beach that police blamed on speed and icy road conditions.
— Virginia Tech filmmaker Jerry Scheeler died Friday while shoveling snow outside his new house in Daleville.
— The medical examiner's office has confirmed five hypothermia deaths — in Hampton and Wise, Charles City, Gloucester and Henry Counties.
— A 55-year-old man collapsed and died after walking home in Leesburg Saturday evening in the blizzard.