At least 50 people die as result of snowstorm that hit East
At least 50 people have died as a result of the mammoth snowstorm that pounded the Eastern U.S. The deaths resulted from car accidents, carbon monoxide poisoning and heart attacks while shoveling snow.
—An 82-year-old man went into cardiac arrest while shoveling snow in front of his home.
— A U.S. Capitol Police officer, 44-year-old Officer Vernon Alston, died of a heart attack after shoveling snow at his Magnolia home.
— Billy R. Stevens, 59, of Williamsburg, died in southeastern Kentucky when his car collided with a salt truck Thursday.
— A 49-year-old man suffered cardiac arrest while shoveling in Abingdon on Saturday.
— Officials in Prince George's County said a man collapsed and died Saturday while shoveling snow in Fort Washington.
— A 5-year-old girl was sledding down a driveway onto a street when she was hit by an SUV on Monday morning in Sykesville.
— An 84-year-old woman with dementia died of hypothermia after leaving her home. She was reported missing Monday night; her body was found Tuesday.
— Twenty-three-year-old Sashalynn Rosa, of Passaic, and her 1-year-old son, Messiah Bonilla, died of carbon monoxide poisoning while sitting in a running car that had its tailpipe covered in snow. Rosa's 3-year-old daughter, Saniyah Bonilla, remains hospitalized in critical condition.
— Police said Mary Wall, 64, died while shoveling snow Saturday but wasn't found until Monday afternoon when children returning home from school found her snow-covered body in Mahwah.
— Al Mansoor, 66, was struck and killed by a snowplow clearing his driveway just after 2 p.m. Sunday.
— Three people died while shoveling snow in New York City — one person on Staten Island and two people in Queens. Police announced the deaths but released no further details.
— Angel Ginel was found dead Monday afternoon inside his running, plowed-in car in Brooklyn. His relatives tell the Daily News that they suspect he got inside the car to warm up Sunday and turned it on, and the car got buried.
— Six people died in car accidents during the storm, authorities have said, including a 4-year-old boy who died Friday afternoon after the pickup truck carrying his family on Interstate 77 near Troutman spun out of control and crashed.
— A teenager sledding behind an all-terrain vehicle was hit by a truck and killed Friday, the State Highway Patrol said.
— Authorities in eastern Pennsylvania say David Perrotto, 56, died of carbon monoxide poisoning, after his idling car was buried in snow by a passing plow.
— Cesar Bourdon, 54, collapsed while shoveling in Allentown on Saturday night.
— Geneva College soccer player Nate Ferraco was killed in a crash on an icy road near Evans City.
— Richard Lapham, 70, died of cardiac arrest while using a snowblower at his Lancaster home.
— Ronald Bernhard, 74, died of cardiac arrest while driving a tractor with a snowplow at his home in Elizabethtown.
— Briahna Gerloff, 18, who was eight months pregnant, died after shoveling snow in Pottstown. A family friend said Gerloff previously suffered from a heart ailment.
— Lloyd McCorkel, 66, was found in a snowbank near a dollar store in Mount Holly Springs late Sunday. A coroner confirmed that he died of hypothermia and heart disease.
— Michael May, 55, died of carbon monoxide poisoning Tuesday, two days after he was overcome by exhaust fumes from his car when the exhaust pipe became blocked by snow in northeastern Pennsylvania.
— Ruby Bell, 86, and her husband, 87-year-old Robert Bell, died in Greenville of probable carbon monoxide poisoning because of a generator filled the house with carbon monoxide.
— The South Carolina Highway Patrol says a 44-year-old man was killed after being struck by a vehicle that slid out of control after hitting a patch of ice.
— Jimmy B. Thomas, 61, was driving a car that ran off a road near Jonesville early Saturday afternoon, hitting a ditch and then a tree.
— A car going too fast for the weather conditions slid off a slick roadway, killing the driver and injuring a passenger, the Knox County sheriff's department said.
— A couple in a vehicle slid off an icy road and plummeted down a 300-foot embankment Wednesday night, killing the woman who was driving, said Carter County Sheriff Dexter Lunceford.
— A man was killed Saturday in a single-vehicle crash in Virginia Beach that police blamed on speed and icy road conditions.
— Virginia Tech filmmaker Jerry Scheeler died Friday while shoveling snow outside his new house in Daleville.
— The medical examiner's office confirmed five hypothermia deaths — in Hampton and Wise, Charles City, Gloucester and Henry counties.
— A 55-year-old man collapsed and died after walking home in Leesburg on Saturday evening in the blizzard.
— A 73-year-old man collapsed after shoveling at his home Sunday in Dale City.
— Early Tuesday, police responded to a Gainesville home where a 69-year-old man was found dead. Police said he had been complaining of chest pain after shoveling.