German train crash: Ten dead, 17 critically injured
(CNN)Ten people are dead and 17 are critically injured after a head-on collision between two trains in Germany's southern state of Bavaria Tuesday, police say.
At least 63 people on board suffered less serious injuries, police said. They said there were about 150 passengers on board the two trains.
The crash occurred shortly before 7 a.m. Tuesday local time near the spa town of Bad Aibling, about 60 kilometers (37 miles) southeast of the Bavarian capital of Munich.
The trains collided at a bend on the Mangfall Valley Railway, a single-track regional rail line between the towns of Rosenheim and Holzkirchen, German Transport Minister Alexander Dobrindt said.
Rescue workers search the site of a deadly train accident near Bad Aibling, Germany, on Tuesday, February 9. Two trains collided in the southern state of Bavaria, police said.
An axis sits separated from the train carriage at the site of of the crash.
Rescue workers search the site in hopes of freeing people trapped in the wreckage.
"There's a curve there, so we must assume that the train drivers must not have been able to see each other beforehand," he told reporters at a news conference.
The two drivers of the trains appeared to be among the dead, although identification of the victims was still in progress, according to a statement from Transdev, the parent company of train company Meridian.
How the two trains came to be running directly toward each other on the same track is still unclear, authorities say, and they are reluctant to speculate too much before data recorders are analyzed.
Two of the three data recorders on board have been recovered so far, and it was expected that the third would be recovered from the wreckage, said Dobrindt.
Both trains in Tuesday's crash had both a driver and a driver instructor on board, said Schreyer. It would be extremely unlikely for both the driver and driver instructor on a train to miss a red signal -- and then for the automatic braking system not to kick in, he said.
Bavarian Interior Minister Joachim Herrmann said at the news conference that at least one of the trains was not running to schedule. "Why they did not stick to the timetable, we don't know. This has to be investigated," he said.
Schreyer said trains were permitted to run at 120 kph, or just under 75 mph, on the line, and he believed they were moving at some speed when they collided.
"I don't think that (they) were on full speed, but looking at what has happened, they have been not very slow, let's say it that way," he said.
A journalist at the scene, Stephan Richter of German broadcaster RTL, told CNN that the Mangfall Valley Railway was one of the most important lines in the region, used by workers commuting from Bavarian villages to Munich.
It was a small mercy that the train was not as full as it usually would be, because of a school holiday for the annual Carnival celebration, he said.
"We can only pray right now that the train was not packed out like on a regular basis," he said.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel said in a statement Tuesday that she was shocked and saddened by the disaster. "My sympathies go out especially to the families of the nine people who lost their lives," she said.