Ecuador earthquake: Hundreds killed, rescue operations underway after magnitude-7.8 tremor
The death toll from the earthquake in Ecuador has risen to 272 but will rise further, President Rafael Correa said as he visited the disaster zone.
"Ecuador has been hit tremendously hard … This is the greatest tragedy in the last 67 years," said a shaken Mr Correa, who rushed back to Ecuador from a visit to Italy.
"There are signs of life in much of the rubble and that is the priority," he added in a televised address to the nation.
He also confirmed 2,068 people were injured, but "the number will certainly rise and probably in a considerable way".
Rescuers were racing to dig out people trapped under the rubble of homes and businesses after the powerful magnitude-7.8 earthquake.
The quake followed a magnitude 7.3 earthquake, which struck Japan early on Saturday morning, sparking questions of whether the two quakes were related.
The quake reduced buildings to ruins, toppled power lines and sent terrified residents running from their homes when it struck the Pacific coast on Saturday in a zone popular with tourists.
Vice-President Jorge Glas called it the "worst seismic movement we have faced in decades".
Officials quickly declared a state of emergency in the six worst-hit provinces.
magnitude 7.0 in Japan The consensus among geoscientists is that while it may be unusual to have two large earthquakes ( magnitude 7.0 in Japan and 7.8 in Ecuador) happen so closely together, there is no link between the two events.Sydney University Associate Professor Dale Dominey-Howes says: "I think we would have to put it down to coincidence at this stage. We just have no way of connecting these two events. "But they are quite usual in that they are earthquakes on the so-called Pacific Ring of Fire and this is a part of the edge of the Earth where crustal plates are moving around, grinding past one another. And so it's not unusual to get earthquakes in both of these locations."Professor Dominey-Howes says there is no concrete evidence of increased earthquake activity, and while the earthquakes in Japan and in Ecuador were devastating "statistically we would expect to see these kind of earthquakes on a year-to-year, decade-to-decade basis.""In the weeks and months ahead, we will see earthquakes in other locations around the Pacific basin, but once again, it's very unlikely they'll be connected."Professor Dominey-Howes says the events sent a clear signal that buildings codes must be reviewed in high-risk areas."Particulary in Ecuador, it's obvious building standards are not up to scratch for keeping buildings safe or for keeping them up during the shaking. So it'll be very critical for the authorities to understand why so much damage has been done."
The quake, felt across Ecuador, northern Peru and southern Colombia, struck at 6:58pm local time on Saturday, lasted for about a minute, and was centred approximately 170 kilometres north-west of the capital Quito.
No casualties were reported in Peru or Colombia.
Among the worst-hit towns was Pedernales, where about 40 hotels collapsed.
"Pedernales is devastated. Buildings have fallen down, especially hotels where there are lots of tourists staying. There are lots of dead bodies," mayor Gabriel Alcivar told local media.
"We need help. We need medicine, water and food to help people."
About 200 aftershocks of lesser intensity followed the quake.
"You could hear people screaming from the rubble," Agustin Robles said as he waited in a line of 40 people for water outside a stadium in Pedernales.
"There was a pharmacy where people were stuck and we couldn't do anything."
As darkness set in and rain began to fall, survivors bundled up to spend the night next to their destroyed homes.
In Portoviejo, the tremor reduced houses to rubble, brought down a local market in a nearby community, and left streetlights and debris scattered helter-skelter.
Rescuers there are scrambling to find survivors.
"We have already recovered three dead and we believe there are 10 to 11 people still trapped," said one worker, digging through the debris of what used to be a six-storey hotel.
About 100 inmates in a prison in Portoviejo escaped when the quake shook their facility, Justice Minister Ledy Zuniga tweeted.
About 30 of them had been recaptured, some had returned voluntarily and police were hunting for the others.
According to Mr Glas, 14,000 security forces, 241 medical staff and two mobile hospitals were being rushed to the most devastated areas, with reinforcements arriving from Colombia and Mexico.
"In the coming days, we can expect acute health needs around trauma care and psychosocial support," said Walter Cotte, from the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
"There may also be urgent needs around maternal and obstetric care. We should also have to expect urgent needs around food, water, sanitation and shelter."
About 91 people died in Pedernales and about 60 per cent of houses were destroyed, according to Police Chief General Milton Zarate.
In the town of Abdon Calderon near Portoviejo, 73-year-old resident Nelly, who would not give her last name, said in tears that she had rushed into the street after the quake and saw that the covered market had collapsed.
"There was a person trapped who screamed for help, but then the screaming stopped. Oh, it was terrible," she said.
Maria Torres, 60, who lives in Quito, said the quake lasted so long it made her dizzy.
"I couldn't walk … I wanted to run out into the street, but I couldn't."
In the Pacific port city of Guayaquil, home to more than two million people, a bridge collapsed, crushing a car beneath it, and residents were picking through the wreckage of houses reduced to heaps of rubble.
Saturday's earthquake is the deadliest to hit the country since a magnitude 6.8 tremor in March 1987 claimed the lives of more than 1,000 people.