Cyclone Roanu: 20 killed in 5 districts
At least 20 people were killed, 100 injured and four went missing in Chittagong, Bhola, Cox’s Bazar, Noakhali and Patuakhali districts as Cyclone Roanu made its impact across the country.
Eleven people died in Chittagong, three each in Bhola and Cox's Bazar, two in Noakhali and another in Patuakhali, our correspondents report.
At least 11 people including two women and a child were killed in Sitakunda and Banshkhali upazila.
Kajol Begum, 35, and her son Belal Hossain, 11, died on the spot when their houses collapsed during the torrential rain in a hilly area at Salinpur in Sitakunda upazila around 4:00am, said Sitakunda Upazila Nirbahi Officer Najmul Islam Bhuiyan.
A child Md Raqib, 11, died around 1:15pm as he was hit by a stone falling from an under-construction building due to the gusty wind in the city’s Sholashahar area.
Abu Siddique, 70, Bulu Akhtar, 50, Tahera Begum, 35, and a children of the Banshkhali upazila were killed in the cyclone, our correspondent reports quoting Mejbah Uddin Ahmed, deputy commissioner of Chittagong.
Identity of the rest three victims could not be known immediately, the DC said adding that at least three people went missing in the cyclone.  
Around 2 lakh houses, cropland worth around Tk 50 crore in Banshkhali, Sandip, Anwara, Sitakunda upazilas and costal area of the city damaged in the cyclone, Mejbah Uddin said.
Around 2.50 lakh people are being affected by the flood water while around two lakh people have been shifted to a total of 479 cyclone shelters in the area, the DC said.  
Three people were killed and around 100 others injured during the storm in Tajumaddin and Daulatkhan upazila.
The deceased Ranu Begum, 50, Rekha Begum, 35, and Akram Hossain, 12, a class-VI student, were killed when their houses collapsed during the storm. 
Four people were missing in Daulatkhan upazila, said Md Alam, office-in-charge (OC) of Daulatkhan Police Station.
Several hundred houses were also damaged at Tajumaddin around 3:00am, Md Faruk Ahamed, OC of Tajumuddin Police Station, told our Jhalakathi correspondent.
At least three people were killed in Kutubdia coastal area this afternoon, our local correspondent reports quoting police.
AKM Fazlul Haq, 55, died after being wounded while getting down from a fishing trawler during the stormy weather at Koiarbil around 2:00pm, said Angsha Thoai, OC of the Kutubdia Police Station.
Another victim Md Iqbal alias Badal, 27, was killed in a house collapse, the OC said.
Body of one Fakir Alam, 50, was found floating in Tabelar Char of the Bay, said Saleh Tanvir Gazi, upazila nirbahi officer of Kutubdia.
The UNO said around 50 thousand people in the upazila have been affected in the cyclone.
Meanwhile, over 41 people were injured as gusty winds left hundreds of houses damaged and trees uprooted over the night in the coastal areas of Cox’s Bazar Sadar, Moheshkhali, Kutubdia and Ramu upazila.
At a press conference around 4:00pm, Cox’s Bazar Deputy Commissioner Muhammad Ali Hossain announced that the district as out of danger.
The DC also instructed all UNOs to visit cyclone affected areas for preparing list of damage.
Two members of a family were killed when a tree fell on them during the cycle Roanu while another woman went missing in Hatia upazila of Noakhali.
The deceased were identified as Marium Begum, 10, and her mother aged around 35, whose identity could not be know immediately, while the missing one was identified as Rasheda Begum, our correspondent reports quoting police.
A 50-year-old woman was killed as her house collapsed during the storm at Nijarabad Gopaldi village in Dashmina upazila at 3:00am.
Naya Bibi died as her tin-shed house collapsed, said Iqbal Mahmud Liton, chairman of Dashmina union Parishad. Over 100 houses were also damaged, he added.