Tasmania floods: Latrobe woman's body recovered, two still missing as evacuations continue
The body of a woman has been found in northern Tasmania, a day after her husband was rescued through the roof of their flooded home.
Mary Kathleen Allford, 75, could not be saved when rescue teams helped her husband to safety at the property in Latrobe on Monday.
Earlier today, police rescued a woman who was caught in a car in rising floodwaters near Evandale, in Tasmania's north, but the search for her companion continues.
The search has also resumed for a man in his 80s, Trevor Foster, who disappeared at the Cluny's Road area at Ouse.
Around the country, four people have died and three are still missing after a major storm brought record flooding and widespread property damage across the east coast over the weekend.
Police said 107 people had been rescued from flood-affected areas and Commissioner Darren Hine has urged people to stay away from floodwaters.
"We rescued over 100 people who have made poor decisions and put themselves into danger by entering flood waters," he said.
"We've rescued over 20 people with the helicopter, and again while were doing this, we can't do our other duties and takes away our resources where they may be needed to save lives."
The wild weather hit Queensland on Saturday and moved south over the weekend to New South Wales, where the search is continuing for a swimmer missing off Bondi Beach in Sydney,and Tasmania.
Conditions eased overnight but major flood warnings remain in place for the Macquarie, Meander and South Esk rivers.
The Bureau of Meteorology's Tony Yates said while more rain was forecast, the worst had passed.
"There will be further rainfall today but no really significant falls, and there'll actually be some periods where it will ease off completely, so the worst of it has definitely passed," he said.
The State Emergency Service has now shifted its focus to the South Esk River, the town of Longford and the Launceston suburb of Invermay.
People in the Launceston suburb of Invermay have been advised to evacuate their homes immediately.
Two evacuation centres are available at the Silverdome in Prospect and the University of Tasmania at Newnham.
While the South Esk has flooded, it is not expected to peak until tonight or Wednesday morning.
Deputy Premier Jeremy Rockliff described the Tasmanian floods as a national disaster and the State Government has offered emergency aid to those who have lost homes and belongings.
Aid of up to $750 per family, $200 per adult and $100 per child will be made available through Service Tasmania.
"State and Federal Governments have to work together, this is a national disaster relief scenario, many lives will be shattered, it's devastating and still very dangerous," Mr Rockliff told 936 ABC Hobart.
The SES will be conducting a detailed impact assessment today.
Meanwhile, Premier Will Hodgman described the floods as catastrophic.
"It's certainly disastrous, this is an extreme weather event, the worst flooding we've experienced in this state in 40 years and it's likely to get worse its likely to cause further damage," he said.
The Insurance Council of Australia declared the event a catastrophe and has established a taskforce.
Mr Rockliff said the floods had hit farmers particularly hard with some losing hundreds of livestock.
"I've spoken to a number of farmers, vegetable processors and the situation is catastrophic for them," he said.
"There's been huge losses of stock, I'm aware of farmers who have lost 200 head of stock, dairy cattle and beef cattle, logs smashed through houses, irrigators a mangled mess, farms completely underwater."
There have been numerous reports of livestock being swept away by floodwaters but the full extent of stock losses is yet to be known.
One man at the flooded Horsehead Creek near Devonport, shepherded several cows to safety using his stand-up paddleboard.
Dairy farmer Paul Lambert from Mersey Lea, south of Latrobe, said he has lost at least 100 cows.
The floodwaters rose so quickly on Sunday night and Monday morning he was not able to get his 500 cows to higher ground.
"The cows stood up to their bellies in water but I don't know where they are now." he said.
"There's probably 100, if not more. Neighbours have lost more than that and there's a lot of damage, hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of damage," he said.
"Its devastating. I watched some neighbours' cows go down the river yesterday.
"Just terribly sad, you can hear them bellowing and you can't do anything."
Spirit of Tasmania crossings between Tasmania and Victoria are expected to resume on Sunday.
Operator TT Line said heavy rain and debris in the Mersey River in Tasmania's north-west had prompted the closure of the Port of Devonport to all commercial traffic.
The company is negotiating to use alternative ports at Burnie and Bell Bay and passenger fares have been refunded.
Ross O'Mara, who spent the night on the ship in Devonport, told 936 ABC Hobart he saw lots of debris float down the Mersey.
"Hay bales, we'd heard from people before livestock, and there was just numerous logs coming down straight out of the Mersey and just flowing past," he said.
"At one stage, I think about six boats went right into the bow of the Spirit and got tangled up."