23 Killed, Including Toddler, as Thousands Left Without Power
"Please continue to work together and support each other as West Virginians always do," Tomblin pleaded at a news conference where he announced the growing death toll and said about 100 homes have been damaged.
West Virginia's Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management announced the death toll had climbed from four people early Friday to at least 23 by Friday night.
One search for a missing 4-year-old ended in heartbreak after officials said Friday they found his body. The boy — Edward McMillion — had vanished in the rising waters in Ravenswood, Jackson County, which sits along the Ohio River on the Ohio border.
At least three other deaths occurred in Kanawha County, while another was reported in Ohio County in West Virginia's northern panhandle, the governor's office said earlier Friday.
Greenbrier County Sheriff Jan Cahill announced that two males were also found dead, and called the situation "complete chaos."
Officials did not immediately identify the victims, although local reports said one of those killed in Ohio County was an 8-year-old who had slipped into a creek and was carried away. He later died at a hospital, The Intelligencer reported.
Meanwhile, an elderly man was killed in the floodwaters in Kanawha County, while a woman there was washed away in her vehicle in another incident,NBC affiliate WSAZ reported.
In one dramatic scene in White Sulphur Springs in the state's south, where up to 10 inches of rain fell Thursday, the flood waters pushed a burning home down the Howard Creek.
Natural gas service was shut off in White Sulphur Springs as a precaution, Tomblin said.
"We surely need your prayers because there's a lot of people hurting right now," added Jim Justice, owner of the luxury Greenbrier Resort in White Sulphur Springs, told The Weather Channel.
Forty-four counties, primarily in the southeastern part of the state, were under a state of emergency Thursday night because of flood waters, emergency officials said. Electric utilities initially reported that almost 500,000 customers were without power, although that number dropped to 19,500 by Friday night.