Severe weather spreads across country
Stormy conditions have battered the country, with strong winds and heavy rain spreading from the west.
If you have photos of the severe weather send them toyourphotos@rte.ie
A severe weather warning is in place, with forecasters saying stormy conditions are likely to lead to some structural damage and will be accompanied by high seas on Atlantic coasts.
Met Éireann says the storm has passed its peak in the west of the country.
However, very strong winds will continue in the east and north, easing overnight.
The Road Safety Authority is appealing to motorists to take extra care while driving.
AA Roadwatch is warning motorists to be aware of surface water and fallen debris on the roads.
Gerard Fleming of Met Éireann told RTÉ's News at One there were gusts of over 125km/h on the west coast this afternoon.
Met Éireann's severe weather warning is applicable from midday today through to 6am tomorrow.
The ESB says 10,000 customers experienced electricity outages during various part of the day, but power has now been restored to all but 1,500 customers.
Parts of the country most affected include Lettermore in Connemara and Ennis in Co Clare.
The ESB says power will not be restored to these customers overnight due to hazardous conditions for crews.
ESB crews are hopeful that electricity will be restored to all homes tomorrow.
As a result of the severe weather, Irish Ferries has cancelled sailings tonight on their Rosslare-Pembroke routes, while Stenaline has cancelled sailings from Dublin and Rosslare this evening.
Aer Lingus had to cancel one flight to Heathrow this evening due to the weather conditions, but alternative arrangements have been made for passengers.
Aer Lingus and Ryanair have both said there have been some delays to flights at Dublin Airport tonight.
AA Roadwatch has reported that Red Line Luas services are operating between the Point and The Red Cow stops only due to a weather related fault.
A number of county councils have put contingency measures in place.
Gardaí have reiterated advice to motorists to be extremely cautious on the roads as high winds and heavy showers continue in the midwest.
A number of trees have fallen in the Cratloe and Newmarket-on-Fergus areas of Co Clare, and on the Cloughjordan Road and Limerick roads out of Nenagh.
The roads have remained open, but motorists should be aware of the dangers of flying debris.
Motorists are being advised to avoid the area around Castlemahon in Co Limerick after a tree and phone lines were downed.
High tide at 10am in Limerick city saw the Shannon overflow at several points along O'Callaghan Strand.
Limerick City Council has erected flood barriers along O'Callaghan Strand and Clancy Strand to try to contain any flood waters.
The flood barriers will remain in place for several days.
Heavy flooding has also been reported on a number of local roads in the Athlone area.
Among the areas worst affected are regions such as Clonown on the Roscommon side of the town, which traditionally suffers from flooding during bad weather.
In the west there have been extremely strong winds, but so far there have been no reports of serious structural damage.
Scores of ships and fishing boats have taken shelter in harbours from Donegal to Kerry.
Galway Harbour Master Capt Brian Sheridan said the conditions are the worst experienced so far this year.
High winds have brought down trees in the Athenry area of Co Galway and council workers were called in to clear the roads.
Lorry drivers reported very severe cross-winds on journeys through Limerick, Clare and Galway.
High winds were also reported in the northwest with gusts of up to 140km/h recorded this afternoon.
Gardaí in Donegal say no major roads are closed but that some minor roads are experiencing disruptions due to fallen debris.
They are advising motorists throughout the county to avoid making any unnecessary journeys due to high winds.
A man was injured after he was struck by timber which fell from a building during high winds in Mullingar, Co Westmeath, this afternoon.
He is being treated for minor injuries at the midlands regional hospital in Mullingar.