Crippled Carnival Cruise Ship, With 4,500 Aboard, Reaches Shore
A few passengers said they saw some kind of canned meat product, but Carnival Cruise Lines officials insisted that while Spam was delivered to the ship, it was never served.
The officials said nobody was hurt as a result of the fire, although one passenger was taken away in an ambulance for unrelated matters. The ship was expected to remain in San Diego for several days while officials from the National Transportation Safety Board and the Coast Guard investigate the fire.
The ship sailed from Long Beach, Calif., on Sunday for what was supposed to be a seven-day trip through the Mexican Riviera. It was 44 miles offshore, roughly 200 miles south of San Diego, when the fire broke out. On Thursday, Coast Guard officials used several tugboats to bring the ship in. It took more than four hours to get all the passengers off the boat.
The vast majority of them were whisked away in tour buses and taxis, taken to the San Diego and Los Angeles airports or local hotels for the night. But about 200 or 300 slowly trickled off the cruise ship pier in downtown San Diego, meeting friends or family members for a ride home.
As the massive ship entered the dock, hundreds of local residents who showed up just to watch waved and hollered to celebrate the arrival. Amid a swarm of TV cameras and photographers, the passengers were treated as if they were military heroes coming home from battle.
Ken King persuaded the crew members to allow him to be the first passenger off the boat by explaining it was his 42nd birthday. All he could look forward to, he said, was “coffee, a hot shower and meat,” explaining that he was tired of eating bread.
“What advice do you have for others?” one cameraman shouted to Mr. King.
“Bring a flashlight and lots of snacks,” he deadpanned. “The food was really not very good.”
But it was even more difficult for the vegetarians on the ship, said Eric Newman, 27, of Ventura, Calif., who was on his first cruise, with his sister. Mr. Newman said that while most of the crew members had been exceedingly cheery, one snapped at him when he asked for extra salad or fruit. In the end, Mr. Newman said, he marched to the kitchen himself to find something he could eat.
“It seemed like they were not at all prepared for anything to ever go wrong,” he said. “That’s just arrogant. And it made everything really hard.”
Crew members served free wine and beer, though passengers who craved more potent drinks had to pay for their own, say, vodka. Luckily for them, several shops on the ship opened after Tuesday, doing cash-only transactions during daylight hours.
“They had liquor and pashminas and perfume, all kinds of stuff, and I saw lots of people buying it,” said Jeanne Ralston, a retired nurse from Santa Barbara, Calif. “I’ve been on these cruises too often to want that stuff.”
Carnival has promised to refund the fare and reimburse passengers for their travel costs — as well as offer them a voucher for another cruise. Like many of the passengers, Mr. Newman was ambivalent about the offer. “I won’t be using that for a very long time,” he said.
The cruise director, John Heald, said in a post on his blog that while some passengers would call it the “cruise from hell,” most “have risen to the obvious challenges and difficult conditions.”
On Thursday, he praised the nearly 1,200 crew members, saying that those on the ship “became a family and left today very thankful for our family.”