Hurricane Newton bearing down on Baja California Sur
Forecast track of Hurricane Newton, with the NHC's hurricane warning area shown in red. Times shown are Mountain Daylight Time.
Tropical storm Newton, located 350 kilometers southeast of Cabo San Lucas, has reached hurricane strength, the United States National Hurricane Center (NHC) said at 4:00pm CDT.
The federal government has issued a hurricane warning for the west coast of Baja California Sur from north of Puerto Cortés to Cabo San Lázaro, and a tropical storm warning for the east coast of the Baja Peninsula from north of Mulege to Bahía San Juan Bautista and for mainland Mexico from north of Bahía Kino to Puerto Libertad.
The NHC’s hurricane warning area extends from Cabo San Lázaro to San Evaristo and includes Cabo San Lucas.
Newton has strengthened more rapidly than expected this afternoon. The NHC’s 1:00pm advisory, which reported maximum sustained winds of 105 km/h, predicted it would reach hurricane strength by tomorrow morning.
Winds had reached 120 km/h by 4:00pm, when the storm was located 350 kilometers southeast of Cabo San Lucas, and further strengthening is forecast.
A tropical storm warning is in effect for Manzanillo to Cabo Corrientes, north of Cabo San Lázaro to Punta Abreojos, north of San Evaristo to Mulege and from Bahía Tempehuaya to Puerto Libertad.
Newton is moving toward the northwest at 26 km/h, a track on which it is expected to remain through early tomorrow, followed by a turn toward the north-northwest and then to the north late Tuesday and Wednesday.
Tropical storm strength winds are forecast for the Baja Peninsula late tonight and hurricane conditions early tomorrow.
Tropical storm conditions from Manzanillo to Cabo Corrientes are expected to end this evening.
The National Meteorological Service has forecast torrential rainfall in Jalisco, Colima and Michoacán, intense rain in Sinaloa and Nayarit and heavy rain in Baja California Sur and Guerrero.
The coasts of Nayarit, Jalisco, Colima and Michoacán can expect swells two to three meters high.