6 patients dead in fire at Johor Bahru hospital
Six patients - four women and two men - were killed in a fire at the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of the Sultanah Aminah Hospital in Johor Bahru.
JOHOR BAHRU: Six patients - four women and two men - were killed in a fire at the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of Johor's biggest hospital.
The fire on level two of the Sultanah Aminah Hospital (HSA) started at around 8.55am on Tuesday (Oct 25).
Director of Johor's Fire and Rescue Department Othman Abdullah said 166 firemen and 10 emergency vehicles were rushed to HSA at 8.56am.
Mr Othman said those who were killed were among the seven patients in the southern ICU on the second floor of the hospital. One patient was rescued by firefighters, he added.
"There were seven critically ill patients in the ICU who, according to doctors, were dependent on ventilators under normal circumstances and could not be moved without their beds," he said, adding that the fire did not spread to other areas of the hospital.
Patients evacuated from HSA were taken to other hospitals in the state, Health Ministry director-general Noor Hisham Abdullah said in a statement.
Providing further details on the incident at a press conference, health minister Dr S Subramaniam confirmed that in addition to the patients, there were 10 members of staff in the ICU when the fire broke out.
Dr Subramaniam said that the members of staff sustained injuries and three were receiving assisted ventilation at a nearby hospital.
Said the minister: "The sprinkler system was operational and officers on duty also tried to use a fire extinguisher, but both steps were unsuccessful in controlling the fire, which was spreading rapidly.
"This is an incident where all the preparations we had made were unable to help control the fire. This could be because of the ICU environment - patients were on oxygen machines and fire needs oxygen. That could be why the flames spread so rapidly and so intensely. It became uncontrollable in seconds."
Earlier in the day, Johor Bahru Selatan Police Chief ACP Sulaiman Salleh said five of the bodies were found at 11.15am and the sixth a little later.
Chief firefighter Muhammad Rizal Bin Buang described the scene when he arrived at the ICU ward.
"When we entered the ward, it was already dark and there was smoke everywhere. But thankfully, we managed to contain the fire to that specific ward. We tried to save the seven patients, who all needed oxygen assistance as part of their treatment. But we could only rescue one in time. We are still investigating the source of the fire," he added.
An eyewitness, Habibah Abd Ghani, 37, said she was not aware of the fire and only realised it after she was out of the building.
"During the incident, I was in the fourth floor ward with my father who was admitted for pain in his ribs. Then I heard a commotion and was asked by the nurse to get out of the ward."
She added: "The situation was under control as we went down the stairs, assisted by the hospital employees."
Dr Subramaniam said the cause of the fire will be revealed only after the investigation and advised against speculation. However, eyewitnesses claimed they first saw smoke and fire coming out of a treatment room in the ICU, he added.
In a tweet posted earlier, Malaysia's Prime Minister Najib Razak also said: "The government will conduct a thorough investigation as soon as possible to identify the cause of the fire."
Dr Subramaniam said he met the families of victims at the mortuary before his press conference.
"I know it's hard for them to accept what's happened. I pray for strength for them to overcome this. I've asked the hospital to provide aid to the families," he said.
The Health Ministry announced on Tuesday evening that it will be setting up a special committee to investigate the incident.