New Zealand earthquake of magnitude 7.5 magnitude hits Christchurch
People in New Zealand are being urged to head to high ground or inland as far as possible after a powerful earthquake struck outside Christchurch.
A tsunami warning has been issued by the country’s government after a magnitude 7.8 earthquake struck – more powerful than the 2011 quake which measured 6.3.
The government said: ‘People near the eastern coast of the south island should immediately move to high ground or inland as far as possible.
‘Take your getaway kit with you if possible. Do not travel into the areas at risk to get your kit or belongings. Take your pets with you if you can do so safely.
‘Move immediately to the nearest higher ground, or as far inland as you can. If evacuation maps are present, follow the routes shown. Walk or bike if possible and drive only if essential.’
Facebook has now launched its safety check for people to let others know they are safe.
The US Geological Survey measured the quake at 7.5 – much more powerful than the 2011 quake which measured 6.3 on the Richter scale. It was later revised upwards to magnitude 7.8.
People said that the quake felt incredibly powerful and lasted for a long time and it was so strong it could be felt 120 miles away in the capital of Wellington.
Power in some parts of the country has been going on and off since the quake struck just after midnight local time (11.02am GMT)
In 2011 an earthquake struck New Zealand killing 185 people and destroying large parts of the city and its infrastructure.
There were no immediate reports of major damage or injuries. There was no immediate danger of a tsunami, according to the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center.
It was at a relatively shallow depth of six miles and was followed by numerous powerful aftershocks ranging from magnitude 5.7 to 7.4.
Earthquakes tend to be more strongly felt on the surface when they’re shallow.
New Zealand sits on the ‘Ring of Fire,’ an arc of seismic faults around the Pacific Ocean where earthquakes are common.
People have been posting pictures of the damage to their homes.
This is a breaking news story and we will update it as more information comes to us.