Solomon Islands hit by powerful aftershocks after magnitude-7.8 quake
Residents in Solomon Islands were hit by powerful aftershocks following a magnitude-7.8 earthquake which struck 130 kilometres from the capital Honiara.
Authorities are starting to receive reports of damage from the earthquake, with police saying they had been told 35 houses were damaged on the island of Makira, including the police barracks at the provincial capital Kirakira.
The quake triggered widespread tsunami warnings across the Pacific, before the Pacific Tsunami Warning Centre (PTWC) said the threat had largely passed.
Most of the buildings damaged were reportedly traditional-style houses. As yet, there are no confirmed reports of casualties.
Foreign Minister Julie Bishop said Australia was ready to provide any support once requested.
"The Australian Government has in place pre-positioned supplies for shelter, water, sanitation, food," Ms Bishop said.
"If they're required we can work with the local authorities and with the government of Solomon Islands to provide that."
Authorities are still waiting to hear from a helicopter sent to Makira to survey the island.
Kirakira resident Edith Haunagi, said there was some damage when the quake struck.
"Everybody got up from their beds and everybody ran out from their houses and at the same time everybody moved up to the hillside while it was still shaking, a few of the houses here fell this morning.," Ms Haunagi said.
"They were running here and there trying to find their kids."
Ms Haunagi said she had contacted people on the southern side of the island, closest to the quake.
"They have said there was a sea rise this morning after the earthquake and a few houses were damaged," she said.
"People ran up to the hillside. There were no reports of deaths but there were reports of damage to properties and buildings that were close to the beach."
The PTWC said local government agencies would continue to monitor any potential threat.
The monitoring body had said tsunami waves of between one and three metres above the tide level were possible along some coasts of Solomon Islands, while waves of between 0.3 and one metre were forecast for some coasts of Papua New Guinea.
The quake struck at 4:38am AEDT at a depth of roughly 48 kilometres, USGS said — it was initially reported to be of magnitude-8.0.
Loti Yates from the National Disaster Management Office in the capital Honiara told Radio Australia's Pacific Beat program there had been reports of houses collapsing due to the quake.
Mr Yates said poor communication infrastructure had made it hard to assess the immediate impact in Makira.
"[One community] that has been in touch with us said they are calling from up the hills, which is good, they activated their own emergency plans and know what to do, so we are happy.
"The warning has been issued ... at this stage, communication difficulties are hampering our ability to get clear information."
He told the Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation there had been reports of landslides in Temotu and Makira provinces.
Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation journalist Georgina Kekea said locals in Honiara had taken to higher ground as a precaution.
"People here have been woken up by the earthquake, so it's been quite a hectic morning for us," Ms Kekea said.
Australian authorities said there was no risk to its coastlines, while the New Zealand Civil Defence office said it had cancelled the country's tsunami threat.