Natural Gas Leak in Alaska to Continue Unabated
An ongoing natural gas leak in Alaska has taken another turn for the worse: Hilcorp Alaska, the company which owns the underwater pipeline, has announced repairs cannot even begin until the ice surrounding it melts, presumably in mid-to-late March.
The crisis began on February 7, when a Hilcorp helicopter pilot spotted bubbling along the route of an 8-inch pipeline. The gas production facility, built in 1964 by Shell, is the oldest of the sixteen offshore platforms currently in the Cook Inlet. The next week, video footage of the leak was itself leaked, and put on YouTube by the environmental nonprofit group Inletkeeper.
Currently, it's estimated that the pipeline is leaking between 210,000 and 310,000 cubic feet of gas a day into the inlet. On February 20, Hilcorp announced in a letter to the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation that it could not shut down the pipeline for fear of releasing crude oil into the ocean, nor could it repair the pipeline until mid-to-late March.
The pipeline was converted in 2005 from oil to fuel gas service, and still has residual crude oil in it. "If the gas supply were shut in," Hillcorp said, "seawater would enter the depressurized Pipeline through the leak displacing the remaining gas."
The letter also states that with "respect to repair, the conditions in the Inlet – the broken ice, exacerbated by high tidal flows and limited daylight – prevent the immediate dispatch of divers to inspect and contain the leak in the pipeline." The ten-page letter goes on to state that the methane released by the leak "may present a physical hazard (asphyxiation), but not a chemical hazard (toxicity)."
Of particular worry is the fate of the Cook Inlet belugas, listed as endangered since 2008. Only in December of last year did NOAA put out a roadmap for recovery for the whale, part of which listed the area of the leak as crucial to that plan. "If a significant hypoxic zone is created by a continuing natural gas discharge," NOAA said in a letter of its own, "Cook Inlet belugas and multiple [physical and biological features] of their critical habitat could be adversely affected."
Inletkeeper, which is planning on suing the company, is also questioning the basic logistics of the situation. "Basically Hilcorp is saying 'we cannot respond to an event in Cook Inlet in the winter,'" Bob Shavelson, advocacy director for the Homer, Alaska-based group told Alaska Public Radio. "Our response to that is, 'if you can't address an event whether it's a gas spill or an oil spill in Alaska in the winter, then you should go back to Texas, because you don't have a right to do business here.'"
Similar questions about the ability to repair in the cold have also been broached about the Dakota Access Pipeline, which saw its construction slow due to the frigid winters of North Dakota.