Airliner crashes in Russia's East Siberia; 11 dead, 4 survive (Update-2)
An An-24 airliner crashed in Russia's Krasnoyarsk Territory in East Siberia on Monday night killing 11 of the 15 people on board, a spokeswoman for the Siberian regional department of the Emergencies Ministry said.
An An-24 airliner crashed in Russia's Krasnoyarsk Territory in East Siberia on Monday night killing 11 of the 15 people on board, a spokeswoman for the Siberian regional department of the Emergencies Ministry said.
The plane, which was flying from the city of Krasnoyarsk to the town of Igarka, crashed some 700 meters (2,300 feet) from the runway during landing at 21:40 Moscow time [17:40 GMT]. There were four crewmembers and 11 passengers, including a child, on board.
The four survivors have been hospitalized and one is in intensive care with serious burns, Olesya Kukuyeva said.
The Russian Air Transport Agency said three of the survivors were members of the crew and the fourth was a passenger.
Kukuyeva said, however, that the four survivors are all crew members of the passenger jet.
Firefighters and rescuers are working at the scene and looking for the plane's black box.
The Transport Agency said the plane was landing in adverse weather conditions.
"Before landing, the plane veered to the right of its landing course and collided with the ground in front of the runway," the agency said.
It said a fire broke out at the site of the crash but was put out by firefighters at the airport.
The airline running the flight, Katekavia, has been running short-haul flights in the region for 14 years. The airline served some 122,000 passengers over 2009.
A spokesman for the Transport Agency said a special commission has been set up to investigate how Katekavia was organizing its flights.
A source in the law enforcement bodies said a criminal investigation was launched and representatives from the Investigation Committee with the Russian Prosecutor General's Office are expected to arrive at the scene of the incident shortly.