Two arrested after eight people killed in horror crash between lorries and a minibus
Eight people were killed when the minibus they were travelling in crashed with two lorries on a motorway in England.
Eight people were killed when the minibus they were travelling in crashed with two lorries on a motorway in England.
Four other passengers - including one child - were taken to hospital after the collision on the southbound carriageway of the M1 near Newport Pagnell, between junctions 15 and 14. The accident took place about 50 miles north west of London.
The drivers of the two lorries were arrested in connection with the incident in Buckinghamshire. A 31-year-old man from Worcestershire has been arrested on suspicion of one count of causing death by dangerous driving and one count of driving a motor vehicle when alcohol level above limit.
A 53-year-old from Stoke-on-Trent is also in custody, on suspicion of one count of causing death by dangerous driving. It is thought the minibus had travelled from the Nottingham area, Thames Valley Police said.
Images posted online suggested the crash took place near an exit ramp, and showed the wrecked minibus had been almost totally flattened in the collision. The cabs of the HGVs were also smashed.
The vehicles involved in the crash were travelling in the same direction Emergency services were called shortly before 3.15am on Saturday and the road was closed until the early afternoon to allow recovery work to take place.
Chief Inspector Henry Parsons from the joint operations unit for roads policing, said: "Our thoughts are very much with the families of those involved in this morning's collision and we are currently working to locate and inform their next of kin."
In a statement to The Independent, FedEx said: "We are aware of the tragic accident that occurred last night on the M1 motorway, junction 14 in the UK with a FedEx truck involved.
"Our deepest thoughts and concerns are with all of those involved. "Safety is of the utmost importance to FedEx, and we are cooperating fully with authorities but have no further information at this time."