Cuba blasted as Hurricane Irma tears through Caribbean
Caibarién, Cuba (CNN)Packing life-threatening winds, provoking massive storm surge and causing a host of rainfall dangers, Hurricane Irma slammed northern Cuba on Saturday, continuing to plod a path of devastation through the Caribbean en route to the US state of Florida.
A string of small Caribbean islands was left reeling by the massive hurricane, which strengthened to a Category 5 storm as it made landfall overnight in Cuba. It was downgraded late Saturday morning to Category 3 but was expected to regain power.
"Irma is forecast to restrengthen once it moves away from Cuba, and ... to remain a powerful hurricane as it approaches Florida," the US National Hurricane Center said Saturday evening.
In its 8 p.m. ET advisory, the National Hurricane Center reported that Irma had temporarily slowed down, moving toward Florida near 7 mph (11kph). The storm is about 110 miles (175 kilometers) southeast of Key West and is expected to reach the Florida Keys early Sunday. The hurricane is expected to move along or near the southwest coast of Florida Sunday afternoon.
Irma slams into Cuba, some towns on north coast underwater. pic.twitter.com/3ceY2fjlKp
At least 24 people were known to have died in the Caribbean as a result of Irma. Many islands were still assessing the damage, even as they prepared for the arrival of another major storm, Hurricane Jose.
By dawn Saturday, the town's main street had waves rolling down it, and within hours the whole town was flooded with several feet of water. Roofs could be seen flying off and trees were blown down as the wind gusted and roared. Officials reported a wind gust of 124 mph (200 kph) around midmorning Saturday.
Most people in the coastal area live in one-story homes, putting them at great risk as floodwaters rose to roof level in some places. Residents were overwhelmed by the damage and said recovery will take time.
Many people had left town over the past couple of days, with all foreigners urged to evacuate. Those who remained were prepared, though they knew this was a storm like few had ever experienced, they told CNN.
As of 8 p.m. ET Saturday, a hurricane warning for Irma remained in place for the Cuban provinces of Camaguey, Ciego de Avila, Sancti Spiritus, Villa Clara, Matanzas, and Havana -- as well as for the northwestern Bahamas. According to state-run news organization Granma, there are 14,500 foreign tourists riding out Irma in the resort town of Varadero in the Matanzas province.
As Irma advanced over neighboring Ciego de Avila province, 16- to 23-foot waves (5 to 7 meters) were recorded. As the storm headed westward, the possibility of even bigger waves and greater flooding was high along the northern Cuban coast, including in Havana, the agency said.
"I have never seen any such destruction on a per capita basis compared to what I saw in Barbuda this afternoon," Browne told CNN on Wednesday.
Antigua, Barbuda's sister island and home to about 80,000 people, was spared the brunt of the storm. Many residents there have been evacuated ahead of Jose.
"There is a sense of dread ... utility poles are down everywhere. There is no power and no public water and it appears it may take a long time to restore," Xaverius van der Hoek, who lives in St. Maarten, told CNN.
Looting broke out on the island, home to about 72,000 people, and security forces were deployed to deal with the problem, French and Dutch authorities said Friday.
Just to the north, Anguilla, a 90-square kilometer island that is among several British overseas territories in the Caribbean, "received the hurricane's full blast," according to UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office Minister Alan Duncan.
USBritish The US and British Virgin Islands were also pummeled by Irma. Pictures from St. Thomas, the most populated of the US Virgin Islands and a popular tourist destination, showed extensive damage.
a Facebook statement "All of us have been affected by Irma and some more than others," Gus Jaspert, governor of the British Virgin Islands, said in a Facebook statement late Thursday in which he declared a state of emergency for the territory.
"Apart from the structural damage, there have sadly been reports of casualties and fatalities," he said. "I am truly heartbroken by this news."
Strong winds and heavy rain also lashed the Dominican Republic, Haiti and the low-lying Turks and Caicos Islands Thursday into Friday. The Turks and Caicos' capital island of Grand Turk suffered "quite a bit of damage," including to part of a hospital's roof, Gov. John Freeman told CNN on Friday.