South Florida braces for slow-moving Hurricane Irma
(CNN)Time is running out to evacuate and prepare for Hurricane Irma, officials warned Saturday night as violent winds and rains from the Category 3 storm began pounding the southern tip of Florida.
Irma's powerful winds and outer rain bands lashed the Florida Keys on Saturday as the massive storm slowly began turning from Cuba's northern coast up into the Florida Strait, the National Hurricane Center said.
Winds of 74 mph -- hurricane force -- reached Key West late Saturday, the National Weather Service said.
With maximum sustained winds of 120 mph, Irma is expected to strengthen once it moves away from Cuba, with the possibility of hitting the US mainland as a Category 4.
Irma's eye is expected to be cross the lower Florida Keys on Sunday morning before driving up the state's west coast in the afternoon, according to the hurricane center. Almost the entire state is under hurricane warning with concerns of devastating gales, heavy rain and life-threatening storm surge.
"If you didn't evacuate the Keys, you're on your own until we can actually get in there and it's safe," he told CNN Saturday. "The message has been clear: The Keys are going to be impacted. There is no safe area within the Keys. And you put your life in your own hands by not evacuating."
major concern among officials was the storm surge The major concern among officials was the storm surge , which is like a sustained high tide that can cause devastating flooding, warning that it could reach as high as 15 feet in some areas. A storm surge warning is in place for the Florida Keys, Tampa Bay, and an extensive stretch of coastline wrapping most of the way around the state. At 11 p.m. ET Saturday it was extended as far west as the Ochlockonee River.
"You can't survive these storm surges," Scott told CNN Saturday evening. "You've got to get out. You've got to evacuate. This storm is coming. Once the storm's here, we can't evacuate anybody."
-- As Irma barrels toward Florida, as many as 26 million people in the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Cuba could be exposed to destructive winds and torrential rain, the Red Cross said, with 1.2 million people already battered by the storm. Hurricane warnings were still in effect Saturday for parts of central Cuba.
-- Of the 24 deaths blamed on Irma, nine were in unspecified French territories, one in Barbuda, one in the British overseas territory of Anguilla, two in Dutch-administered St. Maarten, four in the British Virgin Islands, four in the US Virgin Islands and three in Puerto Rico.
Florida Power and Light estimated that 3.4 million of its customers could be without power at some point during Irma, which would make it largest number of outages they have ever had to deal with in history, company spokesman Chris McGrath told CNN Saturday.
"We think this could be the most challenging restoration in the history of the US," he said.
As much as 20 inches of rain was predicted through Wednesday across the Florida peninsula and southeast Georgia, and maximum wind gusts above 100 mph are expected in much of western Florida.
Officials in other states also were preparing Saturday for Irma. South Carolina Gov. Henry McMaster issued a mandatory evacuation for some barrier islands, while Georgia Gov. Nathan Deal expanded the state of emergency to include 94 counties. Schools throughout Georgia, including the University of Georgia, planned to close Monday.