ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Dozens of asylum seekers are feared dead after their boat smashed into rocks and broke apart in rough conditions off Christmas Island this morning.
Customs crews and locals are frantically trying to save survivors of the wreck, near Flying Fish Cove.
Witnesses have described being woken up by screaming and then watching helplessly as bodies and wreckage were dashed against the rocks.
Local electrician Michael Foster has been taking part in the rescue effort and has estimated that about 30 people died.
"By the time I got down there and saw what was going on, there was debris and people everywhere with life jackets on and so forth but a lot of screaming and carrying on," he told The World Today.
"With the horrendous seas as they are, the only thing that people could do from the mainland was really throw life jackets back into the water or just advise them to swim away from the rocks."
Acting Prime Minister Wayne Swan described the crash as a serious and tragic incident, and has confirmed some bodies have been pulled from the water.
He would not confirm, however, how many people were alive and how many had drowned.
At 3.00pm AEDT he said the rescue operation was still ongoing.
"You will be brought up to date as soon as we have a clear picture. At the moment the priority is on the rescue," he said.
"A number of people have been rescued, but sadly some bodies have been retrieved."
Mr Swan said Navy and Customs boats were involved in the rescue effort.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard has released a statement saying she will return from leave tonight after receiving briefings on the incident.
"This has been a tragic event and it will be some time before there is a full picture of what has happened," the statement said.
"The Government's focus and absolute priority now is on rescue, recovery and treatment of those injured."
The ABC has been told Customs has launched inflatable rafts to rescue the passengers from rough seas. Locals also threw ropes out to people in the sea.
Documentary maker Philip Stewart, who is on the island, says he has heard reports that 50 people have died.
He says the conditions were too rough for rescuers to get close enough to help many of the people.
"They were waving and shouting and screaming for help," he said.
"They were desperate, by that stage they had been in the water for an hour already.
"They hung on for as long as they possibly could and each one of them was eventually thrown off into the sea onto the rocks."
Mr Stewart says he saw at least one person rescued by Navy personnel, while others clung to bits of flotsam from the boat.
"We did however witness one person jumping off a piece of flotsam and actually swimming towards a naval rescue boat, but unfortunately what we witnessed was a major tragedy," he said.
"We only witnessed one person surviving while the others unfortunately didn't.
"To see people die and not to be able to do a damn thing is one of the worst things you can possibly do."
Customs has issued a statement confirming an "ongoing situation" on the island.
"This response is ongoing and the AFP's (Australian Federal Police) priority is the safety of all involved in the incident," police said in a statement.
Christmas Island shire councillor Kamar Ismail says around 20 locals watched as the tragedy unfolded, throwing life jackets into the water.
"The boat hit a rock and smashed into pieces ... it was horrific," he told ABC News 24.
"We as the locals travelled there to give a hand but it was just too dangerous for us.
"I was there, [the boat] was floating, people were swimming for help," he said.
"A big wave smashed the boat into the rocks and smashed it into pieces. We weren't far from the rocks ... we were maybe three metres from the cliff. But we just couldn't help ... it was just too dangerous."
Mr Ismail estimates there were 50 to 60 people aboard the boat, including children, before it smashed into pieces.
He says rescue boats arrived about 10 to 20 minutes after the boat hit the rock.
He says he saw some people picked up by the rescue boats but he does not know how many.
He says there was no opportunity for anyone in the water to reach the rocks and the best they could do was to cling on to debris.
Customs has confirmed that those on the boat include women and children. The asylum seekers are mainly from Iraq and Iran.
Sea conditions in the area are so bad that a Royal Australian Navy ship has been unable to land at Christmas Island to drop off asylum seekers picked up from an earlier boat arrival.
The National Critical Care Trauma Response Centre in Darwin is on standby to assist with the treatment of injured asylum seekers, and to take the bodies of those who have died.
Trauma centre executive director Len Notaras says his team is prepared to send doctors to the scene and to transfer patients back to Darwin if necessary.
"I understand there are a number of deceased - I can't comment on the number of deceased or indeed the injuries," he said.
The plane is carrying two doctors and two nurses and is expected to land on the island about 6:00pm AWDT.
It is understood the doctors will treat two injured men and one woman before flying them to a Perth hospital later this evening.
The West Australian Health Department is on standby to treat the survivors.