ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The town of Echuca, on the Victorian-New South Wales border, is facing unprecedented flood peaks later today.
Dozens of other towns will also be threatened in the coming days, after record-breaking floods across the north-west of the state.
13,000 properties have been flooded and 3,000 people have been forced to abandon their homes.
Thirty-four towns have been affected by the floods, and authorities say it is the worst flooding to hit northern and north-western Victoria since records began.
Rochester and Charlton have been hardest hit so far and both towns remain cut off, so the full extent of the damage is not known.
For many towns the deluge comes just five months after September's crippling floods.
There are emergency evacuation warnings in place for Donald, Boort, Culgoa and Quambatook in north-eastern Victoria.
The State Emergency Service says up to 100 properties at Echuca could be flooded when the Campaspe River peaks later today.
SES spokesman Lachlan Quick says the community must be prepared to leave if they feel unsafe.
"It is important to note that we are facing an unprecedented flood event on the Campaspe river," he said.
"Water volumes of this size have never been seen down this river before."
However, the local council is playing down the threat to Echuca.
The Deputy Mayor of the Campaspe Shire, Peter Williams, says the river has not risen as high as had been expected and Echuca's levee should hold.
"After what happened in Rochester we were very nervous that a similar sort of thing would happen in Echuca," he said.
"But [this is a] slightly different river, slightly different conditions and it now appears that Echuca is going to be saved from those kind of conditions.
"That will be well below the one in 100 year flood heights of the levees so we'll get quite a deal of inundation outside the levee system but there shouldn't be anything getting into town."
Lachlan Quick from the SES says locals should not take any chances.
"If those conditions change and they do ease then that's good," he said.
"But from an SES perspective I would prefer to over-prepare for these incidents than under prepare."
Victoria's flood crisis is expected to continue to threaten towns for days.
Rising creeks are beginning to flood the small townships of Rupanyup, Boort and Culgoa, and evection warnings are in place for low-lying areas.
The SES says floodwaters have gone over the top of some flood gauges meaning levels can no longer be read.
Horsham in the state's west is bracing for its worst flood in 100 years when the Wimmera River peaks tomorrow afternoon.
It is expected 100 homes will be flooded and a further 500 will be isolated.
Residents in Horsham have begun preparing homes and businesses.
Trent King says he is nervously awaiting the river's peak.
"We're covering up the holes into house at the moment with sandbags," he said.
"Just having a bunch of sandbags on stand-by and brooms and other sorts of equipment to help move the water."
Hundreds of roads across Victoria have been closed since Friday because of flooding.
The main route from Melbourne to Adelaide, the Western Highway, was closed but has since re-opened.