Rescue bid for Chile miners moves slowly 4 days on
COPIAPO, Chile (Reuters) - Rescuers advanced slowly on Monday to contact 33 miners trapped deep in a small mine in northern Chile, hoping they are holding onto life in a tiny shelter with little food and water four days after a cave-in.
Rescue workers drilled small holes deep into the mine hoping to locate the miners and provide them with food and water as they look for other ways to extract them from the copper and gold deposit that caved in on Thursday afternoon.
The accident has shocked the world’s top copper producer and shed light on safety conditions at small mines in the mineral-rich Atacama desert, where hundreds risk their lives for a piece of the commodity bonanza.
Lawmakers have vowed to review Chile’s mine safety regulations, although radical changes are unlikely in an industry where serious accidents are uncommon.
Hopes for a quick rescue were shattered on Saturday after an air shaft used by rescuers to descend caved in, hampering rescue efforts in what could become one of Chile’s worst mining accidents in decades.
“We have gone from hours to days and now possibly a rescue that could take weeks, which is very painful for us and generates a feeling of anger and powerlessness,” said Mining Minister Laurence Golborne, who is overseeing rescue efforts.
No contact has yet been made with the miners, trapped 4.5 miles (7 km) inside the mine and around 900 feet (300 metres) vertically underground.
Dozens of relatives have endured the freezing nights and sun-blasting days in the desert outside the mine for news about their loved ones, hoping to find them alive in the deposit located 450 miles (725 km) north of the capital, Santiago.
President Sebastian Pinera, who took office in March only weeks after a massive earthquake hit central Chile, has vowed to probe the causes of the accident near the northern mining town of Copiapo and punish those responsible for any lapses.
Rescue efforts are another test for his new government as it moves to rebuild cities and industries ravaged by an 8.8 magnitude quake in February.
The San Jose mine, owned by the local Compania Minera San Esteban Primera, is part of a mining complex that produces around 1,200 tonnes of copper per year.
The mine, which has been operating since the late 1800s, has been linked to several fatal accidents in the past that briefly closed the deposit years ago.
Most of the country’s copper is extracted by big, foreign mining companies that invest heavily in safety to comply with international standards. Copper is by far Chile’s top revenue earner.
Smaller mines make up a tiny part of the country’s total output, but pepper the rugged, hilly desert of northern Chile.