Dozens of Victorian homes inundated by flood waters
DOZENS of homes have been inundated by flood waters in Victoria's north as Prime Minister Julia Gillard warns Victorians to brace for "major problems".
Residents in Irymple, just south of Mildura about 450km northwest of Melbourne, were told to evacuate when residual water from Friday’s downpour overflowed from a blocked drain.
An SES spokeswoman said a stormwater drain had failed, causing the flooding.
Up to 20 homes were flooded just after noon today, with up to 50 homes at risk.
Residents have moved to a relief centre in nearby Red Cliffs as clean-up crews move in.
Residents in Rochester remain on watch as the Campaspe River moves toward its peak later tonight.
Meanwhile, emergency evacuations took place around West Gippsland area last night, as the Bunyip River threatened to rise to its highest peak in 40 years.
Several roads in the area were flooded but it's not yet known how many homes were affected.
Victoria is "heading for some major problems," Ms Gillard warned.
"This is going to get very tough indeed," she told Channel 10.
It comes as a "really cruel" strike to communities preparing to mark the second anniversary of the deadly Black Saturday bushfires, Ms Gillard added.
In the rural hamlet of Iona, in the state's east, residents were hit by the worst floods to hit the town in more than 70 years.
Locals were yesterday scrambling to keep water out of their homes and protect their properties after the most threatening floods since 1934.
A handful of the town's 30 homes were inundated, while dozens were isolated.
Shirley Boulase, who lives opposite the Bunyip drain, said she was forced to evacuate or face being isolated in her home.
"It came up so quickly. We were monitoring the bridge and thought it would probably overflow about midnight, but it was early evening when it hit," Ms Boulase said.
"Once it started there was no stopping it. Within seconds of it coming over the road we were surrounded by water."
Elsewhere farmers were surveying damage to their crops with some fearing they had been wiped out.
Residents in the town of Rochester in the state's north remain on high alert as the Campaspe River continues to rise.
More than 780 Rochester residents attended an emergency community meeting last night, and State Emergency Service workers are keeping a close eye on the river today.
Emergency assistance payments will be available to people directly affected by the natural disaster.
Fears were strong overnight for the township of Koo Wee Rup and surrounding areas, with 170 people registering at a local relief centre.
Yesterday, paramedics helped relocate 50 patients from the Koo Wee Rup Hospital to Melbourne.
While several roads in the area were flooded, no homes were inundated.
There were also concerns overnight for a small dam at Emerald, southeast of Melbourne, but that has held firm against the rains.
SES damage assessment teams are moving into Mildura today to assess the fall-out from the high winds, heavy rains and flash flooding in that city in Victoria's northwest on Friday night and yesterday morning.
"It has calmed down, but we have just got to see what damage there is," he said.
In Koo Wee Rup, Allison Cathie, 32, said she feared she would not have a home to return to today.
"I'm scared about losing my house, having nowhere to live and to find all my belongings trashed," Ms Cathie said.
"I don't want to drown and I hate the feeling that we could all drown."
Police and ambulance staff evacuated 51 patients and elderly residents from the Koo Wee Rup hospital, taking them to hospitals in Malvern, Camberwell and Leongatha.
Hugh Brown has lived in the Lower Bunyip River area for 62 years and said he would defy the evacuation order despite his home being on the riverbanks.
"I'm going to ride it out," Mr Brown said.
Last night, the roads out of Koo Wee Rup were clogged with cars full of residents and their belongings fleeing the flood threat.
Almost two years to the day after a fierce heatwave sparked the Black Saturday bushfires that claimed 173 lives, Victoria was awash yesterday, with almost 5500 stranded and besieged Victorians needing help from emergency services.
In the most serious storm incident, an English tourist, 26, was rushed to hospital with serious head and chest injuries after a gum tree fell on top of the tent she was sleeping in at a Doncaster East caravan park.
More than 90 people had to be rescued.
Sara Tanner of Koo Wee Rup spent her 16th birthday sheltering with friends at an evacuation centre at the Cranbourne Sports Centre.
About 70 people including families with young children had gathered at the emergency spot by 11pm.
The Frankston line is experiencing disruptions because of storm damage and flooding today.
Metro is urging customers to plan ahead and allow extra travel time.
For all other updates, go to metrotrains.com.au or twitter.com/metrotrains.