Cyclone Carlos leaves Karratha intact, as tornado rips through town
Damage to the All Seasons Hotel in Karratha. "Crews are out at the moment assessing the damage and checking the area. They need to make sure it's all safe before we give the all clear." Residents have been in lock-down since early this morning with a red alert in place for Karratha and the surrounding areas. Ms Lockwood said the town had been bracing for a large cyclone to hit, and while she glad there was no reports of major damage, it was still a bit of a letdown that it was just another storm. "The last time there was a cyclone of significance was in '89. We really haven't had a direct hit since then," she said.
Damage to the All Seasons Hotel in Karratha. "It's a funny atmosphere in Karratha at the moment. It does build up a bit of momentum." Ms Lockwood said low lying parts of the town and caravan parks had been evacuated before the storm hit, with people seeking shelter with family or friends or at a relocation centre at the Pilbara TAFE. Damage to the All Seasons Hotel in Karratha. All schools in the town were closed for the day.
Ms Lockwood said houses in Karratha were rated to stand up to a category 5 cyclone so people should be safe if they stayed away from windows and retreated to the strongest part of their homes. This massive tunnel of wind, this ferocious wind just ripped just straight through the street out the front of the office. Oil, gas and port installations in the region have also been battened down in readiness for expected heavy weather. Gale force winds of 110km/h are being experienced in coastal areas between Whim Creek and Mardie, and were bound to hit Onslow yesterday evening. Wind gusts at the centre of the cyclone are exceeding 120km/h, however it is likely to intensify as the system moves in a south-west direction.
Exmouth was likely to be affected this morning, and possibly as far south as Cape Cuvier tonight. At 2pm yesterday, tropical cyclone Carlos was located about 50km west-south-west of Karratha, and 155 east-north-east of Onslow and moving south-west at 20km/h. Carnarvon and the offshore islands may be affected by the strong winds and rain this evening. On Monday Karratha was lashed by a mini-tornado which ripped through a supermarket and the Karratha pool, wiping away pool furniture and anything lose it its path, radio 6PR reported.
Thirty-eight homes, mainly on Padbury and Wellard ways, were damaged in the tornado, while nine commercial properties in the town centre sustained major damage. GWN Karratha reporter Simon Nichols said the tornado hit about 3pm. "It all went quite eerie, I was outside at the time, it felt like something was about to happen," he said. "Then this massive tunnel of wind, this ferocious wind just ripped just straight through the street out the front of the office." "In only lasted about five or 10 minutes. I have been in Karratha about eight months and I've never seen anything quite like this before." He said residents who lived in Karratha for many years described wild weather like this as "part of their lives."
He spoke to a female employee at the Karratha pool, which was in the path of the tornado. The employee said a power line fell through the compound and the fence crashed down just a couple of metres away from her." "Even the pool water, when the tornado was moving across, you actually see the pool water being swept up into the sky," Mr Nichols said. The All Seasons Hotel on Searipple Road was hammered by the tornado, with debris still scattered around outside. Strong winds are hampering clean-up efforts as cyclone Carlos approaches the town centre in the next few hours, and staff are bracing for more damage. Corey Holman managed to get into the town centre to take photos of the tornado's damage, and said there was no warning for the tornado, he said he just heard "a few big bangs" before it hit.
He said that after a couple of false alarms over cyclones in recent months, he believed Carlos was looking the most likely to do some damage. "You get a bit blasé about it all after a while," he said. "But this one, it's likely to make some impact up here. "The last one, I just thought, I'm not going to bother too much. But this time, we're all sorted and everything is all neat and tidy." Karratha resident Lynn Brown, who lives about three kilometres from the town centre, said that with the red alert, residents are in lockdown inside their homes while they wait for the worst of the cyclone to pass.
She said after about five years living in the area, she had become all too used to the threat of cyclones and that this morning's warning was not of great concern. "We can't drive anywhere at the moment, but we all just want to go and have a look around," she said. "But there's really nothing you can do but wait. We're just sitting around watching out for updates." She said while she hoped the town would escape with minimal damage, she said locals were used to the cyclonic weather and were generally well-prepared for it. "We often get excited at the prospect of a big storm, and then get let down that they don't come to what you imagined they're going to," she said.
"We've put everything away and tied it all down. That's really all you can do." Roebourne Shire president Nicole Lockwood said crews had worked to clear debris and electricity crews had worked through the night to restore supply to all but 60 out of about 1600 homes that had lost power. No further damage had been reported in Karratha since the tornado, she said. ''It's been very mild up till now, I think it's the next couple of hours that will tell.''
The Department for Child Protection has opened a relocation centre at the Civic Centre, McGregor Street in Port Hedland. FESA have given the all-clear to those between Point Samson and Karratha, including Point Samson, Wickham, Dampier, Roebourne and Karratha, although residents need to remain vigilant with severe damage in the area. FESA said homes were very likely to be impacted by rapid and powerful flooding as Carlos passed the coast. A number of roads have been closed including: