Tsunami warning issued for Oregon coast, advisory for Washington
Damaging waves could hit between 7 a.m. and 7:30, the National Weather Servicesays.
The timing of when the initial wave may hit ranges from 7:15 a.m. at Charleston to 7:24 a.m. at Seaside. Scientists are still working on models to forecast the size of the wave, but early predictions indicated it could be up to 3 feet.
A tsunami advisory is in effect for the coast of Washington. That is a step below a warning and means spot damage is possible in harbors and estuaries along beaches.
A tsunami warning also is in effect for California north of Point Conception to the Washington border. An advisory is in effect south of Point Conception.
"Stay away from the beach,"  said Bill Steele, a University of Washington seismologist with the Pacific Northwest Seismic Network. "Be smart about it. The water has a lot of power. Pay attention to your local emergency managers."
All coastal residents in the warning area who are near the beach or in low-lying regions should move immediately inland to higher ground and away from all harbors and inlets including those sheltered directly from the sea. Those feeling the earth shake, seeing unusual wave action, or the water level rising or receding may have only a few minutes before the tsunami arrival and should move immediately. Homes and small buildings are not designed to withstand tsunami impacts. Do not stay in these structures.      A tsunami advisory means that a tsunami capable of producing strong currents or waves dangerous to persons in or very near the water is expected.  Currents may be hazardous to swimmers, boats, and coastal structures and may continue for several hours after the initial wave arrival.      The wave is expected after the  8.9-magnitude earthquake off northeastern Japan.      The last major tsunami to strike Oregon and Northern California was March 27, 1964. It killed four children camped on Beverly Beach north of Newport and 11 people in Crescent City, Calif. It was triggered by a magnitude 9.2 earthquake off Alaska and caused damage in Seaside, Newport and other coastal communities.     Tsunami safety information from the state