New tsunami warning for Japan cancelled
AFTER initial reports of a three metre tsunami off the coast, the Meteorological Agency says there is no current risk of another deadly wave hitting Japan's northeastern coast.
Soldiers and officials along a stretch of Japan's northeastern coast had warned residents that the area could be hit by another tsunami, ordering them to higher ground.
Farther south along the coast, helicopters flew over coastal communities warning residents to head to higher ground.
In Sendai, the biggest city in the area, police announced warnings on a public address system.
Earlier, Jiji news agency reported that a large wave was spotted off the coast by a helicopter, but the meteorological agency says it had detected no sign of a new tsunami or a major quake that would have triggered it.
Authorities had issued evacuation orders in some parts of the devastated coastline after the initial report and as seawater was seen retreating off Iwate and Aomori prefectures - a phenomenon that occurs before tsunamis.
Public broadcaster NHK had reported that the crew of a fire department helicopter had spotted a three-metre high tsunami off Fukushima prefecture, saying it was expected to hit shortly after 1.30pm AEDT.
By 2pm AEDT no tsunami was reported to have hit.
A meteorological agency official told AFP: "When we detect an earthquake, the agency issues either a tsunami warning or an alert, but there was no quake monitored".
He added, as a note of caution, that some of the agency's offshore monitoring systems had been broken by last Friday's disaster.
An offshore quake had struck 140 kilometres northeast of Tokyo earlier today, shaking tall buildings in Tokyo, but authorities did not then issue a tsunami alert.
The quake off coastal Ibaraki prefecture - one of many aftershocks since Friday's massive 9 quake - had a 5.8-magnitude, said the US Geological Survey, which said the quake struck at a depth of 18 kilometres.
Meanwhile, an explosion has rocked a quake-damaged Japanese nuclear power plant but the reactor apparently has not been breached.