ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
German officials held crisis talks, with reports at least 14 people have died and hundreds are ill amid an outbreak of a highly virulent strain of bacteria found on imported cucumbers.
Belgium and Russia banned the import of vegetables from Spain, believed to be the source of at least some of the contaminated cucumbers. The Spanish government hit back, saying it would seek financial compensation from the European Union for lost sales.
More than two weeks after the food poisoning outbreak was first reported in northern Germany, the number of confirmed and suspected cases has reached 1,200, according to media reports.
The Robert Koch Institute (RKI), Germany's national disease institute, said three deaths have been officially linked to the bacteria, but "in total about a dozen people have died according to regional authorities".
These authorities later on Monday announced two more deaths: a woman, 50, and a man, 75, bringing the toll to at least 14.
The Stockholm-based European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control has described the outbreak of the strain of E. coli as "one of the largest worldwide and the largest ever reported in Germany".
Authorities in Germany warned against eating raw vegetables after traces of the bacteria were found on organic cucumbers from Spain last week.
But officials said they were unsure what caused the sudden outbreak of enterohaemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), which can result in full-blown haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS), a disease that causes bloody diarrhoea and serious liver damage and possible death.
The outbreak has hit countries including Britain, Denmark, Sweden and the Netherlands, but most of these cases appear to involve people who had recently travelled to or from Germany.
"Normally we see about 1,000 cases per year, but we've now had some 1,200 cases in just 10 days," Jan Galle, director of the Luedenscheid clinic in western Germany, told ZDF public television.
"And we know that this time the EHEC strain is especially virulent and resistant and has led to a very high number of HUS cases," he added.
German consumer affairs minister Ilse Aigner held emergency talks with health minister Daniel Bahr and regional state representatives, telling reporters the crisis has "taken a European dimension".
Many German supermarkets and shops removed all Spanish-grown vegetables from their shelves.
Belgium said it was blocking cucumber imports from Spain, while Russia said it was banning vegetable imports from both Spain and Germany.
The Netherlands, which usually exports vast amounts of vegetables to Germany, said sales had collapsed. German farmers also said consumers were boycotting their vegetables.
Doctors remained unsure how to treat the disease which can result in total kidney failure.
Rolf Stahl, a neurologist at the Eppendorf University Clinic in Hamburg, said nearly a third of patients there had lost all kidney functions and were on dialysis.
Doctors were experimenting with a new type of monoclonal antibodies drug, Eculizumab, which, while not officially approved, has been administered to 11 patients in a bid to save their lives.