French Alps climbers died after falling from mountainside, investigators say
Accident on Neige Cordier peak in Hautes-Alpes region that killed six may have been result of human error
Six climbers have died in an accident in the Alps in one of the worst mountain tragedies in France in recent years.
The apparently experienced mountaineers, climbing in two groups in what were described as "ideal conditions", are thought to have become unattached from the mountain and fallen into a steep pass 200 metres (656 feet) below to their deaths.
Their bodies lay on the mountain for around 24 hours before being found by an English hiker, following a similar route, who made the macabre discovery on Sunday morning.
The hiker immediately called a mountain rescue team to report finding the bodies at an altitude of 2,700 metres on the Neige Cordier peak, three miles (5km) from the village of Villar-d'Arène in the Hautes-Alpes region. The spot, in the Massif Ecrin mountain range, just south east of Grenoble in the southern French Alps, is popular with climbers and is not considered by mountaineering experts as especially dangerous.
French police have launched an investigation into the accident.
The sky was clear and locals say conditions could not have been better when the six French mountaineers – two men and three women aged between 42 and 64 and a 16-year-old youth – set off from the Villar-d'Arène area at 6am on Saturday, aiming to climb the 3,614-metre Neige Cordier peak.
Police believe the group, equipped with crampons, ice axes and suitable climbing clothing, and making the ascent roped together in two groups of three, had not gone far before tragedy struck.Although they have not established the exact cause, investigators say that at some point on Saturday morning all six fell up to 200 metres into a steep pass that locals said was frequently used by snow walkers and mountaineers. At first it was believed the group had been hit by an avalanche of snow and rocks, but first examinations of the scene suggested human error.
"On the face of it there wasn't an avalanche. They came unattached [from the mountain]. At the moment we don't know why," local magistrate Rémy Avon said.
He said that the first investigations showed "traces of slippage" in the Plate des Agneaux pass, a steep corridor where the bodies were discovered "halfway up", and added that the first group appeared to have reached the top of the corridor before falling.
"It's possible that this brought down the second roped group, or it may have been that the two became unattached at the same time," he said.
Although the party was due to return to an alpine lodge on Saturday evening, the alarm was not raised when the climbers failed to appear.
When the British hiker came across them at about 9.40am on Sunday morning, he called the emergency services and a mountain rescue team made up of police, paramedics and doctors was dispatched to the scene.
The bodies were later flown by helicopter to Villar-d'Arène, where a makeshift morgue was set up.Xavier Cret, mayor of Villar d'Arène, a village of 300 inhabitants, told French journalists: "I am a high mountain guide and I am very familiar with this site. It's not a particularly difficult area (to climb)."
However, he said the accident appeared to have happened at the "most technical part of the ascent."
"We won't know (what happened) until there is an investigation. It's not a place with a dangerous reputation and the conditions for climbing were ideal. We are are a small village and everyone is extremely distressed," he said.
A spokesman for the mountain rescue service that recovered the bodies said "all hypotheses are possible".
Local guide François Pinatel said the area in the Ecrins Alpine range was known to be dangerous "when the snow is heavy and in certain places where there are overhangs". In June 2007 five climbers from the same family died after falling in the same range.