Rain moves on, leaving damage, cleanup behind – The Denver Post
Thunderstorm and flood warnings in the Denver metro area have expired after a “fast and furious” ride for rush-hour commuters and rescuers.
A thunderstorm that rolled into Denver at about 4:14 p.m. today dropped as much as 3 inches of rain in 90 minutes, prompting flash flood warnings in Denver and Boulder counties until mid-evening.
The deluge swamped commuters at underpasses and inundated intersections in Denver, Aurora and Commerce City. Dozens of people had to be plucked from their cars by rescuers.
There were no reports of serious injuries or fatalities, despite dozens of people being pulled from the water.
Numerous streets across the metro area remain closed to repair damage or to remove debris and vehicles.
Flash flood warnings expired in Denver, Adams and Arapahoe counties at 10:15 a.m. and in central Boulder County at 9:16 p.m. However, a flash flood advisory remains in effect until 2 a.m.
The storm left about 28,000 Xcel customers without power, as the storm snapped trees and lines. At 8:45 p.m., about 10,000 were still without power, a spokesman said.
About two dozen crews will work through the night and the company hopes all the power is restored by 9 a.m. Friday.
Several roads remain closed in Commerce City tonight, including U.S. Highway 85 near the rail tracks,
The state highway department also also closed the Interstate 270 frontage road due to a 8-foot-wide and 3-foot sink hole in the road.
During the normal afternoon commute, Denver Fire Department crews has made scores of water rescues as more than 10 cars at a time found themselves trapped in rising, fast water, said Lt. Phil Champagne.
“It’s been all over the board,” he said of the locations. “And it’s been fast and furious all afternoon long.”
In Boulder County, authorities were nervously watching Fourmile Canyon, left mostly barren by a 6,200-acre wildfire last fall.
The storm caused four landslides along Fourmile Canyon Drive, including one in the 7800 block near Emerson Gulch Road that was 100 yards wide and four feet deep, according to the Boulder Daily Camera.
Boulder County Sheriff’s Cmdr. Rick Brough said 303 residents were notified to be ready to move to higher ground, but evacuations did not prove necessary.
Rock slides also were reported in Lefthand and Boulder canyons, the Camera reported.
Cherry Creek in Denver was running at seven times its normal flow this afternoon, according to river gauges.
Champagne said power lines and trees were down in some areas, “presenting additional challenges.”
Near the intersection of 36th Street and Walnut Street, Scott Knock, a National Guardsman, said he had helped push eight or nine cars after they got stick in knee-deep water.
“People are being stupid and trying to get through,” he said.
Jenna Kolb knew the water was too deep and stopped before driving through.
“The manhole covers were popping off” and getting swept away,” she said.
Aurora police also reported “several manhole covers have floated out of place.”
Wes Dupee, bartender at the Denver Eagle at 36th Street and Blake Street, said water began pouring into the back door of the bar, and the staff had to lift things and unplug electrical equipment.
Flights were delayed for 60 to 90 minutes at Denver International Airport, spokeswoman Laura Coale said. Some flights have been canceled and it’s possible others will be diverted.
Coale did not know how many flights had been affected.
Although tornado sirens blared near Colorado Avenue and elsewhere in the south part of the city this afternoon, there are no tornadoes in the area, according to the Weather Service.
The storm caused several outdoor events to be cancelled or postponed, including Commerce City Cultural Council’s Music in the Park at River Run Park.
Showers are expected to continue in the metro region until midnight.
Denver Post Staff Writers Liz Navratil and Caitlin Gibbons contributed to this report.