Atlantic City casinos are closing as Hurricane Irene churns north
ATLANTIC CITY — Opting not to press their luck, gamblers and residents boarded buses today to flee Atlantic City as Hurricane Irene barrels down on the nation's second-largest gambling resort.
Atlantic City casinos are expected to close at some point this afternoon. It would be just the third time in the 33-year history of legalized gambling in New Jersey that the gambling halls would be shuttered.
Pearson Callender was waiting in vain for a Greyhound bus before 5 a.m. at the Atlantic City bus terminal. He did not want to wait until later in the day, when one might be available, so he had to shell out extra money for an NJ Transit bus ride back home to Brooklyn, N.Y.
"I like gambling, but you don't play with this," he said. "People are saying this is an act of God. I just need to get home to be with my family."
Jess Cornwell of Portsmouth, England was one of a group of young women who had just wrapped up a short stay at the Golden Nugget. (They all lost, and were headed for Vermont, which they reckoned would be beyond the storm's worst effects.)
"We were watching the hurricane on TV and this looks scary," said Cornwell, 22. "I'm glad we're leaving. I was thinking we might have to sit in the bathtub and put the mattress over our heads."
She said she was doubly concerned for her family, which was in Florida on Thursday.
"This is my first hurricane, and I'm very concerned," said Danielle Hebroni, 22, of Shoham, Israel. "We're glad to be getting out of here."
Arthur Peteriet, a waiter at the Borgata Hotel Casino & Spa, was waiting for a bus to New York City where he planned to stay with his sister.
"You can't fight nature," he said. "If it's gonna happen, it's gonna happen."
They were among many gamblers and city residents who began boarding buses before a 6 a.m. mandatory evacuation order took effect. Buses were picking people up at neighborhood schools and carrying them inland.
Mandatory evacuations in Cape May County, the state's southernmost region, were to begin at 8 a.m.
The state planned to suspend collection of tolls on the Atlantic City Expressway and the southern stretch of the Garden State Parkway to speed evacuations.
A hurricane warning for New Jersey was issued early today, meaning hurricane conditions were expected within 36 hours. The National Hurricane Center was predicting the storm surge will raise water levels by as much as 3 to 6 feet above ground level along the Jersey shore. This would be accompanied by large waves.
Irene was expected to produce 6 to 10 inches of rain in New Jersey, with isolated amounts of 15 inches, forecasters said.
David Nieves was torn between securing his Atlantic City Laundromat and making sure his elderly relatives got out all right.
"I don't want to see anybody get hurt or killed," he said. "I'm going out soon, taking my car to a higher place and making sure my grandmother and my niece are all right. Then I'll probably come back (to the Laundromat.) If it's really bad, then I'll go."
JOIN OUR LIVE CHAT WITH THE N.J. WEATHER GUY TODAY AT NOON
• N.J. braces for Hurricane Irene's wrath as officials warn of high winds, heavy flooding and possible power outages
• Hurricane Irene: N.J. is now under a hurricane warning