New York escapes the wrath of Irene
AN elderly Bronx man whose body was found floating at a City Island marina just hours after Hurricane Irene tore through the area may be the only New York City fatality related to the monster storm, authorities said.
Jose Sierra, 68, arrived at the Sunset Marina, where cops believe he kept a boat, at around 8:00am local time, at the height of the storm - and waved hello to the marina owner, cops said.
The marina owner then spotted Sierra's body floating in the water at 4:40pm, hours after Irene passed through New York, and called 911.
The body showed no signs of trauma and no crime is suspected, police said.
At least 25 deaths in eight states have been attributed to Irene, with most of those killed either struck by trees or caught in floodwaters.
America’s largest city was shut down as the eye of the storm - downgraded from a hurricane, but still blasting winds - passed over the Big Apple overnight.
Thousands of New Yorkers fled the city while those who stayed boarded up windows, filled bath tubs with emergency water and went panic shopping for days worth of food and drink, expecting the very worst from Irene.
In an unprecedented move, Mayor Michael Bloomberg ordered the mandatory evacuation of hundreds of thousands of New Yorkers, including the sick at five New York hospitals most at risk from the hurricane.
The three major airports in the New York area which closed ahead of the arrival of Hurricane Irene will reopen early today, officials say.
John F Kennedy International Airport in New York and Newark airport in New Jersey will open at 6am (8pm AEST), while LaGuardia reopens at 7am (9pm AEST), the Federal Aviation Administration said on its website. The city's transport system was shut down for the first time in history and is still to re-open. Commuters face lengthy delays on their return to work on Monday morning.
The New York Times reports sections of Long Island, Westchester County, New Jersey and Connecticut faced blackouts, blocked roadways and flooding.
Emergency officials scrambled to respond to flash floods. On Staten Island, firefighters used boats to rescue more than 60 people from a flooded neighborhood.
The New York National Guard deployed 129 soldiers and several speedboats in an attempt to rescue 21-people, including several children, trapped in a Prattsville, New York, hotel by massive flooding from Hurricane Irene. John Esquivel, who was staying at the Moore's Hotel with his family, told myFOXny.com that he awoke to fast rising water today. The hotel was quickly surrounded by water, forcing Mr Esquivel and 20 others to rush to the second floor.
Esquivel said that he saw entire buildings float by, apparently knocked off their foundation by the flash flood caused by rains from Hurricane Irene.
At least 14 deaths have been blamed on Hurricane Irene, which slammed into North Carolina yesterday with 140 kilometre an hour winds and the National Hurricane Centre reports a new tropical storm, Jose, has formed and is approaching Bermuda.
In New Jersey, a 20-year-old woman was found dead on Sunday morning in her submerged car on a flooded rural road in Salem County, eight hours after she called the police to say she was trapped in her vehicle with water up to her neck.
In Spring Valley a man was electrocuted after coming in contact with a downed power line. In North Carolina a man died after he was hit by a falling tree. A woman in Maryland died after she was hit by a falling chimney, and another man was killed by a storm-related electrical fire in Connecticut.
The youngest fatalities were a boy killed by a falling tree in his apartment in Newport News, a city on a coastal peninsula in Virginia, and a girl who died in North Carolina.
"A 15-year-old girl was killed in a car accident on her way back from the beach after vacationing in North Carolina,'' emergency official Patty McQuillan said.
"The traffic light at the intersection was not working, the power was out.''
North Carolina emergency management spokesman Brad Deen said one of the six victims in his state was a man who had a heart attack on Friday while nailing plywood over his windows in preparation for the hurricane.
Two people were also killed in the state in separate driving accidents. Another North Carolina fatality was a man struck by a falling tree limb while outside feeding his animals.
Another storm-related death was a 55-year-old surfer who took to his board in treacherously high waves off the Florida coast on Friday.
Damage in the billions Irene is expected to inflict tens of billions of dollars in damage after its three-day sweep caused widespread flooding and structural damage across a vast swath of the US eastern seaboard. "I've got to imagine the damage estimates will be in the billions of dollars if not the tens of billions of dollars," Governor Chris Christie of New Jersey said.
Experts said the financial toll would have been much higher if there was a direct hit on New York, the US financial capital and largest city with nearly 19 million people living in its metropolitan area. Economist Peter Morici put the immediate casualty losses from the storm at $US40 billion ($38.42 billion), including the loss of two days of economic activity. But Morici, a professor at the University of Maryland, said the impact would diminish significantly over the longer term as reconstruction spending kicks in, injecting fresh spending in recession-weakened regional economies. "Rebuilding after Irene, especially in an economy with high unemployment and underused resources in the construction and building materials industries, will unleash at least $US20 billion ($19.21 billion) in new direct private spending-likely more as many folks rebuild larger than before, and the capital stock that emerges will prove more economically useful and productive," he said. Another silver lining is that the storm made landfall over a weekend, mitigating the economic impact in coastal cities although dealing a direct hit to the tourist industry at the peak of the summer beach season.