Derry Township schools shelter more than 1,000 stranded students and parents; heavy rain calls for early dismissal for many others
The remnants of Tropical Storm Lee on Wednesday ushered a slew of school cancellations, closures and early dismissals across the midstate.
In some cases, districts were forced to suspend school bus service due to flooding, leaving students and parents stranded in schools.
Dozens of districts closed schools early due to flooding, power outages and concerns about bus transportation. All Dauphin County Schools dismissed early after county commissioners declared a state of emergency at 1:45 p.m.
As early evening approached, more than a thousand Derry Township School Districtstudents remained sheltered at Hershey Middle School after the district had to suspend bus services due to impassible roads. Derry Twp. roads were among the hardest hit with flooding in the midstate.
District spokesman Dan Tredinnick said the district had been able to transport home students dismissed early from the middle school and the high school. But by 1:30 p.m., when the elementary students were being dismissed, many of the roads were deemed unsafe, and buses returned to the buildings.
Parents who arrived shortly after to pick up their children were also advised to remain on campus, and were also being sheltered along with students at the middle school, which is an emergency evacuation center.
“Ironically we have some folks coming in even as we have some students going home,” Tredinnick said. “In essence this the best place they can be.”
Tredinnick said food services had provide meals for those stranded at the school.
“We are providing food and drink and keeping them as comfortable as possible,” he said.
Tredinnick said approximately 1,400 students, plus parents, were at the school. He said the district would not be able to resume bus service Wednesday night.
“We have too many road closures,” he said. 
The decision to suspend school bus service at West Hanover Elementary Schoolled to unsettled nerves among parents who said the initial notification indicated the school was in a lockdown.
A school official said parents were told students were being “sheltered in place.”
“It was disturbing,” said Tim Mellotte, who rushed out the elementary school to pick up his first-grade daughter Faith. “At first it sounded like we couldn’t come pick them up.”
Mellotte said parts of the route he takes from his home in the south-central part of the district to the school were under water.
Taylor Hepler, who traveled just under a quarter of a mile to pick up her granddaughter at West Hanover, said she too had been concerned when she heard the message regarding “a lockdown.”
“It shook me up,” Hepler said. “I thought she might be here all night.”
Central Dauphin School Districtspokeswoman Shannon Leib said parents were given the option to pick up their children or have them wait at the school until buses were able to run again.
“I think they misunderstood,” Leib said. “The message never stated lockdown. It said students were being sheltered in place. We never had a lockdown. I think parents confused the two.”
Heavy rain remained in the forecast for today and tonight and the Susquehanna River expected to crest about 26.2 feet. Across central Pennsylvania, flooded roads were making for messy and treacherous commutes, and in some cases, road closures.
A high school bus from the Annville-Cleona School Districthad to turn back, unable to complete its route due to flooding.
School superintendent Steven Houser said another bus, which carries students from the Palm City Trailer Park area, was also unable to make its round. The residential area, located on the southwest corner of the district near Killinger Creek, was being evacuated by the American Red Cross.
“It’s a low lying area and the creek came up rather rapidly,” Houser said. “We couldn’t send out students to that area.”
Students were being sheltered in schools, and parents had been informed, Houser said. By midafternoon, Houser said that about six students in the high school, 12 in one elementary school and 15 in another, were being sheltered.
“We are taking good care of them,” he said. “The elementary students have popcorn and are watching a video and the high school students are connected to the Internet doing their homework. That always keeps them happy.”
Like dozens of schools across the midstate, Anville-Cleona had canceled all afternoon and evening activities.
Harrisburg School Districtfinished out its day, dismissing students at the normal time. Superintendent Sybil Knight-Burney said the district would follow recommendations and guidelines from county emergency officials.
“Right now we don’t see any cancellations,” she said “If anything, an adjusted schedule, but right now we don’t know.”
Other area districts faced a variety of challenges brought on by the tropical storm.
Camp Hill School District closed due to power outages. Cumberland Valley schools and Derry Township schools dismissed two hours early.
School officials on Wednesday said they would likely make a decision later tonight regarding any cancellations or delays for Thursday.
“This is a unique situation,” said Leib, the spokeswoman from Central Dauphin. “We will be taking our cues from Dauphin County. They might give the word tonight that we should curtail all school activities but we won’t know that until we receive updates from them.”