UPDATE: Fire burns on after 100,000 acres destroyed
The plume of smoke rises from the The Pagami Creek forest fire. Smoke plume may affect individuals with respiratory and heart problems State officials provide health precaution information State health officials are monitoring a large smoke plume from a forest fire in northeastern Minnesota. The plume is moving through Wisconsin. "The Department of Natural Resources has not issued an air quality alert, but temporary peaks in pollutants are occurring around the state. This can cause problems for people with respiratory and heart problems," said Dr. Henry Anderson, State Health Officer. "People with such health problems should consider staying indoors, closing windows and using an air conditioner with a high efficiency air filter." Anderson said local health departments are receiving calls about heavy smoke odors, ash and concerns about smoke inhalation. He noted that in healthy people, symptoms of smoke exposure usually include irritation of eyes, nose and throat, or breathing discomfort, and more severe symptoms may include chest tightness, wheezing, shortness of breath, and coughing. Smoke exposure can aggravate chronic lung or cardiovascular disease. "Concerned citizens should listen for news updates on air quality and visibility and follow all precautions and instructions given by local health and governmental departments," Anderson said.The Pagami Creek forest fire continues to burn ever more out of control, covering what is now 66,000 acres of land in and around the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness in northern Minnesota. According Jane Bergerson, a fire information officer, the fire has forced Lake County and Superior National Forest officials to close several county and Forest Service roads east of Ely and northwest of Isabella. "We have over 200 fireman and personnel on scene - folks from all over the Midwest," she said. "The fire did die down a bit [Tuesday] morning so we are up in the air now trying to get a better map of just what it has burned so far." Jim Grant of the Wisconsin Forest Service in Rhinelander, traveled to Ely Monday and was on-site Tuesday and Wednesday where he said the conditions continue to push plumes of smoke and debris into northern Wisconsin. "I'm actually just outside of Ely right now where there is absolutely no smoke because of the northwest winds still pushing everything down toward Wisconsin," Grant said Tuesday. Wednesday, Grant was going back in the air with fire control officials getting a better gauge on what the fire was doing on the leading edge. "We flew it yesterday quite a bit, but it was still hard to see so we are flying again this morning," Grant said. "We've got several helicopters and five, 20-person crews getting here [Wedneday]. We hope to get in there and start flanking the fire. The winds cranked up here again yesterday which didn't help." Those northwest winds blew at speeds of 45 mph Monday causing the fire to continue spreading out of control. "Because of the winds we have yet to be able to fight the fire on the leading edge," Bergerson said. "Our fire behavior person said [Tuesday] that we can expect the fire to continue moving at about a half-mile to a mile per-hour. A wind switch from the south is expected Thursday which will then allow us to get out in front of it and turn the fire against itself." No one has been evacuated, but the fire continues to head toward areas with some rural homes and cabins. According to Bergerson, the fire Tuesday was close to two miles from buildings and houses on the leading edge. From Monday to Tuesday the fire burned 17 miles to the south and east. The land the fire continues to consume is primarily made up of pine and spruce, according to Bergerson. "The sheer amount of smoke that's in the air, that everyone in Wisconsin is smelling, is because the fire is burning so fast and we're really not able to fight it right now because of the conditions," she said. Another spokesperson told the Duluth News Tribune Monday that teams are struggling from the air because of the smoke. "We really can't tell how big it is because there's so much smoke," Doug Anderson said. "The pilots can't get a good sense of what's happening on the ground." The fire started from a lightning strike Aug. 18, smoldered for a week or so and then grew to 130 acres on its own. Fire crews burned an additional 2,000 acres intentionally around the fire to keep it from growing into populated areas. But the fire continues to grow. Fires in the wilderness generally are to run their course because it renews the forest naturally. But officials have been leery of this fire from the start because of drought conditions and now are trying to stop it as soon as possible. Resources to fight the wildfire, especially from the air, are limited, according to officials who say a lot of aircraft are being dedicated to wildfires in the south and west regions of the United States. Two large state-owned water dropping CL-215 airplanes continue to fight the blaze, in addition to one smaller water-scooping plane and a helicopter. "When the winds are as strong as they have been, and are supposed to be, there's not much right now we can do to stop it," Bergerson said. Cooler temperatures did come into the region Tuesday and will help, according to Grant, who will remain in Minnesota for an undetermined amount of time. According to the News Tribune, local and county officials have been meeting to fine-tune evacuation plans for rural areas, such as the Isabella area, should they be needed. Lake County sheriff Carey Johnson was on the Tomahawk Trail just southwest of the fire this morning and flew over the fire area Sunday. County and Forest Service officials are huddling this evening to plot their next moves. The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources imposed a fire ban in all areas of northern Minnesota. The temporary burning restrictions mean the state will not give out burning permits for burning brush or yard waste until conditions improve. Small campfires in developed campfire pits or structures are allowed. Doug Etten can be reached via email at detten@lakelandtimes.com. As soon as I heard about this fire I remembered this: http://www.dnr.state.mn.us/volunteer/mayjun00/blowdown.html Please feel free to submit your comments. Article comments are not posted immediately to the Web site. Each submission must be approved by the Web site editor, who may edit content for appropriateness. There may be a delay of 24-48 hours for any submission while the web site editor reviews and approves it. Note: All information on this form is required. Your telephone number is for our use only, and will not be attached to your comment. Click here to see a new mix of characters. This is an anti-SPAM device. It is not case sensitive.