Second Pacific island running out of drinking water
In an attempt to counter the acute water shortage, a C-130 Hercules from the Royal New Zealand Air Force has arrived in Tuvalu which, with a population of 11,000, is one of the world's smallest independent nations.
It carried two desalination units and containers of water, as well as Red Cross workers and supplies.
Murray McCully, the New Zealand foreign minister, said: "There has been a state of emergency declared in Tokelau as well, where there are three islands.
"They are New Zealand citizens and they're down to less than a week's drinking water there too.
"We're now doing an assessment, not just in Tuvalu but also in other areas of the Pacific that are affected by the shortage of rainfall, making sure we deal with the drinking water issue most urgently."
Mr McCully warned that the regional crisis would not be restricted to drinking water.
"There are going to be some flow-on effects here.
"Clearly this is having a severe impact on crops, so there's likely to be a food shortage as well."
Mr McCully told Radio New Zealand that other islands in the South Pacific were also reporting water shortages.
He said the government in Wellington, a major aid donor in the region, "may yet be called upon to help in some other places".
A Red Cross report blames the drought on the La Nina weather pattern, which produces extreme conditions and has been the predominant system in the South Pacific over the past year.
Inhabitants of the islands normally collect rainwater from their roofs and store it in tanks.
But there has been no appreciable rain for more than six months, and meteorologists predict none until at least December.
Compounding the crisis, Tuvalu is only 16ft above sea level at its highest point and encroaching tides have ruined much of the soil with salination.
Willy Telavi, the Tuvalu prime minister, last month warned the UN that global warming is threatening his country's existence.
Some estimates predict Tuvalu's nine coral atolls will have disappeared by the end of this century.