Tuesday's weather and travel updates
A clean-up operation got under way today after torrential rains hit the Dublin region yesterday and caused extensive damage.
Within a 24-hour period from 7pm on Sunday evening to 7pm last night, almost an entire month's rainfall was recorded in the Dublin region.
Hundreds of homes and businesses were evacuated across the city as a result of last night's flooding.
Dublin City Council says it does not yet know how many properties have been damaged.
The cost is likely to run into tens of millions of euro.
The floods claimed the lives of two people - in Dublin and in Wicklow.
2349 The ESB says most of the 1,200 customers who were without power supply yesterday have been reconnected.
In many cases the supply was cut as a precaution because of flooding.
The company says there are still around 50 customers without power supply but they say they are working to restore services.
2347 Eircom says it has reports of around 6,000 faults in the Dublin area due to the inclement weather conditions in recent days.
The company says it is working round the clock to restore services as quickly as possible to affected customers.
2111 Northside DART and all rail services are operating again.
1856 Iarnród Éireann: All Northern Commuter services cancelled until further notice due to major signal fault at Howth Junction.
Trains currently between Dundalk and Malahide will terminate at Malahide
Those trains between Connolly and Howth Jct will return to Connolly.
DART services operating between Connolly and Bray Greystones only.
1836 Minister of State Brian Hayes said he is in talks with the Insurance Federation so that when the OPW carries out flood defence works, that insurance companies will take account of that and provide cover.
1835 Sinn Féin's Mary Lou McDonald said you could have predicted what homes were going to be flooded again. She said it was like groundhog day. Ms McDonald said many of these households have no insurance.
1834 Independent Finian McGrath said the response was pathetic.
He said he was told that Met Éireann informed Dublin City Council that it was a major event, and the council did not react quick enough.
1815 Dundrum Town Centre says it will open tomorrow at 10am after its lower level shopping mall was flooded last night.
Some stores may open later in the day, and a limited amount of stores including Marks & Spencer and Next will not open until later in the week. All car park entrances will be open as normal.
1747 National housing charity threshold has issued advice to tenants affected by the heavy rain.
1739 Dundrum Town Centre says it will re-open its doors to the public at 10am Wednesday.
It says some stores may open later in the day and a limited number of stores will not open until later in the week.
1737 The ESB says that around 1,200 customers in Dublin city centre and south Dublin have no power supply.
In most of these cases the supply has been cut as a safety precaution due to flooding, and will be restored when flood waters recede.
ESB crews worked through the night and all of today to address supply issues. Supply has been restored to Dundrum Town Centre.
1725 A "post-event analysis" of the response to the Dublin floods will be undertaken by the regional emergency authority in the coming weeks, with input from all authorities and the OPW.
Minister of State Brian Hayes said it "will inform the effectiveness of the response and identify any improvements needed."
He said the Government will look sympathetically on requests for emergency financial aid should it be made by the local authorities affected by the floods.
1713 ESB Networks has confirmed that the electricity supply was cut off in the Merrion Centre in Dublin because of safety concerns following flooding in the basement car park.
Supply was also cut in the Sweepstakes Apartment complex in Ballsbridge.
The ESB says it's not aware of any power outages at the moment.
1711 Eircom says there are "a high level" of faults on its network following the heavy rain and flooding.
"We expect fault levels to increase to somewhere in the region of 6,000 faults by close of business today."
The worst affected areas are in the eastern half of the country.
1640 Iarnród Éireann update: Rail services are operating on all routes, with some minor delays.
On DART, Northern Commuter and Maynooth/M3 services, services are operating almost to schedule with minor delays of 10 minutes due to speed restrictions and damage to signalling equipment.
Maynooth services are operating to/from Connolly following earlier diversion to Docklands. In addition, Drumcondra Station has reopened.
Bayside Station is closed due to a flooded station building, customers should use Sutton or Howth Junction Stations.
Belfast services are operating with a bus transfer between Portadown and Newry due to flooding.
Services are not expected to be restored today.
A Luas bus service is operating every 30 minutes. The bus serves every stop exluding: Brides Glen, Laughanstown, Cowper, Beechwood.
1615 Monaghan: Gardaí say the main street in Ballybay was closed for a time due to flooding, not because of a fire as was previously reported.
The main street has since reopened, but a number of roads leading in to the town are flooded, and access is difficult.
Elsewhere, Monaghan town has also been affected by the weather, as this picture from Philip Fitzpatrick shows.
And his photo here shows the situation in Ballybay.
1607 Northern Ireland Railways has said the line between Portadown and Newry is closed due to flooding and subsidence. Irish rail says bus transfers are now in operation on the route.
1537 South Dublin County Council says traffic is moving freely with the exception of the N81 betwee Orr and Jobstown.
1512 Iarnród Éireann has said services are operating on all routes, with some delays.
1511 In the Dáil, the Minister for Justice has praised Dublin City Council, the gardaí and the fire service for their extraordinary work in exceptional weather conditions yesterday.
Alan Shatter said there was extensive coordination between the Garda Traffic Control Centre, who have access to CCTV cameras throughout Dublin City, and all the other agencies involved in the emergency situation.
1421 The N4 is now open to all traffic from the M50 at junction 7.
One lane has opened and one remains closed at Wolfe Tone Quay, delays can be expected in the area.
Gardaí are encouraging commuters to use public transport wherever possible.
1415 An Post has said that the collection, processing, and distribution of mail posted yesterday in many parts of Leinster was seriously disrupted by the severe weather. The transportation of mail from other parts of the country into Leinster was also disrupted, An Post said.
1407 Donabate Community College in North County Dublin is closed due to continued problems with the drainage systems caused by last night's flooding. The College, which is housed in a newly-built complex, will also be closed tomorrow and expects to reopen on Thursday.
1357 Age Action has asked the public to check on older people in their area. It has received 30 calls so far from people with problems such as leaking roofs and damaged beds.
It also urged landlords to check on the welfare of their tenants.
1320 All Luas Green Line services have been suspended due to power outage.
1311 This photo emailed from Niall O'Dowd shows a car that was swept into the River Dodder last night. Photo was taken this morning in Milltown.
1259 Irish Rail says delays have eased and most services are on schedule. DARTs are now operating between Dún Laoghaire and Dalkey.
1258 Lloyd Shiels has emailed in this photo from last night showing flooding under the bridge at Howth Junction.
1249 Dublin Fire Brigade says just 12 residents of the Boyne Court apartment complex in Harold's Cross were taken to safety this morning.
A further 30 were helped from the building during an evacuation last night.
The 12 who left this morning had opted to stay last night but changed their minds this morning. Anyone else who is still in the building has chosen to stay.
The ground floor apartments have been flooded and residents on the second and third floor have had difficulty coming and going from the building.
1245 Keep sending your photos and videos of the flooding to yourphotos@rte.ie. Thanks to all who have contributed so far.
1240 The N4 inbound remains closed at the M50. The Con Colbert Road is also closed in both directions due to flooding.
1222 This "like totally genuine" photo has like surfaced via @suzanneSIMI
1216 Dún Laoghaire to Dalkey DART services have been suspended.
1201 Police are advising people to avoid the Monaghan Road in Aughnacloy due to flooding at Moy Bridge.
1152 Delays of up to an hour are being experienced on DART and other commuter services.
The line between Dún Laoghaire and Bray has reopened.
Commuters on northern services and the Maynooth/M3 services should expect delays due to speed restrictions and flood damage to signalling equipment.
Bayside and Drumcondra stations remain closed due to flooding and high capacity pumps are being used by the city council to pump water from a Luas substation in Dundrum and from roads in the Harolds Cross area.
1144 Dublin City Council's Tom Leahy has told Pat Kenny that the quay wall at Wolfe Tone Quay has moved 100mm over a 30 metre stretch. He said that it is veering over the water.
Mr Leahy said it is being structurally assessed at the moment and it is hoped that the wall has not been undermined.
1137 The Boyne Court apartment complex on Greenmount Avenue in Harolds Cross has been evacuated. Residents were moved from their apartments by members of the Dublin Fire Brigade.
Around 100 people were trapped inside the apartment complex.
Ground floor apartments were flooded by several feet of water and residents on the second and third floor had been unable to exit the building.
They are now being removed by ladder with the assistance of Dublin Fire Brigade.
1135 Tesco is the only store within the main Dundrum Shopping Centre to have opened for business this morning following last night's floods. Power remains off in the Centre and Tesco is operating off back up generators.
1120 Locals say the woman who drowned in the floods on Parnell Road was a 35-year-old from the Philippines.
1106 The body of a woman has been found in the flooded basement of a building on Parnell Road in Dublin.
The basement was initially searched at around 1am last night by the Garda Water Unit - the body was found when the flood subsided this morning.
1056 Heavy surface water has been reported in most areas in the Midlands while heavy rainfall continues.
Motorists on the Athlone to Mullingar (R390) road are advised to drive with care as the road is flooded in spots.
Porlaoise gardaí say they have surface water on most roads and are urging motorists to drive with care.
Longford is experiencing isolated/localised flooding but no major problems.
1037 Traffic on the N11 can use the right lane under the UCD flyover, gardaí diverting traffic in the left lane up and over the flyover.
1026 All District Court custody cases, including those defendants in garda custody, will be dealt with in Cloverhill Courthouse.
All other District Court cases from the CCJ, where defendants are not in custody, will be mentioned in the Bridewell Courts in Chancery Street and will be remanded back to the original court room in the CCJ for 8 November.
1017 Rail services are suspended Dun Laoghaire-Bray due to flooding. Dublin Bus will accept rail tickets.
Delays on all DART/Commuter services from 30-60 minutes.
1005 Irish Rail says services have been suspended at Glenageary as flooding is being assessed.
1002 Kildare Co Council says water services have been interupted in Kill, Castlewarden, Sallins, Donadea, Baltracey and surrounding areas due to flooding.
1001 Harolds Cross has reopened to traffic, however there are long delays from Harolds Cross to Rathmines and onto Ranelagh.
0950 RTÉ's Philip Bromwell has tweeted that a staff member at Dundrum Town Centre has described scenes in M&S as "unbelievable". No cameras allowed.
0947 Gardaí say the N81 inbound at the Glenview Roundabout, the Belgard Rd/Mayberry Rd and the entrance to Killinarden Estate are all flooded.
0931 People who left their cars in the Dundrum Town Centre car park can call 01 205 1630 for an update
0923 Jurors have been asked not to attend the Courts of Criminal Justice, but to report as normal tomorrow.
0916 DART and Commuter operating with around 30-70 minutes delays through Connolly.
0907 Irish Rail says the tree has been cleared at Lansdowne Road, Severe delays ongoing for DART and Commuter.
0902 Some updates from AA Roadwatch on Dublin road closures:
The Strawberry Beds in Lucan are impassable. The Lwr Lucan Rd is closed between Lucan Bridge and Tinkers Hill.
James Larkin Rd is closed between Mt Prospect Ave and the Howth Rd jct.
Traffic on the N11/Stillorgan Rd is being diverted up and over at the UCD flyover. Delays from Cornelscourt.
Harolds Cross Rd has been closed to traffic approaching Grand Canal. No impact on Dublin Bus services.
The N81 Dublin/Blessington Rd is closed both ways at Jobstown in Tallaght.
0851 South Dublin County Council has issued an update. It says the following roads are barely passable: N81 Jobstown, Nangor Road / Parkwest, N81 Avonmore, Belgard Road/Mayberry, Garter’s Lane, Millroad Saggart and Whitechurch Road.
0837 Dart services are reportedly suspended from Booterstown into the city centre due to the the fallen tree at Lansdowne Road.
0835 In Carlow, the N81/Dublin-Carlow Road is flooded at Rathvilly.
Nearby the Tullow-Castledermot Road (R418) is also flooded.
0830 Delays now 30-60 mins on DART, Maynooth service, and Northern services, according to Irish Rail.
0822 Delays are worsening on DART, Commuter & Sligo/Belfast services - with around 30-45 minute delays.
Trains now suspended through Lansdowne Rd, a tree is down.
0819 The N4 is closed to all inbound traffic from the M50 at Junction 7 (Lucan/Palmerstown) except for buses.
This is due to the closure of Wolfe Tone Quay.
The South Quay and N4 remain open to outbound traffic.
0818 Our Lady's Hospice at Harolds Cross has been affected by the flooding.
At around 8pm last night the River Poddle burst its banks and flooded the entrance and the basement of the hospice.
Around 20 visitors to the hospice were evacuated using large basins.
Staff say all patients are safe and that the hospice is operating normally.
The bottom of the Harold's Cross road is closed to traffic and people living apartments and homes at Greenmount Avenue just off the Harold's Cross Road have been trapped inside.
0811 No cases will be heard at the Courts of Criminal Justice in Parkgate Street in Dublin due to damage caused by flood water.
A spokesperson said it is anticipated that most cases will be adjourned to other dates.
Wicklow: The Wicklow Gap is closed. Blessington gardaí are advising motorists not to use the Sally Gap and all access roads to Valleymount and Lacken. Also, Ballyfolan and Oldcourt are impassable.
Gardaí advise motorists not to make unnecessary journeys in Lacken, in Ballyknockan and along Ballyward Bridge.
Conditions have improved between Baltinglass and Tallaght, Co Dublin.
The Ballyknockan Rd and the Lacken Rd are impassable.
Traffic is down to one lane southbound on the N11 Dublin / Wexford Rd between the Kilmacanogue exit and Lil Doyles Pub exit.
Louth: The Dunleer/Collon Rd (R169) at Kirwan's Cross is impassable due to flooding.
Monaghan: Conditions have improved along the N2 Dublin/Derry is flooded at Castleblaney.
Cavan: The Cootehill/Shercock Rd (R192) is closed due to flooding.
Kildare: The local road between Straffan and the N7 Dublin/Limerick Rd is impassable.
Kerry: The Slea Head Rd (R559) is closed at Cumeenole Beach due to flooding until Wed 26th Oct.
0741 A number of people had to be rescued from their homes in Co Tyrone after a river burst its banks in Beragh.
The flood waters also damaged the ground floor of a new GAA hall in the village.
0737 Delays of around 20 minutes through Connolly to all DART and Commuter trains are being reported by Irish Rail, due to signalling equipment damaged by flooding
0728 Belgard Road now passable, however the N81 between Jobstown and Cheeverstown is closed to traffic
0724 According to Met Éireann 67mm of rain was recorded as having fallen at Dublin Airport between 7pm on Sunday evening to 7pm yesterday.
The average mean rainfall for October is 68mm.
0718 Dundrum Shopping Centre will be closed all day today.
Last night, the River Slang in the Dundrum area burst its banks and created a surge of water to flow through the ground level of the Centre.
The centre had asked Electric Ireland to disconnect the supply until they have carried out all of our own checks.
0658 Flood waters have mainly receded overnight however there is still flooding in the following areas: Parnell Road, Harolds Cross Road, Wolfe Tone Quay, Belgard Road, Strawberry Beds, N11 at UCD.
The main arterial routes are now open. However, as driving conditions are challenging, motorists are asked to be aware of debris on the roads following last night’s heavy rain.
The local authorities are currently working to clear debris and obstructions.
Motorists returning to cars should ensure braking systems are working correctly.
People returning to houses or business affected by flooding are advised to exercise caution as there may have been power failures in theses premises.
0655 Tweet from @GardaTraffic: Blakes Cross, Lusk Village and Rush have re-opened to traffic
0634 Dublin City Council is to hold a second emergency meeting this morning following yesterday's heavy rain in the capital.
The gardaí and Health Service Executive will also attend the meeting at City Hall at 7am.
0609 The Luas Green Lineis operating Brides Glen to Balally stop only. There is no service from Balally to St Stephen' s Green This is due to flooding in a sub station on the Balally-St Stephen's Green Section of the Green Line.
Luas tickets are valid on Dublin Bus Luas Red Line services are operating as normal. Saggart to Connolly and Tallaght to The Point.
0603 Dublin Bus says some diversions and curtailments are currently in place, and there may also be delays due to slow traffic.
Route 13 southside, buses out of Woodford using Monastry road in both directions.
Route 17a terminating at Newgrove Cross on the northside.
Route 18 using Stanaway Road to Terenure Road West onto Cromwellsfort Road to Walkinstown Avenue and normal route.
Route 27 operating to Dolphins Barn turning left to South Circular Road to Sallys Bridge onto Clogher Road to Kildare Road and normal route.
Route 33 operating as normal to Swords and motorway to Skerries. Rush and Lusk not Served.
Route 33a To Skerries via motorway . Rush and Lusk not served.
Route 54a unable to serve Killinarden, operating via Kiltipper way in both directions.
Route 65 operating via Cheeverstown Rd and Citywest to Blessington Rd in both directions. All buses operating to Blessington only.
Route 65b Operating via Cheeverstown Rd, Citywest in both directions.
Route 69 not serving Saggart or Rathcoole terminating at Citywest.
Route 79 normal route to Decies Road to Garryowen Road onto Ballyfermot Road terminating at Parkwest as per 79a. Spiddel Park not served.
Route 102 Operating to and from Carraighill only.
Route 123 operating as normal on southside. Northside not serving Ballybough, turning down Portland Row to North Strand onto Fairview and Malahide road to terminus. Inbound from Marino via Malahide road to Fairview Strand onto Clonliffe road to North Circular Road via Great Charles street and Mountjoy Square to Gardiner street and normal route
Route 150 is not serving Crumlin village and is using Long Mile Road to Walkinstown Road via Cromwellsfort Road to normal route in both directions.
Route 151 Normal to Dolphins Barn then following 27 Diversion.
0555 Services have resumed this morning on all Irish Rail routes.
On DART, Northern Commuter services, customers should expect some delays (around 10-15 minutes) as there are speed restrictions in some areas on the route.
Maynooth/M3 Parkway services are operating also with minor delays, although services may not serve Drumcondra Station.
Belfast, Sligo and Rosslare services will also operate, with some minor delays possible.
0550 A search and rescue operation is continuing in Wicklow.
It is expected that a large number of volunteers will join the search this morning.
The N81 close to Tallaght remains closed this morning.
Debris and other material following last night's flooding remains on the road - a number of abandoned cars remain in the area.
0126 Keep up-to-date on airport arrivals and departures here
0125 Latest from AA Roadwatch: (no further updates until 6am)
Dublin: The Ballyknockan Rd and the Lacken Rd are impassable. Flooding and treacherous conditions with southbound on the N11 Dublin/Wexford Rd between the Kilmacanogue exit and Lil Doyles Pub exit.
The M50 was expected to remain closed northbound between J14 Leopardstown and J12 Firhouse until at least 1am due to heavy flooding. Also flooding southbound at J6 Blanchardstown.
A section of the M1 is closed northbound beyond Port Tunnel
Gardai advise the N81 is closed at Jobstown due to flooding. The Ballybough Rd is closed. The Grand Canal Quay is closed. The Dodder Rd is closed. Blake's Cross to Lusk Rd is closed due to flooding.
N7 Naas Rd is down to one lane both ways between J3 Citywest & J4 Rathcoole.
The Crumlin Rd is impassable between Dolphins Barn and Sundrive Rd jct. Avoid Kilmainham completely. Conyngham Rd is impassable as is Old Kilmainham Rd. Blackhorse Avenue is closed.
In the Crumlin area Bunting Rd is closed, as is Balph Rd East & Harty Ave. In Ballyfermot, Cold Park & St. Laurences Rd are impassable. The Nangor Rd is impassable at Park West Ave.
Impassable at the Cookstown Industrial Estate. The Strawberry Beds in Lucan are impassable. The Lwr Lucan Rd is closed between Lucan Bridge and Tinkers Hill due to flood water.
Parkgate St outbound is flooded before the Infirmary Rd jct. Infirmary Rd is impassable.
Flooding on Seapoint Ave in Monkstown and also on the Rock Rd at Booterstown Ave. Carysfort Ave in Blackrock is almost impassable. The N11/Stillorgan Rd is flooded at Fosters Ave. Further out there's flooding at Cornelscourt.
Flooding in the north and south bore of the Port Tunnel. The tunnel remains open, however.
James Larkin Rd inbound is closed to traffic due to flooding. Flooding on the Howth Rd at the Clontarf Rd jct. Avoid the Phoenix Park. The N3/Navan Rd is badly flooded at the Church.
Flooding on the N1/Swords Rd outbound before Santry Ave. Severe flooding on Griffith Ave approaching the Ballymun Rd and the Collins Ave jct.
Longford: The Farneyhoogan Rd just off the N63 Athlone Rd into Longford town is closed until approx. 4pm Tues 25th Oct due to a bridge strike.
Wicklow: The Wicklow Gap is closed. Blessington Gardai are advising motorists not to use the Sally Gap and all access roads to Valleymount and Lacken.
Ballyfolan and Oldcourt are impassable. Roads are impassable throughout Blessington Village and Gardai advise motorists not to make unnecessary journeys in Lacken, in Ballyknockan and along Ballyward Bridge. Conditions are also treacherous between Baltinglass and Tallaght.
Louth: The Dunleer/Collon Rd (R169) at Kirwan's Cross is impassable due to flooding.
Monaghan: The N2 Dublin/Derry is flooded at Castleblaney.
Cavan: The Cootehill/Shercock Rd (R192) is closed due to flooding.
M7/Laois: Flooding southbound on the M7 Dublin/Limerick Rd between J17 Portlaoise Centre and J18 Portlaoise West. Slow down and drive with extra care.
Kildare: The local road between Straffan and the N7 Dublin/Limerick Rd is impassable.
Kerry: The Slea Head Rd (R559) is closed at Cumeenole Beach due to flooding until Wed 26th Oct.
Galway: No delays or incidents to report for Galway City traffic.
Limerick: No delays or incidents to report for Limerick City traffic.
Cork: No delays or incidents to report for Cork City traffic. Traffic signals are switched off at Washington St/Sth Main St jct until 10pm Wed 26th Octo facilitate works. Works take place between the North Ring Rd & Ballyhooly Rd on Glen Ave each day from 9:30am to 8pm until Wed 2nd Nov.
Waterford: No delays or incidents to report for Waterford City traffic.
0114 RTÉ's Paul Colgan reporting that an inflatable rib is rescuing motorists stranded in some parts of the M50.
He says cars have been abandoned at Citywest, and cars are bobbing in water at Ballsbridge after the Dodder river burst its banks.
There are reports of sewage on street level at Mulhuddart, and some houses in Rathmines and Rathfarnham in Dublin are under water.
0100 Deteriorating conditions caused delays and cancellations at Dublin Airport. A number of incoming flights were diverted to Shannon.
0046 Gardaí are advising commuters to allow extra time in the morning, to be aware of debris on roads and to tune in to the broadcast media for traffic updates.
Currently, a section of the N11 is closed at UCD and diversions are in place. Santry Village and Santry Ave are impassable. Lusk village is also impassable.
The R132 Drogheda to Balbriggan Road at Gormanstown is closed.
0045 Notice from Dublin City Council: "There is currently a very high demand on the Emergency Services and the public are asked only to dial 999 in the event of a true emergency.
Persons being evacuated are advised to ensure that they remember to bring their medication, if needed.
The public are advised to stay away from floodwater and not to travel unless absolutely necessary, as a number of key transport arteries are currently impassable."
0040 A search-and-rescue operation is taking place in Co Wicklow after a young garda was swept away by the River Liffey.
Gardai, the Coastguard and local mountain rescue teams have been involved in the operation to try and find the missing man.
He is 25-year old Ciaran Jones, who was from Manor Kilbride in Co Wicklow.
0025 A reminder of the latest weather from Met Éireann:
Spells of heavy rain affecting parts of north Leinster and Ulster will continue to clear northwards overnight, with drier weather developing in many areas and just a little patchy rain or drizzle. However, another spell of persistent and locally heavy rain will spread into much of Munster and south Leinster overnight. Fog will form widely inland as it turns cooler.
Fog in many areas in the morning will clear gradually. Further outbreaks of rain in many parts of Munster and Leinster during the morning will spread into Connacht and west Ulster during the day. Mainly dry weather will develop in Munster and Leinster, extending into most other parts later.
2353 (Monday) Dublin Bus says it will update commuters on services in the morning on www.dublinbus.ie
2347 Garda update: "Junction 13 M50 (Ballinteer) is still impassable. Motorists are asked to avoid this location.
"A section of the M1 is closed northbound just after the Port Tunnel, diversions are in place.
"Gardaí are advising motorists to avoid all unnecessary travel due to severe flooding. However, flood waters have started to recede."
2327 Dublin Airport: "Some access roads ... are flooded as a result of heavy rainfall in the past 12 hours.
"Therefore passengers are advised to check access routes before setting out on their journey to Dublin Airport."
2322 AA Roadwatch: Harold's Cross Road inbound is impassable due to flooding between the Grand Canal and St Clare's Avenue.
Luas Red Line service is only running between Tallaght and Connolly. The Luas Green Line is running a full service.
Read more updates from Monday, 24 October, here