Two bodies found in aftermath of Irish floods
One of two bodies recovered in separate incidents following widespread flooding around Dublin has been confirmed as that of a missing police officer.
Search teams found the body of Garda Ciaran Jones close to where he disappeared in County Wicklow.
Meanwhile, the body of a woman was found by police in a flooded basement in Dublin.
A major emergency plan for the Dublin region remains in place following widespread flooding in the city.
The woman's body was recovered from a flooded basement in Dublin city after water was pumped from the premises by Dublin Fire Brigade.
Emergency services were alerted by neighbours of the woman - who lived on the Parnell Road - earlier on Tuesday.
In the other fatal incident, Garda Ciaran Jones was off duty when rising waters threatened to collapse a bridge near his County Wicklow home last night.
The 25-year-old left the safety of his own car to warn other motorists of the dangers but he was swept away by flood water.
On Tuesday his body was recovered close to the scene.
Garda Jones had been a member of the force for around four years, according to RTE.
His brother and sister were at the scene on Monday night and his parents, who are out of the country on holidays, were expected back in Dublin on Tuesday.
Garda Commissioner Martin Callinan extended his sympathies to Mr Jones' family and colleagues.
He described the death as a tragedy and said Garda Jones had been a highly regarded member of the force.
Many key routes in Dublin are barely passable with further rainfall forecast later on Tuesday.
The judicial system has also been affected. The Courts of Criminal Justice in Dublin's Parkgate Street has been temporarily closed due to flood damage.
No jury trials are going ahead in other courts and jurors have been advised not to attend.
Business owners have also been affected. Dundrum Shopping Centre was evacuated due to flooding on its ground floor.
The River Slang burst its banks and created a surge of water, which flowed through the lower level of the centre.
Amateur footage shows shocked shoppers standing on a staircase as water gushes past them.
The centre had asked Electric Ireland to disconnect its power supply until they have carried out all of their own checks.
Elsewhere, passengers onboard a Dublin bus were trapped after water enveloped the lower deck of the vehicle.
There is widespread disruption to the public transport service in the Republic's capital.
However, the Belfast to Dublin Enterprise train service, which was suspended for a time on Monday, is now running normally.