Section of a New Railway Line Collapses in China
News media showed pictures of workers who had been rushed to the scene near the city of Qianjiang.
The ground under the tracks appears to have become waterlogged and the concrete ties and steel track submerged. Pictures showed heavy equipment hauling away the ties and flattening the rail bed.
The collapsed section had already undergone test runs, Xinhua reported.
According to the Communist Party’s flagship newspaper People’s Daily, a whistle-blower had warned that contractors had used earth instead of gravel on the line, putting the tracks at risk in heavy rains.
A Ministry of Railways study last year had found the section to be safe, according to the newspaper.
Chinese news media has reported on extensive corruption in the powerful Railways Ministry. A report on last year’s crash found domestically produced signals to be at fault. Earlier, the railway minister had resigned amid reports he steered contracts to a subcontractor run by his mistress.
Contractors working for the ministry say they are regularly squeezed by government officials, who pocket part of the money allocated for construction. One contractor working in Fujian Province, who asked to remain anonymous for fear of retribution, said in an interview that he was forced to compromise on building materials in order to make a profit.
“You are constantly being forced to cut corners, or else you cannot make a profit,” he said. “Everyone does this.”
China has high hopes for its railway sector. It has already exported trains and subways to developing countries, which are attracted by China’s lower prices and high performance.
On Monday, China re-emphasized its technological prowess in railway modernizing, with an official at the China Academy of Railway Sciences saying it had developed the world’s most advanced simulator for railway speed tests.
The new equipment can simulate speeds of up to 330 miles an hour, the official said, according to the official China Daily newspaper.