Magnitude 6.8 earthquake strikes Japanese coast, tsunami wave hits coast
A small tsunami wave has hit Japan's northeastern coastline, officials say, after a strong earthquake rocked the region a year on from the country's worst post-war natural disaster.
The 20cm wave and 6.8 magnitude quake, which struck around 210km off the northern island of Hokkaido, prompted local authorities to issue an evacuation warning for coastal residents before it hit land.
Japan's meteorological agency also confirmed that an earlier 10cm wave had hit land.
The waves hit two locations in Aomori prefecture, which was one of the areas in Japan's northeast devastated by last year's disaster.
The agency had initially said a tsunami could be as high as 50cm, but US monitors said there was no Pacific-wide tsunami threat.
The quake struck at a relatively shallow 10km below the seabed at 6.09pm local time (8.09pm AEDT last night).
The Australian Bureau of Meteorology said the tsunami posed no threat to mainland Australia, its islands or territories.
The tsunami warning - which was lifted at 9.40pm - comes after a 9.0-magnitude earthquake triggered a monster wave on March 11 last year that killed more than 19,000 people and crippled Japan's Fukushima nuclear plant.
The tsunami swamped cooling systems at the Fukushima site and sent three reactors into meltdown, spewing radiation into the environment and sparking the world's worst atomic accident in a generation.
There were no immediate reports of damage at nuclear facilities in the area affected by the quake overnight.
A spokesman for Tohoku Electric Power, which operates two nuclear power plants in the country's northeast, said the facilities were unaffected.
"There was no damage to our nuclear power facilities following the earthquake," he told AFP.
"We have not monitored any change in radiation levels around the facilities following the quake."
The meteorological agency also warned the tsunami could reach the Kuril islands, off Hokkaido, which Russia has controlled since Japan's surrender at the end of World War II.
On Sunday, Japan fell silent to remember last year's tragedy, with tearful families gathering in towns and villages across the country's shattered northeast to remember those they lost when the towering waves smashed ashore.
Tens of thousands were forced to evacuate a 20km exclusion zone immediately around the Fukushima plant, while many families with small children moved away from the prefecture completely.
At Sunday's anniversary, thousands protested against nuclear power in demonstrations across the world.
Japan has temporarily shut most of its 54 commercial nuclear reactors, but plans to re-open the plants has set off a highly-charged debate in a country prone to earthquakes.
On Monday, a group of Japanese citizens filed a lawsuit to prevent the restart of a nuclear power plant, warning that there was little proof the reactors would were quake-resistant.
The disaster also hammered Japan's already struggling economy, stoked fears about radioactive contamination in the food chain and set off multi-billion dollar reconstruction efforts.