Commission calls for CMC probe into flood engineers
Three engineers who worked on Brisbane's Wivenhoe Dam during last year's devastating floods have been referred to the Crime and Misconduct Commission following the release of the state's long-awaited floods inquiry.
The Queensland Floods Commission has released its report into the massive floods that swamped large parts of Brisbane and surrounding areas in January 2011.
It says Wivenhoe Dam, which was built after the 1974 floods to help protect the state capital from floods on the Brisbane River, was operated in breach of its manual for more than 22 hours before the floods hit the city.
The report says senior engineer Robert Ayre, along with John Tibaldi and Terry Malone, should be referred to the CMC for investigation in relation to their flood report, statements they gave to the commission, and evidence they gave to the State Government.
Queensland Premier Anna Bligh says the matter was referred to the CMC this morning and the CMC says it is examining the report's findings.
In the report, Commissioner Cate Holmes found there was a "good deal of room for improvement" in the state's emergency response planning.
But she found the disastrous floods were, to a large degree, handled to the best of the authorities' ability, under the systems that were in place.
"Generally, though, Queenslanders can be relieved that governments at all levels were able to provide a prompt, if not perfect, response," the report says.
It adds that the response from all levels of government in Queensland "compares favourably with the apparent paralysis of government agencies and breakdown in order apparent on the [US] Gulf coast after Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans."
The report has been released just eight days before Queensland goes to the polls in an election which opinion polls say will be lost by Premier Anna Bligh's Labor Government.
Published in two volumes and running to more than 650 pages, it includes more than 150 recommendations on land planning, insurance, dam management, mining and emergency services.
Among them, it calls for Seqwater to improve its processes for drafting flood event reports, and calls for an urgent study of future flood risks in the Brisbane River catchment.
Ms Bligh has welcomed the report and promised to implement it "lock, stock, and barrel" if re-elected.
Speaking to reporters in Brisbane, she said the breach of the dam manual did not establish any liability against the State Government, but said any claims would be treated fairly.
Campbell Newman says a LNP government will also implement all of the recommendations.
The Insurance Council of Australia says the industry has already started adopting earlier recommendations on ways to better manage insurance claims.
"Most of those recommendations have already been implemented," said chief executive Rob Whelan.
"Our code of practice has been updated to take those recommendations into effect, and insurers are actually processing those sorts of recommendations now into their own operations."
About 2,000 flood victims have signalled their interest in a potential class action against Wivenhoe's operators.
Maurice Blackburn lawyers say it will get independent hydrodynamic modelling before proceeding with the law suit.
Read the Queensland Floods Commission's final report in full, or read its recommendations below.