 Organisations based in Derbyshire Police forces of England 1967 establishments in England Government agencies established in 1967 Firefighting Fire departments English footballers A.F.C. Bournemouth players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Burton Albion F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Wimbledon F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English football managers Burnley F.C. managers Cheltenham Town F.C. managers Sligo Rovers F.C. managers Stoke City F.C. managers Notts County F.C. managers Portsmouth F.C. managers Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Bristol City F.C. managers League of Ireland managers UEFA Pro Licence holders 1964 births Living people Alvechurch F.C. players The Football League managers Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Queens Park Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Hereford United F.C. players National League (English football) players People from Cheltenham Sportspeople from Gloucestershire Death Demography Life Senescence TNA Victory Road Total Nonstop Action Wrestling pay-per-view events Areas of Derby Derby Local government in Derbyshire Railway towns in England Unitary authority districts of England County towns in England Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in the East Midlands Local government districts of the East Midlands The Five Boroughs Living people 1949 births English male television actors 1956 births Living people 20th-century English criminals 21st-century English criminals British Army soldiers British arsonists British people convicted of attempted murder English people convicted of assault British people convicted of manslaughter British prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment Crime in Derbyshire Criticisms of welfare Date of birth missing (living people) People convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily harm Place of birth missing (living people) Prisoners and detainees of England and Wales Medical aspects of death Anatomical pathology Forensic techniques Post-mortem Hospitals in Derby NHS hospitals in England Teaching hospitals in England Police ranks Police ranks in the United Kingdom Derbyshire Non-metropolitan counties East Midlands Conservative Party (UK) Toryism Political parties established in 1834 1834 establishments in the United Kingdom Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists member parties European Conservatives and Reformists member parties International Democrat Union member parties Conservative parties in the United Kingdom Eurosceptic parties in the United Kingdom Parties represented in the European Parliament 1801 establishments in the United Kingdom Government of the United Kingdom House of Commons of the United Kingdom National lower houses Parliament of the United Kingdom Westminster system 1947 births Living people Alumni of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford Alumni of the University of Birmingham Female members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for English constituencies Conservative Party (UK) MPs Converts to Roman Catholicism from Anglicanism Councillors in Surrey English autobiographers English Roman Catholics Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for English constituencies People from Bath, Somerset Strictly Come Dancing participants Television personalities from Somerset UK MPs 1987–92 UK MPs 1992–97 UK MPs 1997–2001 UK MPs 2001–05 UK MPs 2005–10 Unilever people 1955 establishments in the United Kingdom ITV Media companies of the United Kingdom 2000s British television series 2010s British television series 2005 British television programme debuts ITV television programmes British television talk shows Television series by ITV Studios English-language television programming Primary education Elementary and primary schools School terminology School types Areas of Derby Former civil parishes in Derbyshire Wards of Derby In Flames Musical groups established in 1990 Musical groups from Gothenburg Swedish melodic death metal musical groups Swedish alternative metal musical groups E1 Music artists Musical quintets Nuclear Blast Records artists 1990 establishments in Sweden Stairways Architectural elements Building engineering Garden features Safety codes Windows Architectural elements Glass 1979 births Living people American rowers Olympic rowers of the United States Rowers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic bronze medalists for the United States Sportspeople from Norwalk, Connecticut Olympic medalists in rowing American male rowers Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Dream Sleep Psychiatric diagnosis