Suicide Bomber on Foot Attacks Joint Patrol in Eastern Afghanistan, Killing 19
According to shopkeepers who were nearby when the attack took place on Monday, the suicide bomber approached the patrol.
“It was around 9 a.m.; the bazaar was overcrowded,” said a shopkeeper who asked that his name not be used. “We were busy with customers, but I noticed a joint coalition force and Afghan police force on a dismounted patrol; they were approaching our shops. The commanders of both the Afghan and coalition forces were at the front of the column, and the rest of the forces were following them. The first soldiers in the column had just reached the beginning of our lane of shops when we heard a really loud bang, followed by gunfire.”
“A big ball of gray smoke went into the air,” the shopkeeper added. “People in the bazaar started running away from the blast site. We all hurriedly closed our shops and ran away.”
Another shopkeeper, Baburi Gul, was knocked unconscious by the blast. He said he saw the joint patrol pass by his small grocery. “As soon as the last person passed, there was a boom, and I lost consciousness,” he said. “When I regained it, I found myself lying on the ground, and I was bleeding. I looked at the street, and I saw bodies everywhere, American, police and civilians.”
Among the 16 Afghan dead were 6 police officers, at least 3 from the Khost Quick Reaction Force, including the force’s commander. Khost’s governor, Abdul Jabar Naimi, condemned the attack and said that 59 Afghans were wounded in the blast, including 3 police officers. The numbers were corroborated by doctors at the government-run Khost Provincial Hospital and at private hospitals that were also receiving the wounded.
Khost is close to the border with Pakistan near Miram Shah, the capital of North Waziristan, in the ungoverned tribal areas. It is heavily infiltrated with insurgent groups, including the Taliban, Hezb-i-Islami and the Haqqani network, a powerful element of the Afghan insurgency, which is affiliated with the Taliban and which the United States says has ties with Pakistan. While the Haqqanis have their headquarters in Miram Shah, there was no immediate evidence that they were behind this bombing, international military officials said.
Attacks by bombers wearing suicide vests can be especially lethal since they are typically able to get close to their targets, and even the extensive body armor worn by international forces leaves some parts of the body vulnerable, said Maj. Adam Wojack, a coalition spokesman.
“Even though our individuals wear helmets and body armor, so much of their body is still vulnerable,” Major Wojack said. “It’s the shrapnel, more than the blast, the legs, arms, necks, face are unprotected. And suicide bombers on foot can get closer; they can be feet away from their victims.” The vulnerability of Afghan civilians is far greater.