Pakistan bomb attacks leave 14 dead and 100 injured in Shia procession
Triple blasts in Lahore end lull in violence after floods as militants and 'civilians' die in air raids near Afghan border
Three bombs exploded at a Shia procession in the Pakistani city of Lahore, killing at least 14 people and wounding at least 100 others, police said.
The blasts took place at three sites as 35,000 Shia pilgrims passed through the streets in mourning for the caliph Ali, one of Shia Islam's most revered figures. The first blast was a time bomb. Minutes later, a young male suicide bomber tried to force his way into an area where food was being prepared for the pilgrims and blew himself up. A second suicide bomber struck at an intersection near the end of the procession.
The atrocities appeared to be the latest in a string of attacks by Sunni extremists against the minority Shias and broke a lull in violence during the floods that have ravaged the country.
The prime minister, Yousuf Raza Gilani, condemned the blasts and said the attackers would not escape justice.
The attacks came after two days of government air raids on militant strongholds in the north-west, near the Afghan border. Pakistani officials said up to 62 militants, their family members and other civilians with no ties to the fighters, were killed.
The raids yesterday took place in several villages in Teerah valley in the Khyber region and killed 45 people, the officials said. One official described the dead as insurgents, but said people living with them could also have been killed. An intelligence officer admitted that some women and children were killed in the attacks.
Jihad Gul, who lives near one of the villages, said he had seen the bodies of at least 20 women and children, but army officials said reports of civilian casualties were unconfirmed.
In today's air attack in the adjoining district of Orakzai, officials said 15 suspected militants were killed and 10 others were wounded.
In April, the Teerah valley was hit by army air strikes that killed about 60 civilians. The army, which initially described the victims as insurgents, ended up paying compensation to the victims' families and issued a rare public apology.
• Pakistan's military cancelled a trip by officers to an annual meeting at US Central Command after they were taken off a plane and subjected to "unwarranted security checks" at Dulles airport, Washington on Monday, a spokesman said today . The nine-member delegation, led by a rear admiral, was awaiting take-off on a United Airlines flight to Tampa, Florida, where Central Command is based.