Suspect in Afghan killings flown to Kuwait
The still-unidentified Army staff sergeant was transferred on the recommendation of advisers to Gen. John Allen, the commander of U.S. and allied forces in Afghanistan, and because "we do not have the proper facility in Afghanistan to detain him for longer than he is being held," said Capt. John Kirby, a Pentagon spokesman.
"We've been through some difficult events in the past few weeks, and yet the army and the police have been able to maintain order and have been able to control the situation," he said. "And that tells me that you have gained a great deal of respect and trust with the Afghan people, and that's extremely important if we are to exceed in this mission of transitioning all of the areas in Afghanistan to Afghan control, governance and security."
The Taliban -- who have battled U.S. and NATO troops as well as Afghan government forces since the 2001 invasion after the September 11 attacks -- issued a statement after Sunday's killings describing U.S. troops as "sick-minded American savages." They said they would take revenge "by killing and beheading Americans anywhere in the country."
During the suspect's last deployment, in 2010, he was riding in a vehicle that rolled over in a wreck, according to a senior Defense Department official, who also spoke on condition of anonymity. After the wreck, the sergeant was diagnosed with traumatic brain injury but was treated and then found fit for duty, the official said.
Speaking Tuesday at the White House, Obama said he has told Karzai that the United States "takes this as seriously as if it was our own citizens and our own children who were murdered."
"The killing of innocent civilians is outrageous and it's unacceptable. It's not who we are as a country and it does not represent our military," he said. A U.S. military investigation "will follow the facts wherever they lead us, and we will make sure that anybody who was involved is held fully accountable with the full force of the law," he added.