ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
There are conflicting reports about whether former Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak has lapsed into a coma, just three weeks before he is due to stand trial on charges of corruption and murder.
Egyptian state television has quoted reports from Mubarak's lawyer saying the former president is in a full coma after his health suddenly deteriorated yesterday.
"I was informed about the sudden deterioration in Mubarak's health and I am now on my way to Sharm el-Sheikh. All that I know so far is that the president is in a full coma," Mubarak's lawyer, Farid el-Deeb, said. He did not give more details.
Mr Deeb said in June that Mubarak was suffering from cancer, although a government minister later appeared to play down that report.
Despite Mr Deeb's statement, state news agency MENA cited a hospital official as denying the report.
"Mubarak suffered a sudden loss of blood pressure but quickly returned to normal again after the necessary medicines were given to him. His medical condition is stable," MENA quoted the official as saying.
Another medical source told Reuters that Mubarak, 83, occasionally slipped into a coma but his condition was stable.
Mubarak has been in custody in a hospital in the Red Sea resort town of Sharm el-Sheikh since suffering a heart attack several weeks ago during questioning over alleged fraud and the killing of protesters during the uprising that ousted him in February.
More than 840 people died in the 18 days of demonstrations.
If the trial goes ahead, it is expected to be held in Sharm el-Sheikh for security reasons.
Depending on his health, the former president could either take the dock in court, or be questioned by court officials in his hospital ward.
Mubarak has been hospitalised since April and his condition has been subject to frequent speculation in the Egyptian media, gaining momentum before his August 3 trial.
Protesters have been camped out in Cairo's Tahrir Square since July 8 and have protested in other Egyptian cities. Their demands have included calls for the military council now ruling Egypt to speed up Mubarak's trial.
Some Egyptians have questioned Mubarak's illness, seeing it as a ploy for the army to avoid putting on trial the decorated former air force commander who ruled Egypt for 30 years.
"The news that comes every now and then about him being in bad condition is designed to gain people's sympathy, especially now with the public demanding he comes to a jail in Cairo and face trial in Cairo, not in his hospital," political analyst and activist Hassan Nafaa said.
Mubarak had generally enjoyed good health in office. He underwent gall bladder surgery in Germany in March 2010 but he had appeared to make a full recovery.
When in office, officials routinely dismissed talk of ill health including cancer reports.