Turkey's Erdogan Declares Coup Over After Clashes Kill Dozens
ISTANBUL — Turkey's president declared he is in control of the NATO country early Saturday as loyal military and police forces fought to squash a coup attempt during a night of explosions, air battles and gunfire that left dozens dead.
A faction of the armed forces attempted to seize power using tanks and attack helicopters, some strafing the headquarters of Turkish intelligence and parliament in Ankara, others seizing a major bridge in Istanbul.
At least 194 people were killed in clashes, Gen. Umit Dundar told a press conference. He said that figure included 47 civilians, 41 police officers, two soldiers and 104 alleged coup plotters.
Turkish Prime Minister Binali Yildirim later said that 1,440 people had been wounded and 2,839 military personnel detained during what he described as a "dark stain on Turkish democracy." He also pinned blame for the coup on the "parallel terrorist organization."
The coup attempt crumbled after crowds answered President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's call to take to the streets and dozens of rebels abandoned their tanks. Government officials blamed the unrest on a Pennsylvania-based Islamist cleric.
A successful overthrow of Erdogan, who has ruled Turkey since 2003, would have marked one of the biggest shifts in the Middle East in years, transforming a major U.S. ally while war rages on in neighboring Syria.
Erdogan, who had been on vacation on the country's southwest coast when the coup was launched, appeared to accuse the coup plotters of trying to kill him.
He added that the rebels "will pay a heavy price for their treason to Turkey," according to a transcript of his remarks provided by his office to The Associated Press. "Those who stain the military's reputation must leave. The process has started today, and it will continue just as we fight other terrorist groups."
Operations at the Incirlik joint military airbase in southern Turkey – home of the 39th Air Base Wing – were briefly halted during the coup but U.S.-led combat operations in nearby Syria and Iraq were unaffected, U.S. officials told NBC News. American forces were put on their highest threat level alert - “DEFCON DELTA” - until it was determined that the coup attempt posed no immediate threat.
A Turkish government official placed a frantic call to Washington pleading for a statement of support from Washington, the U.S. officials said. Both President Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry released statements declaring US support for the “democratically-elected government of Turkey.”
Erdogan, whose Islamist-rooted ideology lies deeply at odds with supporters of modern Turkey's secular principles, said the plotters had tried to attack him in the resort town of Marmaris.
"They bombed places I had departed right after I was gone," Reuters quoted him as saying. "They probably thought we were still there."
With roots in Islamism, Erdogan's AK Party has long had a strained relationship with the military and nationalists in a state that was founded on secularist principles after World War I. The military has a history of mounting coups to defend secularism, but has not seized power directly since 1980.
Fighting continued into the early morning, with the sounds of huge blasts echoing across Istanbul and Ankara, including at least one bomb that hit the parliament complex. Television footage showed images of broken glass and other debris strewn across a lobby leading to the assembly hall.