Islamist group Hamas calls for another intifada as violence spreads to Gaza Strip
A week of violence between Israelis and Palestinians spread to the Gaza Strip on Friday, with Israeli troops killing five people in clashes on the border and Islamist group Hamas calling for another intifada.
In one of the bloodiest days since last year's Gaza war, a fresh wave of stabbings also hit Israel and the West Bank, including a revenge attack by a Jewish suspect that wounded two Palestinians and two Arab Israelis.
Ismail Hanniyeh, the Gaza-based leader of Hamas, declared a new uprising after Friday prayers and urged his followers to ramp up attacks.
“We are calling for the strengthening and increasing of the intifada… It is the only path that will lead to liberation,” Mr Haniyeh said, speaking at a mosque in Gaza City.
In the wake of Mr Haniyeh’s address, at least six Palestinians from Gaza were killed and more than 60 injured by the Israeli Defence Forces after they approached the border fence with Israel.
On Friday morning, an Israeli teenager went on a stabbing spree in the southern city of Dimona, injuring three Palestinians and a Bedouin. Israel’s prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu condemned the violence, calling it an “attack against innocent Arabs”, and announcing that the perpetrator “will be dealt with to the fullest extent of the law.”
It remains yet to be seen, however, if the Israeli attacker’s house will be demolished, as is the practice with Palestinian attackers.
Three Israelis were attacked and wounded on Friday: a Palestinian woman from Nazareth was shot in the city of Afula after she attempted to stab a security guard.
In Jerusalem, a Jewish teenager was stabbed with a tin opener, and his attacker was shot dead at the scene, while in the West Bank settlement of Kiryat Arba, a policeman was stabbed by a Palestinian perpetrator, who was also shot dead.
The violence comes amid an tense mood in Israel and the West Bank. Thousands of Israeli police were deployed in Jerusalem’s Old City ahead of the Friday prayers, which passed without incident. Restrictions on entry to the al-Aqsa compound - known as Temple Mount by the Jews - were increased, with men under the age of 45 barred from the site.
Prior to Mr Haniyeh’s calls for an intifada, Hamas’s West Bank leader called for Friday to be a violent ‘day of rage’.
But Saeb Erekat, the secretary general of the Palestine Liberation Organisation and a member of Hamas’s rival Fatah group in the West Bank, said that the question of whether or not the recent violence is indeed an intifada is irrelevant for Palestinians.
“Without international intervention things are not going to change. Providing international protection to the Palestinian people and to stop treating Israel as a state above the law is the least that we could ask for”, Mr Erekat wrote in Newsweek.