Jeremy Paxman: BBC impartiality warning after Iraq war Blair's 'lies' article
Jeremy Paxman has been reprimanded by the BBC after he was judged to have  broken the corporation’s strict impartiality rules.
The Newsnight presenter has been warned over ‘inappropriate’ comments he made  in an article about the Iraq war, which he wrote for the Guardian newspaper in  November last year.
The director of BBC News, Helen Boaden took exception to the 60-year-old’s  claims that the country had been taken to war on the back of ‘lies’ by Tony  Blair.
He was criticised for the making the statement before the Chilcot inquiry has returned a verdict the former prime minister’s justification for going to war.
Boaden reacted after a reader wrote to the BBC to complain about Paxman’s remarks, contained in an article in which he discussed his picture of the decade - an image of Iraqi civilians and US soldiers pulling down a statue of  Saddam on 9 April 2003.
It begins with a withering attack on Blair and former US President George Bush, with the presenter saying: ‘The Iraq war hangs over this decade like a very bad smell.
'From the initial lies that took us to war, through to the summoning of  clubby members of the House of Lords to conduct later "inquiries" that claimed  so much and revealed so little, it tarnished everything it touched. 
‘For all Tony Blair's striding around with his new best friend (who can forget  the excruciating "ball-crushing jeans" shots of the two of them at Camp  David?), this was an American war, won, to no one's slightest surprise, by an overwhelming American force.’   
It emerged that the presenter, who only recently signed a new £3.2million  four-year deal with the corporation, did not clear the article with his department head, as BBC guidelines stipulate.
Boaden said: ‘I do not think it was appropriate for the article to refer to  “the initial lies that took us to war.'
‘Given that we do not know the truth about what lies may or may not have been  told, we cannot attribute such a motive to Tony Blair's government, and making  such an unequivocal statement gives a partial impression.’
BBC guidelines forbid staff from activity that might prompt viewers to doubt  the corporation’s ‘objectivity or integrity’.
Boaden added: ‘Had he asked for approval for this article, we would have asked  him to change some elements.
'I shall be drawing his attention to my view of aspects of this article and  will remind him of the need to appear impartial at all times while retaining  his much admired and valued iconoclastic style.’
In a letter to the reader, Stan Rosenthal, Boaden also said that Paxman’s  reference to ‘little George Bush’ was ‘somewhat sneering’.
She suggested it ‘borderline in terms of tone’ to talk about ‘Tony Blair's striding around with his new best friend’ wearing ‘excruciating ball-crushing jeans’, adding that the presenter should have ‘phrased differently’ his summary  of the steps to war. 
Paxman, 60, is one of the BBC’s top earners, who now earns around  £800,000-a-year.
However, earlier this month, in a slip of the tongue, Paxman used a four-letter  expletive as he stumbled over the word ‘cuts’ during a Newsnight interview on  tax avoidance.
Mr Rosenthal has now said he intends to appeal to the BBC Trust for a ‘more  forthright and public verdict’ against the presenter.
A spokesman for the BBC refused to comment.