Pakistan Militants Hit NATO Convoy
Another 30 percent comes through northern Afghanistan, traversing Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan. More delicate materials like electronics, weapons and ammunition arrive by air, according to the military.
“It’s too early to tell the impact,” said Maj. Joel T. Harper, a spokesman at the NATO headquarters in Kabul. “We’re working with the government of Pakistan to address their concerns.” Major Harper also said, “We expect these matters to be resolved through review of this incident.”
While the northern supply route could be expanded, the goods have farther to travel before they reach the troops, who are mostly positioned in the south and east of Afghanistan. Furthermore, north to south roads in Afghanistan are poor.
“Quietly we have been looking into other options,” said a NATO official who was not authorized to speak to reporters on the subject. “Resolving this is in the interests of both sides. If this condition persists and we have to make other arrangements, it means more expense to us and a significant revenue loss for Pakistan.”
Television footage of the convoy attack early Monday showed firefighters struggling to douse the flames of the trucks waiting at a refueling station in Rawalpindi.
A group of eight assailants attacked the trucks, according to Mir Waiz, a police officer from Islamabad. Three people were killed in the attack, presumably drivers, Mr. Waiz said.
The attackers were “terrorists,” Mr. Waiz said. Pakistani news media reported that the Pakistani Taliban were responsible for the attacks.
The interior minister, Rehman Malik, appealed on Monday for an end to the attacks, saying in a television interview that the drivers of the trucks were Muslims.
Trucks and fuel tankers have been attacked in the past, and the owners of trucking companies in Karachi, the country’s main seaport, have said that they pay considerable money to militant groups in an effort to keep the route safe.
American and Pakistani officials said during the weekend that they were conducting a joint investigation into the helicopter strikes on the border posts last week that killed three Pakistani soldiers of the Frontier Corps.
Two senior Pakistani military officers arrived in Kabul on Saturday to join the inquiry, which was called in an effort to cool the mounting tensions between the United States and Pakistan over the border strikes.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman, Abdul Basit, said there was no firm date for reopening the border.
“The supply has been suspended because of security reasons and it will be resumed as soon as these reasons are addressed,” he said.
In Brussels on Monday, the NATO secretary-general, Anders Fogh Rasmussen, apologized for the three deaths last week and said that he hoped Pakistan would reopen the border quickly, news agencies reported.
“I expressed my regret for the incident last week in which Pakistani soldiers lost their lives,” Mr. Rasmussen said after a meeting with the Pakistani foreign minister, Shah Mehmood Qureshi. “I expressed my hope the border will be open for supplies as soon as possible,” Mr. Rasmussen said, according to Reuters.