Bundy militia remove fence at Oregon wildlife refuge as protest escalates
Local support is waning with people in the town of Burns expressing dismay at methods employed by the armed occupation
Days after leaders of the armed occupation in Oregon insisted that they were trying to de-escalate conflicts at the wildlife refuge, the rightwing militia began destroying part of a US Fish and Wildlife Service fence on Monday.
The tactic, intended to allow privately owned cattle to graze on adjacent public land, is one of the most aggressive actions the occupiers have taken since they took over federal property at the Malheur national wildlife refuge headquarters last weekend. The out-of-state militiamen say they seized the sanctuary to protest against the overreach of the federal government and the imprisonment of local cattle ranchers Dwight Hammond and his son, Steven.
Ranchers in Harney County have long contended that the government and environmental groups have unfairly blocked their access to public lands through burdensome regulations and fees. The militia’s core members, led by Nevada resident Ammon Bundy, removed about 25 or 30 yards of fence near the occupation, according to the Oregonian.
Throughout the first week of the standoff, occupiers have repeatedly pointed out that they are not damaging any government property and that they would leave the refuge headquarters in good condition when the protests ended.
The removal of barbed wire, which the militiamen accomplished using a government excavator, came as leaders of the occupation faced increased pressure from the local town of Burns and from former supporters of Bundy to leave the refuge. In addition to occupying numerous buildings, militia members have also driven around government vehicles, used the site’s kitchens and beds and may have even accessed government computers with employee ID badges left on site.
Local ranchers – some of whom have said they support Bundy’s message but disapprove of his methods of protest – criticised the militia for cutting the fence on Monday afternoon. “There are better ways to go about it then what he’s doing,” Travis Williams, a 46-year-old Harney County rancher, told the Guardian. “It’s destroying public property … I’m a law-abiding citizen. I pay my grazing fees.”
Williams added: “I agree with his concerns and what he’s standing for. I just don’t agree with the way he’s doing it.”
A Fish and Wildlife Service spokesperson strongly condemned the action: “In the century of Malheur national wildlife refuge’s existence, enormous effort has been displayed by partners, surrounding communities, ranchers and landowners to restore a devastated landscape. Removing fences, damaging any refuge property, or unauthorised use of equipment would be additional unlawful actions by the illegal occupiers.”
Harney County judge Steve Grasty said it was clear the protesters were trying to escalate the occupation and spark conflict: “Oh my goodness, now you’ve got a crime,” Grasty said. “They’re trying to cause a confrontation.”