80 Dead, 231 Injured In Kabul Attack
[caption id="attachment_209651" align="aligncenter" width="700"] The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the recent twin explosions that rocked the Afghan capital of Kabul on Friday evening. At least 61 people were killed and 207 were injured in the attack. (Image: ANI/Twitter)[/caption] At least 80 people were killed and nearly 231 others were wounded in the twin-attack in the Afghan capital of Kabul on Saturday evening. Terror organisation Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack in Kabul. Earlier, Taliban was suspected to be responsible for the attack however, they denied any connection to the attack. According to reports, the explosion occurred in Kabul's Dehmazang Circle, where crowd of minority Shiite Hazaras had gathered to protest over a key power transmission line. The scene of the blast was littered with charred bodies and dismembered limbs, with ambulances struggling to reach the scene as authorities had overnight blocked key intersections with stacked shipping containers to impede movement of the protesters. Thousands of demonstrators had gathered to demand that a multi-million-dollar power line pass through their electricity-starved province of Bamiyan, one of the most deprived areas of Afghanistan with a large Hazara population. "The horrific attack on a group of peaceful protesters in Kabul demonstrates the utter disregard that armed groups have for human life," Amnesty International said in a statement. "Such attacks are a reminder that the conflict in Afghanistan is not winding down, as some believe, but escalating, with consequences for the human rights situation in the country that should alarm us all." In a statement, Afghan President Ashraf Ghani said he was "deeply saddened" by the carnage, adding that the casualties included security officials. "Peaceful protest is the right of every citizen, but opportunist terrorists infiltrated the crowds and carried out the attack, killing and injuring a number of citizens including some security forces." The protest march was largely peaceful before the explosion struck as the demonstrators sought to march on the presidential palace, waving flags and chanting slogans such as "death to discrimination". According to reports, three suicide bombers carried out the explosions. While the first explosive was successfully detonated, the second explosive was defective. The third bomber was killed by NDS officers.