Rallies across Canada support Tunisian uprising
Canada’s Tunisian communities have rallied in support of a populist uprising in their North African homeland that drove President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali from power this week. Their demonstrations were mirrored around the world.
More than 1,000 people marched through downtown Montreal Saturday afternoon in solidarity with protesters in Tunisia.
“My dream and my hope is to basically see Tunisia a real free democratic Arab country, proud with his democracy, and proud by his people,” said Hichem Zibi, a 32-year-old IT consultant.
Zibi and others at the Montreal rally called on Ottawa to do more to ensure a democratic resolution to the political upheaval, and to see that Ben Ali, who fled to Saudi Arabia, is brought to justice.
“That would be the first step to show people that we have law and a constitution,” Zibi said.
There are close to 20,000 Tunisians living in Canada, about half of whom are in Montreal. Demonstrations supporting Tunisia were also held Saturday in Quebec City and Toronto and on Parliament Hill.
Ben Ali’s downfall has sent a warning to other autocratic leaders across the Arab world, particularly because he didn’t seem especially vulnerable until recently and had managed his country of 10 million better than many other Middle Eastern nations.
Hours after riots forced him to flee, hundreds of Egyptians poured into the streets of Cairo with a warning to their own authoritarian president, Hosni Mubarak.
“Ben Ali, tell Mubarak a plane is waiting for him too!” they chanted late Friday night. “We are next. Listen to the Tunisians; it’s your turn, Egyptians!”
Camaraderie among protesters has swept cyberspace, creating lively tableaux of opinions and strategies on Internet social networks. It’s almost as if for a fleeting moment, Egyptians, Jordanians, Moroccans and others have vicariously become Tunisian.
In Jordan, thousands of demonstrators marched Friday in several cities against rising food prices and unemployment.
“Tunis today may well go down in history as the Arab equivalent of the Solidarity movement in the Gdansk shipyard in Poland in 1980 that sparked wider protests that a decade later ultimately led to the collapse of the Soviet Union and its empire,” wrote Rami Khouri of the American University of Beirut.