Israeli soldiers killed in Hezbollah attack
(CNN)Fighting between Israel and the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah has left two Israeli soldiers and a Spanish peacekeeper dead, officials said Wednesday.
Separately, in Gaza, the United Nations said it was "outraged" when Palestinian protesters climbed the perimeter of a U.N. compound and damaged it. U.N. officials took Hamas to task for not preventing the incident.
Hezbollah fired five anti-tank missiles at Israeli military vehicles in the disputed Shebaa Farms area, killing an officer and a soldier, the Israel Defense Forces said. Sgt. Dor Chaim Nini was 20; Capt. Yochai Kalangel was 25, the IDF said.
The attack took place near Shebaa Farms, also known as Har Dov, a disputed strip of land between Lebanon and Syria adjoining the Golan Heights, under Israeli control.
The Spanish service member, Cpl. Francisco Javier Soria Toledo,was serving with UNIFIL, the U.N. Interim Force in Lebanon. He was killed "during the incidents that happened between Hezbollah and the Israeli military," the Spanish government said.
"During the course of the developments, a UNIFIL peacekeeper deployed at a U.N. position near Ghajar sustained serious injuries that resulted in his death. The precise cause of death is as yet undetermined and remains the subject of investigation," UNIFIL said in a statement.
"UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander Major-General Luciano Portolano was in immediate contact with the parties to help control the situation and prevent further escalation. In the meantime, at around 1:30 p.m., five rockets were fired from the general area of Kafer Shouba toward Israel. The IDF fired artillery rounds towards the source of fire.
Overnight, the military launched airstrikes against Syrian targets in response to Hezbollah rocket fire from Syrian bases, IDF spokesman Lt. Col. Peter Lerner told CNN. "We did this to send a message to the Syrian regime that we view it responsible for what occurs on its territory and that there is a price to pay for allowing Hezbollah to use your positions," Lerner said.
"If the Syrians think they are going to open up a new front on the Golan after 40 years, we are not willing to accept that."
At a ceremony in the southern Israel city of Sderot, Netanyahu said, "At this moment, the IDF is responding to events in the north. To everyone who is trying to challenge us at the northern border, I recommend that they look (at) what happened not far away from the city of Sderot, in Gaza: Hamas took its hardest hit since its formation. And the IDF is prepared to act strongly on all fronts."
"Iran has been attempting for some time, through Hezbollah, to create an additional terror front against us from the Golan Heights. We are working aggressively and responsibly against this attempt," he said. "The Lebanese government and the Assad regime are both responsible for the implications of the attacks that are originating from their territory against Israel. "
"We must not provide terrorism with a nuclear umbrella. We must not let the most dangerous regime in the world have the most dangerous weapon in the world," the office said.
pulled out of the Golan Heights U.N. peacekeepers pulled out of the Golan Heights in September after Islamic militants took some peacekeepers hostage and Syrian rebel fighters took control of the border crossing between Israel and Syria in the Syrian town of Quneitra.
Hamas controls Gaza. "Pending a full transfer of security responsibilities to the legitimate Palestinian Authority, we continue to hold Hamas fully responsible for the security and safety of all United Nations personnel and operations in Gaza," Serry said.
"As this serious incident took place in the context of increasing incitement against the United Nations in Gaza, the Special Coordinator is conducting an urgent review of operations in Gaza," his statement added.