Egypt protests - Saturday 5 February
Good morning this is David Batty with the Guardian's live coverage of the unrest in Egypt. It is the twelfth day since mass protests began against the regime of President Hosni Mubarak and thousands of people spent the night in Tahrir Square in central Cairo, after another huge rally demanding his resignation. Jack Shenker and Mustafa Khalili are in Cairo for the Guardian and will be filing reports throughout the day. We'll also be bringing you a roundup of UK and international news coverage of the protests.
Here is a roundup of the latest developments:
• Thousands of people spent the night in Tahrir Square following another huge rally against Mubarak.
• The US has raised the pressure on Mubarak, with President Barack Obama urging him to begin an "orderly transition" of power. US officials say a meeting between Egypt's leaders and the opposition could be held in the next few days, perhaps even this weekend.
• Egypt's finance minister, Samir Radwa, says talks are planned between the vice-president and opposition leaders. The outlawed Muslim Brotherhood is not expected to take part.
• Reuters reports that there has been a blast near Egypt's gas pipeline with Israel in north Sinai. Jack Shenker will have more details on this shortly.
Egyptian state television has reported that saboteurs blew up a gas pipeline in north Sinai.
It quoted an official as saying that the "situation is very dangerous and explosions were continuing from one spot to another" along the pipeline, according to Reuters.
"It is a big terrorist operation", a state TV reporter said.
There were no injuries and the blaze was quickly brought under control after the gas flow was shut off, according to the Associated Press.
The governor of the region, Abdel Wahab Mabrouk, said he suspected "sabotage".
Security sources told Reuters that the Egyptian army closed the main source of gas supplying the Jordanian branch of the pipeline, blaming the attack on "foreign elements".
Israel Radio said the Egypt-Israel pipeline was not damaged, but the supply has been stopped as a precaution.
Jack Shenker said it is thought that the explosion is linked to the ongoing dispute between Mubark's government and the Sinai Bedouins, rather than being directly related to the current protests against the regime.
More world leaders have joined the US president in putting pressure on Mubarak for an orderly transition of power.
The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, backed the pro-democracy demonstrators, saying the rest of the world would be remiss "if we were not siding with these people".
Speaking at a security conference in Munich, she added: "There will be a change in Egypt … but it needs to be change in such a way that it is peaceful and orderly."
However, Merkel added that early elections would probably be unhelpful.
"Early elections at the beginning of the democratisation process is probably the wrong approach," she said.
At the same conference, the United Nations secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, said the turmoil in Egypt, Tunisia and other Arab countries demonstrated the risk of insecurity caused by a "deficit of democracy".
He said democracy created peace and security but "where it is absent there is chaos and uncertainty. We see this of course … most recently in Tunisia, Egypt and other countries in the Middle East."
The causes of this instability include "human insecurity, poverty, diminished or disappointed expectations, lack of good governance, corruption, ineffective governance of public institutions and deficits of democracy", the UN chief added.
With the political crisis estimated to have cost Egypt $3.1bn (£1.9bn), Mubarak today held talks with his economic team.
The state MENA news agency said the meeting, which involved the oil minister, the finance minister, the governor of the central bank and other officials, took place this morning in the presidential palace in Heliopolis, a Cairo suburb miles away from the protests in the city centre.
The immediate removal of Mubarak from office will not be sufficient to stop the mass protests in Egypt, Jack Shenker writes in the Guardian. In a piece filed late last night, Shenker notes that the coalition of protesters have drawn up a common list of radical demands.
• The resignation of the entire ruling party, including the new vice-president Omar Suleiman, whom the Obama administration believes is best placed to oversee a transition of power. • A broad-based transitional government appointed by a 14-strong committee, made up of senior judges, youth leaders and members of the military. • The election of a founding council of 40 public intellectuals and constitutional experts, who will draw up a new constitution under the supervision of the transitional government, then put it to the people in a referendum. Fresh elections would then be held at a local and national level. • The end of the country's emergency law. • The dismantling of the state security apparatus. • The trial of key regime leaders, including Mubarak.
British prime minister David Cameron has added his voice to the other world leaders calling for a swift transition of power in Egypt.
Speaking at the security conference in Europe, Cameron said:
Associated Press has an analysis piece on the Egyptian army's role in the political unrest.
It states that ultimately only the army can tell Mubarak to quit, but also notes that the generals face a dilemma in intervening in the crisis:
The US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, has urged Middle Eastern leaders to embrace democratic reforms in response to growing unrest in the region.
Despite the risk of short-term instability in countries like Egypt, Tunisia and Yemen, Clinton said change was a "strategic necessity" that will make Arab nations stronger and their people more prosperous and less susceptible to extremist ideologies.
Speaking at the international security conference in Munich, Clinton said leaders who deny their people freedom and opportunity open the door to instability.
The Guardian's Julian Borger has sent through more on Clinton's speech. She told the security conference:
The political party led by Iraqi prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, has expressed solidarity with the Egyptian people in securing a peaceful transition of power for their country.
The Islamic Dawa party stopped short of calling on Mubarak to step down but it praised Egyptians for demanding their right to choose their leadership.
The statement also urged Egyptians to reject violence or chaos and praised the Egyptian army for balancing security with respecting protesters' rights.
The statement from the Dawa party raises the stark contrast between the push for regime change in Egypt and the 2003 invasion of Iraq which, according to Iraq Body Count, has claimed more than 150,000 lives.
The US-led invasion of Iraq dismantled the state apparatus, including the army, leaving a power vacuum that led to violent disputes among different religious and political factions and the growth of Islamic extremism. The leaders of the grassroots uprising in Egypt clearly wish to avoid such chaos and it is worth noting that their shared aims include involving the army in a transition of power.
Iraqi clerics and protesters have also warned leaders in Baghdad to heed the unrest in Egypt and Tunisia or risk facing it at home.
Jack Shenker has sent through a list of all the known prominent activists and human rights defenders arrested in Egypt in the past few days. This list, which is likely to be incomplete as information on arrests is still dripping through, lists the activists by the human rights organisation they are associated with.
Hisham Mubarak Legal Centre and the Centre for Economic and Social Rights Ahmad Seif el-Islam abd el-Fattah Ahmad Taher El-Sayyed el-Fekki Fatma Abed Kamal Samir Mona el-Masri Muhamma Hamdi Mahmoud Muhsin Bashir Mustafa el-Hasan Nadia Nadine Abu-Shadi Shahdan Tamer Hagina
Fox News has reported there was an assassination attempt on Egypt's vice-president Omar Suleiman late yesterday, although this has not been confirmed by other sources.
The news network reported two of Suleiman's bodyguards were killed in the failed assassination. However, a senior security source has denied the report, according to Reuters.
Protest leaders say they have met Egypt's prime minister to discuss ways to ease Mubarak out of office so negotiations can begin on the nation's future, AP reports.
Abdel-Rahman Youssef, a youth activist, told the news agency that he and other protest leaders met prime minister Ahmed Shafiq late yesterday. He said the meeting only concerned how to bring about Mubarak's departure.
Under one proposal, Mubarak would become deputy to the current vice-president, Omar Suleiman, and step down "in some way, either in a real departure or a political one," Youssef said.
Here's a roundup of the stories on the Egyptian protests in today's Guardian.
• The front-page story is an account of yesterday's "day of departure" - the largest protest yet against Mubarak's regime. Jack Shenker and Mustafa Khalili write that the huge peaceful gathering marked a contrast to the violence and anarchy of previous days as people flooded into Tahrir Square "to show the world something different".
• Barack Obama has dropped heavy hints that Mubarak should go, although he stopped short of unambiguously calling for him to stand down.
• Peter Beaumont writes about the harassment he, Jack Shenker and other journalists have dealt with in recent days. This has ranged from being detained by soldiers who ordered them to kneel facing a wall with their hands behind their heads to the suspicion aroused by a pack of Strepsils.
• Egyptian novelist Ahdaf Soueif has a diary of the past week's protests, which she says has seen hope emerge amid the violence and deaths.
• Mubarak's family fortunecould be as much as $70bn (£43.5bn), with much of his wealth in British and Swiss banks or tied up in real estate in London, New York, Los Angeles and the Red Sea coast.
•The paper's leader column contends that while the outside world is right to be anxious about the risk of Islamic extremism in Egypt, it should not be too worried by the Muslim Brotherhood as the organisation is now more politically conservative than a fundamentalist group.
Here's Jack Shenker's latest piece on the political negotiations regarding a transition of power which have now started between the government and opposition figures amid the ongoing mass protests.
Here's the latest from AP on the meeting between opposition leaders with the prime minister over ways to ease Mubarak out of office.
Blogger and journalist Wael Abbas has posted a message on Twitter saying that all the people dragged out of a legal aid centre in central Cairo and detained by the military police have now been released.
Novelist Ahdaf Soueif said eight to 12 people were dragged out of No 1 Souq el-Tawfikiyyah St and bundled into a bus while a military police vehicle waited nearby. The building houses offices of the Hisham Mubarak Legal Aid Centre, the Centre for Social and Economic Rights and the 6th April Youth.
Mustafa Khalili in Cairo has called in to report that the Egyptian army is moving its tanks beyond the barricades in Tahrir Square and appear to be trying to scare the protesters into going home. He also says soldiers are trying to shut down one of the first aid stations inside the square.
The Press Association is reporting how Britons desperate to flee Egypt are making last-ditch efforts to get seats on a government-chartered flight out of the country:
Here's Julian Borger's report on US secretary of state Hillary Clinton's comments at the security conference in Munich. Clinton signalled US backing for vice-president Omar Suleiman and stressed the need for an orderly transition. Here's a video of her speech.
Mustafa Khalili has just filed an update on the situation in Tahrir Square where soldiers appear to be taking a more aggresive stance towards the protesters.
Reports on Egyptian state television today seem to be stressing that stability is returning to the country.
AP says it is possible that the regime thinks a resolution to the crisis can be reached without the immediate removal of Mubarak.
Reuters has a report on the impact of the political unrest in Egypt on the stalled peace negotions between Israel and the Palestinians.
The quartet of Middle East peace negotiators said today they will give high priority to the impact of Egypt crisis on the negotiations, but would not allow the situation to derail the peace talks.
In a draft statement due to be endorsed by the UN, the European Union, Russia and the US, the quartet said further delays in resuming talks would be "detrimental to prospects for regional peace and security".
Israel has voiced alarm at the unrest amid fears that the Muslim Brotherhood, perceived as anti-Israel and anti-Semitic, could take control of Egypt.
There has been an explosion at a church in Rafah in the Gaza Strip, near the border with Egypt, Reuters reports.
The cause and the scale of the blast are not yet clear, according to the news agency.
The Egyptian government blamed the Gaza-based Army of Islam for a New Year's Day church bombing in Alexandria that killed 23 people. The group denies the charge.
Reuters reports that the Egyptian opposition groups have yet to agree on a common position.
I've just spoken to Mustafa Khalili who has the latest on the situation in central Cairo where the army seems to be taking a more active role in trying to take control of parts of Tahrir Square. He says:
Egyptian state TV says the leaders of the ruling National Democratic party have resigned, including the president's son, Gamal Mubarak, and the secretary-general of the party, Safwat el-Sharif. The new secretary-general of the party is Hossam Badrawi, seen as a member of the liberal wing of the party, Reuters reports.
One of the new leaders of the party, Mohammed Kamal, told AP: "It's a good change. It reflects the mood of change that is sweeping the country."
Egyptian state television has announced that Mubarak has resigned as head of the ruling party.
Two of al-Jazeera's journalists in Cairo have been released a day after they were detained by the Egyptian authorities.
The release of Cairo bureau chief, Abdelfattah Fayed, and another journalist, Mohammed Fawi, comes a day after the news channel said its offices in the Egyptian capital had been burned and destroyed by "gangs of thugs", Reuters reports.
Al-Jazeera continues to operate in the country and can be seen by Egyptians via satellite feeds. It is also being aired on a giant screen in Tahrir Square.
More on that explosion in a church in Rafah. Egyptian security officials said the blast was caused by a bomb but the building was empty and there were no casualties. The attackers escaped, taking with them a cross from outside the church, AP reports.
Egypt's army is working with the west to remove Mubarak from power in return for keeping its influence over the country's political system, Reuters reports.
Robert Springborg, professor of national security affairs at the US Naval Postgraduate School, said the army was manipulating the situation by dragging out a resolution of the crisis.
He said the army's aim was to focus the anger of the uprising against Mubarak rather than the military.
More on the report that Mubarak has resigned as head of the ruling party. An NDP party official told Reuters he could not confirm the report by al-Arabiya television. But the official added that if this was the case it would not affect his position as president.
"These are two different positions," the official told Reuters.
• Egyptian army tanks and soldiers have attempted to take control of parts of Tahrir Square in central Cairo, where thousands of people are still holding protests against the government.
• Senior leaders of the ruling National Democratic party have resigned and Hossam Badrawi, seen by some as a liberal, has been appointed as its new secretary-general.
• Protest leaders are to meet with vice-president Omar Suleiman to discuss their demands and a transition of power.
• Mubarak has held talks with key finance ministers and officials in an effort to revive the economy, which has been hit by the continuing political unrest.
• The US secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, has signalled the Obama administration's support for Egypt's vice-president Omar Suleiman leading a transition of power.
• There was an explosion at a gas terminal in northern Sinai this morning, setting off a fire that could be seen dozens of miles away. Officials blamed the blast on saboteurs.
Reuters has more about the army's action today inside Tahrir Square, reporting that a commander tried to persuade the thousands of protesters to leave.
"You all have the right to express yourselves but please save what is left of Egypt. Look around you," Hassan al-Roweny said.
"We need to clear the road in the square, we need traffic to flow again through Tahrir. The people can stay in Tahrir, but not on the road. We want people to go back to work and to get paid, and life to get back to normal."
The move does not appear to have impressed those demonstrators interviewed by the news agency though. Omar Rayes, a 15-year-old student, said: "The regime is playing the economic card. They're saying people are losing money, not getting their pay, etc. Yes, there are losses but that's the price we have to pay for three decades of passivity."
Here's a link to the Guardian's online gallery of today's protests in Cairo. I'm signing off for today but live coverage will continue throughout the evening.
Hello, Alex Olorenshaw here with further coverage of the protests.
Egyptian state television has retracted its report that Mubarak had resigned as head of Egypt's ruling party.
Jack Shenker has received word that Tamer Wageeh, who works for BBC Monitoring, has been detained by the army by the Cinema Rivoli on 26th July street in central Cairo.
The resignation of Gamal Mubarak from Egypt's ruling party was a positive step, an Obama administration official has said. The official told Reuters:
Tamer Wageeh – from BBC Monitoring – is reportedly now safe.
Reuters and the BBC report that the US's special envoy for Egypt has said Hosni Mubarak must stay in power for the time being to steer changes needed for political transition.
"We need to get a national consensus around the pre-conditions for the next step forward. The president must stay in office to steer those changes," Frank Wisner told the Munich Security Conference.
More from Frank Wisner, via AP:
The BBC has interviewed Maged Botros, an NDP policy committee member:
Greece has announced that the prime minister, George Papandreou, has cancelled his planned visit to Egypt tomorrrow, AP reports.
Papandreou said yesterday he would visit Egypt to deliver a message from the European Union to Mubarak.
A Greek government statement says that Papandreou has postponed his planned visit because of developments in Egypt. No alternate date for the visit has been set.
Here's the most recent report from Tahrir Square by the Human Rights Watch team in Egypt. Heba Morayef writes:
Morayef finishes: "These are momentous and unprecedented days for Egypt, and every day brings new surprises." You can read the entire post here.
France suspended exports of arms and tear gas to Egypt late last month, AP reports.
European Union foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton has defended the EU and herself against criticism that the EU was slow and timid in its response to events in Egypt, AP reports.
A senior Hamas commander returned to the Gaza Strip today after breaking out of a Cairo jail during the protests, Reuters reports, quoting sources in Hames.
The sources said Ayman Nofal had been arrested in the Egyptian Sinai in early 2008. According to Egyptian media, he had been armed and was suspected of hunting members of Fatah who had fled from neighbouring Gaza.
Hossam el-Hamalawy, an Egyptian journalist based in Cairo, has posted this video on his blog of makeshift hospitals set up by protesters.
John McCain, who attended the security conference in Munich, has underlined what he sees as the need for Mubarak to go quickly, reports AP.
Egyptian journalist Hossam el-Hamalawy has posted this picture of protesters around Omar Makram mosque in Tahrir Square today.
Amnesty International has called for an investigation into the detention of 35 human rights activists and journalists who were freed after spending almost two days in military custody.
Reuters has a summary of the strengths of the protest movement and Mubarak and his group:
The protest movement • The protesters have the numbers, for the moment. The movement brought more than one million people onto the streets last Tuesday and its rally in central Cairo on Friday was almost as well attended. The protests have also been massive in provincial cities and towns, especially Alexandria, Suez and the textile town of Mahalla in the Nile Delta. Rallies in favour of Mubarak have been much smaller. They started later and have already started to diminish. But some Egyptians say the government has made enough concessions and the protests should end. Many say they are tired of the disruption and losses the protests have caused. • The opposition has widespread international sympathy, enhanced by the reputation it has earned for non-violence. A crucial phase in the battle for public opinion came when Mubarak supporters attacked the protesters on Wednesday and tried to expel them from the square with rocks, petrol bombs and gunshots. The protesters are searched for weapons when they enter Tahrir Square and have to defend themselves with whatever they can find there. • The protesters have a promise from the army that it will not shoot them. Although the army's role has been mysterious and ambiguous, most do at least trust the army to keep that promise. • Foreign governments, the United Nations and international rights groups have upheld their right to demonstrate peacefully and is watching the Egyptian government's behaviour carefully. Any attempt to disperse the Tahrir Square protests by force would lead to condemnation and international isolation. • The opposition has the momentum, again for the moment. Mubarak and others in government have made a succession of concessions and gestures, the most important of which was Mubarak's announcement that he will not stand for re-election when his current term runs out in September. The core protesters have held fast to the demand that Mubarak must leave. Mubarak and his group • Mubarak is supreme commander of the armed forces, which has more than 450,000 men and a vast arsenal of weapons. But so far the army has done little to help his cause, other than to protect government buildings. It has sometimes restricted access to Tahrir Square but not in a way that severely hampers the protest movement's activities. The army has urged the protesters to go home but the protesters has ignored it. No outsiders can readily judge whether the army command might at some stage press Mubarak to give up and resign. • The police forces, especially the Central Security riot police force, are in serious disarray after withdrawing from the streets on Jan. 28. Vice President Omar Suleiman has said it will take months to restore their capabilities. But if the confrontation drags on, some police units could return as a force in Mubarak's favour. • Mubarak remains president of the ruling National Democratic Party (NDP) but the party is immensely unpopular and many of its offices have been ransacked or burned. In practice, the party is not a very significant asset. • Mubarak still controls the state media, which have proved one of his most loyal tools, broadcasting a stream of propaganda in his favour. But many Egyptians now have access to a wide range of satellite television channels that the government cannot control. The Qatari channel Al Jazeera played an important part in keeping Egyptians informed but the government has now made it more difficult to receive. • The popular uprising has alarmed many Egyptians, including some prosperous middle-class people, those who benefited from the old system and some Coptic Christians who fear the inclusion of the Muslim Brotherhood in political life. But those people are unlikely to come out in the streets for the moment. • Mubarak has support and sympathy from right-wing leaders in countries such as Israel, Italy and Saudi Arabia. On Saturday the United States shifted its position significantly, saying that Mubarak should stay on for some time to supervise political change - not very different from Mubarak's position. But foreign connections are a political liability for both sides.
Here's a selection of comment and analysis from the media:
• Abdullah Al-Arian, writing for al-Jazeera, notes how Egypt's foreign policy has been a focal point for demonstrators on top of domestic grievances.
• Landon Thomas Jr in the New York Times looks at how Turkey could provide some valuable lessons for Egyptian reformers.
• The Washington Post has asked a panel of experts what should happen in Egypt after Mubarak leaves.
• James Zogby has written a comment piece for the Huffington Post that is heavily critical of US politicians and their "string of comments, some bizarre, others dangerous".
Anne Gearan has written an analysis piece for AP in which she notes that "Obama's attempt to give his most important Arab ally a firm shove off the world stage marked a full turn from his cautious appeals for calm and restraint one week ago".
An al-Jazeera reporter in Alexandria has just appeared on al-Jazeera English. He said resolve in the city was still very high, with many people (not just protesters) blaming the 12 or so days of economic stagnation on the government. He added that there was "a very wide and vivid understanding" of the situation – even among those who haven't taken to the streets.
The vision remained, he said, of Mubarak's resignation, the dissolution of both houses of parliament, and changes to the constitution.
He signed off by relaying a chant on the streets of Alexandria directed to the army: "Come on army, tell us what's your decision. Freedom awaits you."
An official Egyptian government source has denied reports (carried by Fox News – see the 11:35am post) that vice-president Omar Suleiman was the subject of an assassination attempt.
Another press release outlines Mubarak's new appointments to the NDP, including:
The BBC has a quote from US state department spokesman PJ Crowley, clarifying Frank Wisner's comments:
It was either a diplomatic gaffe or Wisner was just expressing his own view, says the BBC's man in Washington, Tom Burridge.
I've just spoken with Ahmed Salah and Omar Robbie Hamilton, both of whom spent the day in Tahrir Square.
They described how the army made it much harder for protesters to enter the square today. It took Ahmed three hours and Omar half an hour to enter. Omar said the process normally takes no more than five minutes, but that today the army were "very slow and aggressive".
Despite this, the turnout was high, and according to Ahmed "people are absolutely ready to stay there for however long it takes".
Here's an article by Chris McGreal for tomorrow's Observer. It features a number of interviews with protesters, who are "steeled by an ever more certain sense of victory after a week in which they have warded off the regime's bloody efforts to break their demands for freedom".
Mohamed ElBaradei has told Reuters that US support for Mubarak or Suleiman to lead Egypt's transition would be a "major setback".
ElBaradei also said he feared the demonstrations could become "more angry and more vicious" if Mubarak holds onto power.
The Huffington Post has a video of "what appears to be a protester shot in the streets of Alexandria".
Barack Obama called leaders from Germany, Britain and the United Arab Emirates today to discuss the situation in Egypt and the need for political change there, Reuters reports. The White House said:
Obama also voiced "his serious concern about the targeting of journalists and human rights groups, and reaffirmed that the government of Egypt has a responsibility to protect the rights of its people and to release immediately those who have been unjustly detained".
More from the Reuters interview with ElBaradei:
"To hear ... that Mubarak should stay and lead the process of change, and that the process of change should essentially be led by his closest military adviser [Suleiman], who's not the most popular person in Egypt, without the sharing of power with civilians, it would be very, very disappointing.
ElBaradei said he did not think the demonstrations were running out of steam, though he worried the situation could get bloodier. "There is of course a little fatigue everywhere," he said, adding that there was a "hard core" of demonstrators who would not give up as long as Mubarak held onto power:
ElBaradei suggested that the United States did not appear to have a clear policy on Egypt:
Here are the stories on the protests from today's Observer:
• Chris McGreal has spoken to a number of protesters in Tahrir Square.
• Peter Beaumont puts events in Egypt into the wider context of upheavals in the Arab world.
• Andrew Rawnsley calls on the west to "cheer, not fear, this cry for freedom".
• And an Observer editorial says the west has a duty to nurture democracy.
Time to wrap up the live blogging for the night. Thanks for reading. We'll have more tomorrow.
In the meantime, here's a recap of the major developments:
• The US has backed Omar Suleiman's call for a process of orderly reform, and disowned a comment made by its special envoy that Mubarak's continued leadership is "crucial" for now.
• Senior leaders of the ruling National Democratic party have resigned and Hossam Badrawi, seen by some as a liberal, has been appointed as its new secretary-general.
• Protest leaders are to meet with vice-president Omar Suleiman to discuss their demands.
• There was an explosion at a gas terminal in northern Sinai this morning, setting off a fire that could be seen dozens of miles away.