Qatar accuses Syrian government of genocide after failed truce
"When the Syrian government announced that it would comply with the truce, it also announced that its military would respond to anything that took place on the ground, and it was clear from this rhetoric that there was no truce," said Al Thani, according to QNA.
"Everyone knows what the solution is and what the Syrian people want. Everything that is happening now is a waste of time and just buying time to kill the Syrian people and to destroy the Syrian infrastructure."
The prime minister said he sensed "a bigger awakening" among Arab nations and in the wider international community over the crisis in Syria, despite moves by Russia and China to block tougher U.N. Security Council action. But, he said, a "paralysis" would prevent action until after the outcome of the U.S. elections.
The report from the VDC, which works closely with the opposition Local Coordination Committees of Syria, put the total civilian toll at 32,013 over some 20 months of violence, with 2,900 government soldiers killed in the same period.
CNN cannot independently confirm reports of violence or casualties as the government has severely restricted the access of international journalists. The numbers reported by the LCC do not include deaths from security forces or the military.
Lavrov said on his own Twitter feed that Russia was disappointed at the lack of support for Brahimi's call for a holiday truce, but that it appreciated his efforts to try to "find potential collaborative ways for the international community" to help stabilize Syria.
"The government says they are fighting terrorists and only terrorists, and that it is their duty to do so -- to protect their people. And the other side says we're fighting a very cruel government that is persecuting us, and we're defending ourselves," Brahimi said after the meeting.
He recalled speaking with a woman who has one son in the Syrian military and another son in the rebel Free Syrian Army. "If that is not civil war, I don't know what is," Brahimi said.