3 U.S. Soldiers Among 8 Dead in a Bombing in Afghanistan
KABUL, Afghanistan — Three American and four Afghan soldiers and an interpreter were killed Tuesday morning in Wardak Province after an insurgent riding a donkey detonated a bomb in one of the most hotly contested districts in the country, officials said.
The attack occurred around 8:30 a.m. as the Americans and Afghans were conducting a joint patrol in a violent stretch of Sayadabad District, close to the main highway leading to Kabul, the capital. At least three more American soldiers were wounded in the bombing, which the Taliban claimed responsibility for.
Although casualties among members of the international military coalition have decreased this year as the Afghans have taken the lead in fighting across the country, commanders have remained concerned about troop vulnerability as the fighting season and withdrawal operations have coincided.
Wardak in particular has been troubled this year, as insurgents focus their energy on planning and executing attacks in neighboring Kabul. The province is a crucial channel to the capital for weapons and explosives smuggled by the Taliban.
Aside from the violent environment, Wardak has become a center of political tension between the government and coalition forces operating in the area. After at least 17 Afghan villagers who had been detained by an American Special Forces unit in Nerkh District disappeared and were later found dead, with evidence of torture, President Hamid Karzai temporarily barred such elite troops from operating in the province.
American officials say they have conducted three investigations into the matter and have cleared their troops of responsibility in any torture or killing in Nerkh. But they have refused to offer further explanation of what might have happened to the dead men, even as local Afghan civilians have focused on the role of Afghan irregulars who often accompanied the Americans. The Afghan government, which has conducted its own investigation, has detained a former interpreter for the American team, Zakariah Kandahari, who is accused of participating in the torture and killings.
Much like Nerkh, Sayadabad District is a highly contested area, fought over by government forces, the Taliban and sometimes other militants. It runs along the main highway southwest of Kabul, on a crucial transportation route that essentially circles the country. Last year, suicide attackers targeted a base in the area, killing at least a dozen Afghans and wounding nearly 60. A similar attack occurred near the base a year earlier.