U.N. monitors arrive in Syria as killings continue
The first members of a U.N. monitoring team have arrived in Syria, a U.N. spokesman said early Monday, four days after a so-called cease-fire that is showing serious signs of collapse.
"They will be liaising with the Syrian government, security forces and the opposition members to establish the monitoring process across the country," Dwyer said.
The 15-member council approved the deployment of an advance team of 30 monitors meant to pave the way for a larger group of up to 250 observers, calling on Syria to provide them unimpeded freedom of movement. The remaining 24 members of the advance team will arrive in Damascus in the coming days, Dwyer said.
The second, larger deployment rests on how the cease-fire holds and whether discussions between Syria and U.N.-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan can make headway to quell the bloodshed.
Bouthaina Shaaban, a Syrian government spokeswoman and presidential adviser, said Sunday that the "length of work of the observers and their movement will be determined in coordination with the government of Syria." A protocol agreement on the observers' mission will need to be signed before the larger group is allowed to come, she said, according to a transcript on the website of state-run Al Dunya TV.
"Syria cannot be responsible for their security unless it participates and coordinates all the steps on the ground," she said.
In addition, "one bomb is being shelled every 10 minutes from the military academy, aiming at al-Wair neighborhood in Homs," said the Local Coordination Committees of Syria, a network of opposition activists.
The state-run Syrian Arab News Agency blamed "armed terrorists" for violating the cease-fire, quoting an unnamed military official's assessment that the groups "have hysterically escalated their aggressions on the army, the law enforcement forces and the civilians."
The Syrian regime has consistently blamed the violence in the country on such groups, but many world leaders have said the government is lethally cracking down on dissidents seeking democracy and an ouster of President Bashar al-Assad, whose family has ruled Syria for 42 years.
Though critics called the Security Council's resolution underwhelming, the U.N. ambassador from Russia -- whose country has previously blocked the council's resolutions -- reminded those strident for action in Syria that the text requires all sides to put down their weapons.
He also said that his government has been discouraged by a lack of objective information and has called on Syria to allow in international journalists.
Until Saturday, Russia and China -- which both have major trade ties with Syria -- had blocked Security Council attempts to pass resolutions condemning the al-Assad government. While the two countries have said they want an end to the violence, both have argued that previous resolutions were not even-handed.
U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Susan Rice welcomed Saturday's long-awaited resolution, but said the United States was "under no illusions" about its immediate effect.
The United Nations estimates at least 9,000 people have died since the protests began, while others put the death toll at more than 11,000.