ISIS bury 45 of their own fighters ALIVE after they fled the battlefield
ISIS terror thugs buried its own fighters alive because they fled the battlefield, it has been reported.
Furious commanders ordered the savage execution after the 45 men retreated from combat against forces loyal to Syrian tyrant Bashar al-Assad.
A source in Nineveh Province told IraqiNews.com : "ISIS had buried its members, who escaped from al-Bashir battles, inside one grave in Qayyarah vicinity in Nineveh Province.
The source, who spoke on condition of anonymity, added, "ISIS buried these members after escaping from Qasbet Bashir battles in southern Kirkuk."
Read more: Woman executed with AK-47 by Taliban chief
Islamic State may have committed the sickening killing to discourage defectors and those living under their brutal regime from fleeing.
As the terror group loses territory to its opponents and cash due to air strikes on oil infrastructure, many of its fighters have deserted.
Read more: Has ISIS killed another US soldier? National Guardsman dies in Iraq
Last month the jihadists reportedly forced its own terrified men into a forensic freezer and left them to die slowly.
A source said the victims were placed in a forensic medicine freezer in the ISIS stronghold of Mosul for 24 hours.
After slowly dying from the extreme cold their frozen bodies were placed at roads leading into the city to act as a warning to others.
Islamic State often subjects captives to horrific and elaborate execution methods - and films them as part of their sickening propaganda campaign.
Their savage methods include drowning men in a cage in a swimming pool, strapping explosives to the heads of kneeling men connected by wires and burning hostages alive in cages.
Middle East analysts say Islamic State has stepped up its propaganda campaign in recent months because it has made major territorial losses in both Iraq and Syria as it battles rival groups, the Syrian and Iraqi armies, Kurd warriors and the Free Syrian Army.