Turkey threatens military incursion into northern Syria as refugees flee across its borders
The warning came as the Arab Red Crescent predicted that as many as 500,000 Syrian civilians could seek refuge in Turkey as government forces widened an offensive in the border province of Idlib, a stronghold of the rebel Free Syrian Army.
Turkey has said in the past that a fresh surge of refugees would make it necessary to create a safe area within Syrian territory to protect civilians.
Besir Atalay, Turkey's deputy prime minister, on Thursday said the move, which was considered but rejected last year, was again being contemplated.
Giving impetus to renewed calls for some kind of limited military intervention, Syrian human rights activists claimed that 23 mutilated corpses had been discovered near the city of Idlib, which fell to President Bashar al-Assad's forces earlier this week.
The victims, who had been blindfolded and handcuffed before being shot, bore the marks of "extreme torture", the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said.
The killings were the latest in a series of alleged atrocities that have seen dozens of civilians, often from the same families, executed in recent days. Opposition activists say the practice is part of a new strategy of government terror aimed at emptying towns and villages known to have harboured rebels in the past.
As the uprising against Mr Assad entered its second year yesterday, 200 human rights groups joined together to urge Russia and China to back UN action against Syria. Both states have vetoed UN Security Council resolutions seeking to resolve the crisis in Syria, arguing that they unfairly singled out the government for blame. At the same time, Russia has continued to supply the Assad regime with arms.
"City after city, town after town, Syria's security forces are using their scorched earth methods while the Security Council's hands remain tied by Russia and China," said Sarah Leah Whitson of Human Rights Watch, one of the groups that issued the demand.
"One year on, the Security Council should finally stand together and send a clear message to Assad that these attacks should end."
The Syrian Observatory said that 9,113 people had died over the uprising's first year, 6,645 of them civilians. It reported 471 rebel deaths and 1,997 soldier and security service fatalities, a figure the government has used to justify its actions.
The regime marked Syria's bloody anniversary by staging shows of loyalty.
In Damascus and other parts of the country where the rebels have not gained a foothold, tens of thousands of people waved Syrian flags and portraits of the president – a sign that Mr Assad continues to enjoy significant public support, particularly outside the country's Sunni Arab majority.
With no sign of Mr Assad's hold on power weakening – despite the defection of a seventh general on Thursday – regional powers are coming under pressure to support the rebels, with Saudi Arabia and Qatar both in favour of supplying them with arms.
Turkey has already given sanctuary to the rebels and plays host to the headquarters of the Free Syrian Army. But despite raising the prospect of a buffer zone within Syria in the past, Turkey would be reluctant to mount a military operation to enforce one without the backing or participation of the Arab League.
Although Mr Atalay said that the issue was now being discussed with Turkey's Arab partners, the depth of support for a buffer zone remains far from clear although progress could be made when the "Friends of Syria" coalition of Western and Arab states meets in Istanbul on April 2nd.