Arab Spring live: Libyan rebels close in on Tripoli
• Libyan rebels want to take Tripoli by end of August attempt • Hague: Syria's Assad is "fast losing the last shreds of legitimacy" • Signs of consternation in Iran, Syria's last ally • Yemen's president vows to return after assassination
21.10 Good night all. For the latest on Libya, Syria and the Arab Spring, visit out World News page or follow us on Twitter, or ideally just do both.
21.07 That's about all for tonight, but before we go, Damien McElroy has filed from Zawiyah, where the action is happening right now in Libya. They have not secured victory yet, and are still having to take on a single sniper who is "tormenting" the rebels.
The death of a woman shot in her front room has only added to the singular mystique of a killer ensconced in high buildings and who is said to have accounted for six of the 12 opposition fighters killed on Monday.
In truth, though, it is not just one man who stands in the way of victory. Zawiyah is a city ready to fall and it appears that Gaddafi forces know their fate and have hit back at the advance with ever more reckless abandon. Grad missiles have rained down on districts seized by rebel troops. Rockets and mortars have stopped ground advances in other disputed territories.
20.50 More from Hillary Clinton. She says that it is not enough for the US to call on Assad to go. The world needs Turkey and Saudi Arabia to lead the calls.
It's not going to be any news if the United States says Assad needs to go.
If Turkey says it, if King Abdullah (of Saudi Arabia) says it, if other people say it, there's no way the Assad regime can ignore it.
20.47 Syrian troops have reportedly pulled out of the flashpoint protest city of Deir al-Zor, capping a 15-day operation to expel "terrorists", as they put it.
Hundreds of residents sprinkled troops with rice and flowers - in a traditional Arab greeting - as they withdrew from the city in a military convoy bearing a banner that read "Soldiers of Assad", according to an AFP reported who is on a government-sponsored tour.
20.40 Gaddafi regime officials are confident that they will have taken Tripoli by the end of August, with the US saying Gaddafi's days are "numbered". Richard Spencer reports.
20.30 Richard Spencer has more on the UK condemning Syria's Latakia assault, and reports that raking machine gun fire has been used on protesters
There were even signs of consternation in Syria's last remaining ally, Iran.
An opposition website in Tehran linked to the "Green Movement" claimed that the Iranian ambassador to Damascus was seeking to pull out, citing an unnamed diplomat who said that embassy staff were concerned about violent retribution for Iran's backing of President Assad if he were toppled.
20.00 Libya's rebel leader has promised to hand over power to an elected assembly within eight months of the collapse of Gaddafi's regime.
The NTC will continue for no more than eight months... This (transition) period is needed to establish stability... it will not exceed eight months, maybe it will be much less. After which Libyans will be called upon to elect a national congress.
19.25 Beji Caid Essebsi, Tunisia's interim prime minister, will address the nation on Thursday on upcoming elections after police clashed with protesters decrying a lack of political reforms. He will list an "inventory" of reforms and "draw the roadmap" ahead of elections, due on October 23.
18.53 Hillary Clinton, the US Secretary of State, has defended the Obama administration's approach to Libya and Syria, telling a military audience that although the US remain's the world's strongest leader, it does not always mean it should act alone or with brute force.
I think this is smart power, where it is not just brute force, it is not just unilateralism.
It is being smart enough to say you know what we want a bunch of people signing out of the same hymn book and we want them singing a song of universal freedom, human rights, democracy, everything that we have stood for and pioneered over 235 years.
18.33 The UN envoy on Libya has reportedly flown out of Tunisia, according to airport sources speaking to AFP. Abdul Ilah al-Khatib's visit has caused a lot of confusion over the status of negotiations. He said he had met representatives of the NTC and the Gaddafi regime, but claimed they were "not part of official negotiations".
17.37 The Daily Telegraph's Richard Spencer asks whether this is the endgame for the Gaddafi regime?
Rebel leaders claim the war in Libya could be over by the end of the month.
That is probably too optimistic, but it is undeniable that they are in their best position to enforce victory since the early days of the uprising in February.
Then, Col Gaddafi made a key decision that turned the tide in his favour – unlike neighbouring dictatorships in Tunisia and Egypt, he would not flinch from the use of force.
Now he has nowhere to turn. His closest aides and family have stuck by him, but political figures are deserting him one by one and his apparatus is being slowly degraded by Nato bombing and defeat on the ground.
17.10 Philip J Crowley, who was until recently Hillary Clinton's spokesman at the US State Department (as well as a prolific tweeter), muses on the contrasts between the Iraq government changing and the new regime in Egypt. He is referring to yesterday's move by the Egyptian courts to no longer televise Hosni Mubarak's trial.
@PJCrowley A new #Iraqi government televised #Saddam's trial while #Egypt's old guard has pulled the #Mubarak trial off the air. A telling contrast.
17.03 Jomana Karadsheh, from CNN, who is covering the Arab uprisings, tweets that an NTC spokesman in the west has said Zawiya is not yet in complete control of the rebels.
16.59 William Hague, the Foreign Secretary, has said that Syria's President Assad is "fast losing the last shreds of legitimacy", adding that "Now is the time for President Assad to act".
16.44 Leon Panetta, the US defence secretary, said Col Gaddafi's days appear to be numbered, in an apparent reference to reports the interior minister Nasser al-Mabruk Abdullah had defected.
Gaddafi's forces are weakened and this latest defection is another example of how weak they've gotten.
I think the sense is that Gaddafi's days are numbered.
16.25 Meanwhile in Jordan, which has escaped the Arab Spring uprisings largely unscathed, has some protests today. About 70 activists are protesting a proposal to build the country's first nuclear reactor in the northern town of Mafraq.
16.21 Libyan rebels have bullishly claimed that the war with Gaddafi has entered a "decisive phase" and victory was within reach by the end of August. Mansur Saif al-Nasr, the NTC's envoy to Paris, claims the rebels not "totally control Zawiyah, which will open the way to Tripoli.
We are entering a decisive phase. Soon we will liberate all of southern Libya. We hope to celebrate the final victory at the same time as the end of (Muslim holy month of) Ramadan.
16.08 The head of Libya's National Transitional Council, Mustafa Abdel Jalil, has said that the rebels are not holding talks with the regime of Gaddafi.
There are no negotiations, either direct or indirect, with the Gaddafi regime.
15.34 The Daily Telegraph's Con Coughlin asks "Is Col Gaddafi about to use chemical weapons against the rebels?" It comes in the wake of reports they have fired their first Scud missile.
We know from high-ranking Libyan defectors that Gaddafi still possesses a quarter of the stockpile of chemical weapons – mainly mustard gas – that he accumulated during the 1990s. US intelligence officials estimate Gaddafi has around ten tons of mustard gas remaining, and one possible way for his forces to fire chemical weapons at rebel forces would be to fit them to the warhead of his stockpile of around 200 Scud missiles.
This was certainly one of the delivery systems that former Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein developed during the period he was known to have chemical weapons, and the only reason he never resorted to this desperate measure was because Washington delivered a stark warning that, if he did so, the US would nuke Baghdad.
15.30 Turkish foreign ministry sources have told Reuters there is no plan to establish a buffer zoneo n the Syrian border, which had been reported earlier by CNN Turk.
The broadcaster reported the news in a rolling headline but gave no source and did not say what form the buffer zone, would take. Turkey has had to deal with an influx of thousands crossing the border. The Telegraph first reported plans to create a military "buffer zone" back in June.
15.25 A Nato spokesman has said that the launch of a Scud missile on rebel positions in Libya by Gaddafi forces, as reported in today's Daily Telegraph, is a "desperate gesture".
15.13 Saleh appeared to be in relatively good health as he spoke from Riyadh. (Twitpic by @AntaReportNews)
15.11 Ahmed Al Omran, a Saudi blogger, was translating Saleh's speech as he went.
15.07 Yemen's president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, has vowed to return to the country soon. Speaking from Saudi Arabia, where he is recovering from an assassination attempt, the wounded leader said he would welcome an election to end the political crisis in Yemen. More as we get it.
14.10 The United Nations' special envoy for Libya says he has met with representatives of both sides in the conflict, but stressed that the talks didn't amount to negotiations as he met the two parties separately.
Abdel-Elah al-Khatib, Jordan's former foreign minister, arrived in the Tunisian capital, Tunis, yesterday and met representatives of both Col Gaddafi and the rebels.
A Tunisian security official suggested al-Khatib might also meet with a representative of Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez, who has been on the Tunisian isle of Djerba for the past days.
12.58 Moscow is "deeply disturbed" by Nato's air campaign against Libya and may ask for a UN investigation into Libyan claims that 85 children were killed in a bomb blast in the town of Majer, according to a senior Russian official quoted on AP.
They said attacks on nonmilitary targets such as the main TV station and Tripoli airport "call into question" NATO's ability to implement the resolution that authorized the use of force to protect civilians.
11.56 A little more detail is emerging about an series of execution killings that formed part of a wave of violence that swept across 14 Iraqi cities yesterday. Gunmen in military uniforms pulled seven people from a Sunni mosque just south of Baghdad, dragged them into the raod and shot them.
After the killings, the gunmen shouted they were fighters from the Islamic State of Iraq, a front group for al-Qaida in Iraq. Around 70 people were killed in attacks across the country.
11.44 Shashank Joshi, Associate Fellow at the Royal United Services Institute, says that the Libyan regime's use of a Scud missile is "an obvious sign that the regime's back is to the wall".
11.24 Heavy machine gun fire is continuing in the Syrian Mediterranean port of Latakia, which is the target of a naval offensive by government forces.
10.01 AFP is reporting that 23 tribesman have been killed in Yemen in clashes with troops loyal to President Ali Abdullah Saleh, according to a tribal source.
09.55 Iran has said there could be "no justification" for Western intervention in Syria, its neighbour and ally. Foreign ministry spokesman Ramin Mehmanparast said:
The events in Syria are its internal affair and there is no justification for any foreign intervention as it can only create many problems. Western leaders, especially Americans, are used to interfering in the internal affairs of countries and using any pretext to march with their military forces and occupy the country.
Yesterday, Rob Crilly revealed that Iranian snipers had been sent to Syria to support the regime.
09.36 Reuters have an interesting round up of what's running in the Iranian papers. A few of the stories:
• Iran's aerospace organisation is training monkeys to send into low orbit soon in the "Kavoshgar-5" spacecraft in preparation for a manned space mission.
• More than 10 people commit suicide every day in Iran, the coroner's office said in a report.
• "The parliament's reformist block is akin to a safety match," said lawmaker Ali Motahari alluding to their political impotence in parliament.
09.30: Syria is coming under sharp Arab and international condemnation for the Latakia crack down and reports that 5,000 Palestinians have fled the Latakia camp:
Palestine Liberation Organisation secretary general Yasser Abed Rabbo said the attack on Ramel was "part of the crimes against humanity" targeting Palestinians and Syrians alike.
08.52: This YouTube video purports to show Saleh Ibrahim at Djerba airport after having defected. The account appears to belong to supporters of the Lbiyan rebels but we haven't been able to independently verify it.
08.51: Reports on Twitter that a plane left Tripoli overnight for Djerba in Tunisia. It was allegedly carrying Saleh Ibrahim, the man behind the killing behind killing of WPc Fletcher:
Libyan plane lands in Djerba arriving from Tripoli airport, unknown who is on it yet, will continue to follow... #Feb17 #Libya
08.40: An international panel investigating Bahrain's unrest closed its office this morning after angry crowds scuffled with staff members following reports that government officials would be cleared of committing abuses against protesters seeking greater rights.
08.36: Turkey has renewed its calls for Assad to end the attack. Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu said at a news conference in Ankara:
This is our final word to the Syrian authorities, our first expectation is that these operations stop immediately and unconditionally.
If these operations do not stop, there will be nothing left to say about the steps that would be taken.
08.29 Syrian tanks opened fire on poor Sunni districts in Latakia on Tuesday, residents said, the fourth day of a military assault on the northern port city. A resident told Reuters by phone:
Heavy machinegun fire and explosions were hitting al-Raml al-Filistini (home to Palestinian refugees) and al-Shaab this morning. This subsided and now there is the sound of intermittent tank fire.
08.22: Amateur video posted online is claimed to show the Syrian army bombarding a Palestinian refugee camp in the port city of Latakia:

08.16: A Spanish diplomat said of the talks in Damascus last month:
My impression is Syria is not going to make any important concessions. They are a long way from reality.
08.12: It has emerged that Bernadino León, a close aide to José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, the Spanish prime minister, went to Damascus in a secret mission to hold talks with Mr Assad, offering him and his family political asylum if he agrees to give up power.
08.00: Welcome to the Telegraph live blog on events in the Middle East. Libyan rebels are looking to consolidate their gains. In Syria, Bashar-al-Assad is expected to continue his assault of the port town of Latakia as it emerges he has rejected a Spanish plan for him to hand over power peacefully.
Egypt, Libya and Syria: as it happened August 15