WATCH: Palestinian girls with scissors stab elderly Arab man in Jerusalem
A security camera on Monday morning caught two Palestinian teenage girls armed with scissors carrying out a terror attack near Mahane Yehuda market in central Jerusalem.
The video footage shows the 14- and 16-year-old girls slashing at passersby before police approach the scene with guns drawn.
In the video, a man opens fire on one of the girls as she lunges at him. Then a uniformed man, who according to reports was a policeman, arrives and fires on the other girl, who collapses against the wall just as someone tries to hit her with a plastic chair.
Get The Times of Israel's Daily Edition by email and never miss our top stories Free Sign Up
One of the men then appears to kicks something out of the hand of one of the girls before returning to the other girl, who at this point is lying on the ground, and appears to fire at her again.
The 16-year-old assailant died at the scene and the 14-year-old was detained, a police spokesperson said. She was taken to an Israeli hospital in critical condition.
Police identified the Palestinian attackers as cousins from northern Jerusalem, Hadil and Nurhan Awad.
One of their victim was identified as a 70-year-old Palestinian resident of Bethlehem, who sustained stab wounds to his upper body. A second person, a 27-year-old guard, was lightly hurt by shrapnel from gunfire against the attackers, police said. Both were taken to a local hospital for treatment.
Hadil Awad was the sister of Mahmoud Awad, who died in November 2013 at the age of 24. He had been shot in the back of his neck with a rubber bullet by an IDF soldier eight months earlier during a protest near the Qalandiya checkpoint.
Several attackers in the weeks-long wave of violence have been named as Palestinian teens and adolescents. On Sunday, ministers approved a move to allow assailants under 14 years of age to be charged under the law.
In a separate terror attack hours later, an Israeli man was killed in a stabbing attack at a gas station on Route 443 in the West Bank, close to the central town of Modiin.
Two others were hurt in the attack and evacuated to the Shaare Zedek Medical Center in Jerusalem for treatment. The Palestinian assailant was shot and killed by Israeli soldiers in the area, Channel 2 reported.
Judah Ari Gross and Ilan Ben Zion contributed to this report