India hits Pakistan back with surgical strikes across Line of Control, 38 killed
New Delhi: Director General Military Operations (DGMO), Ranbir Singh salutes after the Press Conferences along with External Affairs Spokesperson Vikas Swarup, in New Delhi on Thursday. India conducted Surgical strikes across the Line of Control in Kash
The Indian Army today said it has conducted surgical strikes on terror launch pads across the Line of Control (LoC) in Pakistan, killing several terrorists and causing significant casualties to their hideouts.
Opinion: Indian Army's surgical strikes should make Pakistan think twice before trying another Uri
"The Army has conducted surgical strikes on terror launch pads on the LoC and significant casualties have been caused. The motive of this operation was to hit out at the terrorists who were planning to infiltrate into our territory," Director General of Military Operation (DGMO) Lt General Ranbir Singh said today in a joint press conference with officials from the Ministry of External Affairs.
The Army said special commandos crossed the LoC last night, conducted the operation in the Pakistan-Occupied Kashmir (PoK) and returned to the Indian side without any casualty. The Air Force was not involved in the surgical strike. The Army has claimed to have killed at least 38.
Also Read: Claims denied: How Pakistan media is treating India's surgical strike
The entire operation was monitored for the entire night by Defence Minister Manohar Parrikar, Army chief General Dalbir Singh Suhag, National Security Advisor Ajit Doval from the Army headquarters in New Delhi.
It was because of this operation that Parrikar and Doval had cancelled their dinner on Wednesday night with the Coast Guard commanders.
Minutes after India announced on Thursday that it carried out surgical strikes across the LoC on Wednesday night, Sharif denounced what he called was an "unprovoked and naked aggression" by Indian forces.
Radio Pakistan quoted him as saying that the Indian operation led to the death of two Pakistani soldiers.
"Our intent for peaceful neighbourhood should not be mistaken as our weakness as our valiant forces are fully capable of defending the territorial integrity of our country," the Prime Minister said.
He said Pakistan can "thwart any evil design made to undermine the sovereignty of Pakistan".
READ| Nawaz Sharif calls for peace, then praises terrorist in UN speech
"I spoke to the Pakistan DGMO and shared our concerns. I told him that we conducted surgical strikes last night," Lt Gen Singh said.
The Pakistani Army has also admitted that two of its soldiers were killed in an exchange of fire with Indian forces across the LoC in Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir today.
Earlier today, India responded to unprovoked ceasefire violation by Pakistan on LOC with punitive strikes. Two Pakistani soldiers have been killed in Indian firing.
India had on Tuesday announced that it was pulling out of the SAARC summit scheduled to be held in Islamabad in November after the September 18 cross-border terror attack on an Indian Army base in Uri, Jammu and Kashmir that claimed the lives of 18 Indian soldiers.
PM Modi had said that the Uri attack would not go unavenged. 
10 terrorists gunned down in Uri after Pakistan violates ceasefire again
Days after Uri attack, suspicious bag found near Army unit in Pathankot
Tension between India and Pakistan escalated since the recent attack on an Indian Army camp in Uri in Kashmir which left 19 soldiers dead.
Here is how Pakistan reacted to the attack by Indian Army.
Nawaz Sharif after India's surgical strike: Don't take our peaceful intent for weakness Moments after Indian Army claimed that it has conducted surgical strikes across LoC, Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was the first to condemn it. He asserted that Pakistan too is ready with its 'defence'. Radio Pakistan quoted him as saying that the Indian operation led to the death of two Pakistani soldiers.
"Our intent for peaceful neighbourhood should not be mistaken as our weakness as our valiant forces are fully capable of defending the territorial integrity of our country," the Prime Minister said.
He said Pakistan can "thwart any evil design made to undermine the sovereignty of Pakistan".
How Pakistan media is treating India's surgical strike After the Indian Army's statement made it to the news, Pakistani media started updating their pages, showing that Pakistani army is denying the claims of Indian Army's surgical strikes.
Watch: All you need to know about the Indian Army's surgical strikes
Sushma Swaraj slammed Pakistan at UNGA In a short but sharp rebuke to Pakistan Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif's speech at the United Nations General Assembly, External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj said that Kashmir belongs to India, and Pakistan must stop dreaming about claiming it.
"Jammu and Kashmir belongs to India, stop dreaming about claiming Kashmir," said Sushma Swaraj while addressing the UN General Assembly.
"Terrorism is the biggest violation of human rights. Those criticising India for violating human rights, should first work on their own shortcomings," Swaraj said in her speech at UNGA.
Pitching the idea of working together against terrorism Swaraj said, "We will have to keep aside obligations and differences and work together to fight terrorism. We cannot win the war on terrorism with blame game. Terror strikes across the world is a reminder of where we fall short in countering terrorism."
Uri attack: India shows evidence by identifying handlers, summons Pak envoy Abdul Basit Earlier in the week, India summoned Pakistani High Commissioner to Delhi Abdul Basit to give him proof of the cross-border origins of the Uri attackers, who killed 19 Indian soldiers earlier this month.
Foreign Secretary S Jaishankar termed the continuing cross-border terror attacks from Pakistan against India as unacceptable as he presented details of the "handlers" behind the Uri army camp attack.
The attackers came from Muzaffarabad, which is the capital of the Pakistan-Occupied Kashmir (PoK), Swarup told Basit as he gave the details of the guides and handlers who helped the four terrorists, who were also killed in the Uri attack.
Modi calls Islamabad sole exporter of terrorism Prime Minister Narendra Modi earlier gave a strong message to Pakistan, blaming it for exporting terrorism across the globe and impeding economic progress in Asia.
The prime minister said, "We often hear that 21st century will be the century of Asia. Every single country is striving to make 21st century the century of Asia except one. That one country is working to deny Asia this opportunity. It is conspiring to make Asia bloodied by using terrorism."
He further said, "Only one country is exporting terrorism everywhere. It's not a question about India only. This country is exporting terrorism to Afghanistan, Bangladesh and rest of the world."
Watch- Former Army Chief Bikram Singh to India Today: Surgical strikes will force Pakistan to start behaving
NIA registers FIR in Uri terror attack, seizes GPS and ammunition from slain terrorists
India slams Pakistan at UN after Uri attack, rakes up human rights violations in Balochistan