Syria: Bashar al-Assad's brother Maher 'loses leg'
A diplomat told the Reuters news agency that Maher lost a leg during an explosion when the regime's security cabinet was attacked in July.
A Gulf source confirmed the report to Reuters saying: "He lost one of his legs. The news is true." Reports at the time suggested Maher had been injured in the suicide attack which killed Gen Daoud Rajha, the defence minister, Assef Shawkat, Bashar's brother-in-law and Gen Hassan Turkmani, head of government's crisis operations.
Maher al-Assad, the younger brother of the president, has been referred to as the "most feared man in the country", "the Butcher of Dera'a" or "the enforcer". He has not been seen in public since the attack.
As the commander of the elite Fourth Division and Republican guard, he took an active part in supressing the protests in Dera'a last year.
There were also reports that Farouq al-Shara, the vice-president of the regime, had defected, but this was later clarified - it was actually a cousin of Mr al-Shara - Yarab al-Shara.
Earlier today, Laurent Fabius, the French foreign minister, said Bashar al-Assad was"butchering his own people" as Syrian refugees urged Paris to help them fight.
"France's position is clear: we consider Assad to be butchering his own people. He must leave, and the sooner he goes the better," Mr Fabius said in a tent at the UN-run Zaatari refugee camp in northern Jordan, which houses around 6,000 Syrians.
"We are, at the international level, encouraging the Syrians to find a political transition. I stress that a political transition must come soon - this is the obvious solution," he added as dozens of Syrian refugees gathered outside the tent, chanting "Allahu akbar (God is greatest).
President Assad has been battling a 17-month-old uprising against his rule. The United Nations says at least 18,000 people have died in the revolt.
He issued a surprise decree on Thursday appointing three new ministers, state television said, in a reshuffle following the defection of his former premier.
It said Saad Assalam al-Nayef was appointed health minister, replacing Wael al-Halqi, who became prime minister a week ago after his predecessor defected to join the rebellion.
Adnan Abdu as-Sahni was named to the industry ministry and Najem Hamad al-Ahmad to the justice ministry. State television did not elaborate on why their predecessors were removed.