ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
A powerful bomb placed in a briefcase outside the high court in New Delhi has killed at least 11 people and injured 76, a senior official said, prompting the Indian government to put the capital on high alert.
Home secretary RK Singh told local media the explosives were placed in a briefcase at the court's reception area in central New Delhi, where hundreds of people come through every day to attend court cases.
Indian authorities said the Harkat-ul-Jihad Islami (HUJI) militant group - an al Qaeda affiliate with bases in Pakistan and Bangladesh - had sent an email claiming responsibility.
In an email to the National Investigation Agency (NIA), the group called on India to repeal the death sentence of a man convicted in connection with an attack on the Indian parliament in 2001, warning it would otherwise target major courts in the country.
"That mail has to be looked at very seriously because HUJI is a very prominent terrorist group among whose targets India is one," NIA chief SC Sinha told reporters.
The blast came as security stepped up at key locations as parliament is in session and ahead of the anniversary of the September 11, 2001 attacks in the United States.
It also came less than two months after near-simultaneous triple bomb attacks in India's financial hub Mumbai killed 24. No one has claimed responsibility for those attacks.
Television images showed scores of lawyers in black coats running from one of the main gates of the building.
Police cordoned off the area, which is not far from parliament and the prime minister's office.
"This appears to be a bomb explosion and it is at least a medium-intensity bomb," said UK Bansal, who is in charge of internal security at the home ministry.
"The site has been fully secured and Delhi has been put on high alert. Whatever precautions need to be taken are being taken."
"This is a cowardly act of a terrorist nature," he told reporters in Bangladesh, where he is visiting.
"We will never succumb to the pressure of terrorism. This is a long war in which all political parties, all the the people of India, have to stand united so that this scourge of terrorism is crushed."
The blast in the heart of the capital will renew concern about the authorities' ability to prevent attacks, particularly in high-security areas.
Several ambulances took away the injured to a nearby government hospital. Fire trucks were also sent to the scene.
"There was a bomb blast where you enter the court... there was panic everywhere. Now we are on the way to the hospital," witness Kriti Uppal told CNN-IBN.
"It seems to be a very powerful (blast). Seems to be many casualties."
In May, a low-intensity blast outside the same court triggered panic but injured no-one.
Near-simultaneous triple bomb attacks in India's financial capital, Mumbai, in July killed 24 people. Police have yet to identify those behind the attacks.
Pakistani-based militants attacked Mumbai in coordinated assaults that killed 166 people in 2008, raising tensions with nuclear-armed arch rival Pakistan.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard condemned the latest bomb blast, describing the bombing as an act of senseless violence which appears to have been planned to cause a large number of civilian casualties.
Ms Gillard said in a statement Australia extends its sympathy and concern to the government and people of India.
She says India has Australia's full support as it continues to combat terrorism.