Suicide bomber attacks Kabul play about suicide attacks, killing one person
A teenage suicide bomber has targeted a Kabul auditorium packed with people watching a drama condemning suicide attacks, killing a German national, officials say.
Witnesses said the blast, which struck a French cultural centre and wounded 16 people, was initially thought by some patrons to be part of the show.
The attack was the second to strike the Afghan capital in a day, after six Afghan soldiers died when their bus was hit on the outskirts of the city as they rode into work.
The violence, part of a nationwide campaign by Islamist Taliban insurgents to strike at military and civilian targets, came less than three weeks before the year-end deadline for most foreign combat soldiers to withdraw from the country.
Afghan deputy interior minister General Ayoub Salangi said the suspected theatre bomber appeared to be about 17 years old and detonated his explosives inside the venue.
Sher Ahmad, an Afghan rights activist who was at the performance, said: "I heard a deafening explosion ... There were Afghans, foreigners, young girls and young boys watching the show."
He said the blast came during a performance of a new play called Heartbeat: Silence After the Explosion, a condemnation of suicide attacks.
"Pieces of flesh were plastered on the wall," he said.
"There were children and women crying for help, some were running out, some were just screaming."
Taliban spokesman Zabihullah Mujahid said the bomber targeted the event because it was staged "to insult Islamic values and spread propaganda about our jihad operations, especially on suicide attacks".
Amid the confusion immediately following the blast, one person could be heard saying "it's all part of the show" in a video posted on YouTube purporting to be of the attack.
French president Francois Hollande condemned the blast, saying it was an attack on "culture and creativity".
"I condemn the heinous attack that occurred at the French Institute in Afghanistan ... by targeting this place of dialogue, the terrorists are attacking culture and creativity," Mr Hollande said in a statement.
The venue was heavily guarded during the event in the auditorium, said Kabul police chief Abdul Rahman Rahimi, who added that the bomber may have hidden explosives in his underwear to pass through security.
He said the bomber detonated the blast at the top of the auditorium's stairs, which may have prevented higher casualties.
Taliban militants have stepped up a campaign of violence this year to take advantage of uncertainty and weakness besetting Afghanistan's security forces as they prepare to take over the war on the insurgency, now in its 13th year.
Earlier on Thursday, a suicide bomber targeted a bus carrying Afghan army personnel, the defence ministry said, ending a near two-week lull in attacks in the capital.
As well as the six soldiers killed, 11 were wounded.
Dawlat Waziri, deputy spokesman for the Afghan defence ministry, said a bomber on foot targeted the bus in the Tarakhil area of eastern Kabul when the army personnel were on their way to work.
Five Afghan school children were also reported killed in a foreign forces air strike in northern Parwan province, Afghan officials said.
The International Security Assistance Force confirmed an air strike in the area, but said five insurgents were killed.
Civilian casualties caused by air strikes have been one of the most contentious issues of the war, although there are often conflicting claims.