Obama blowing it again in the Middle East
Posted at 10:20 AM ET, 01/28/2011
Jackson Diehl traces the serial missteps of the Obama administration in wrapping its arms around Hosni Mubarak. Diehl urges Obama to correct course: "In fact, U.S. support for a peaceful transition from Mubarak's government to a new democracy could be decisive -- and it is not too late to take the right side."
The signs are not positive that he will do so. Obama proclaimedhis desire for Mubarak to allow that "people have mechanisms in order to express legitimate grievances." But is that a democratic government? Obama is unclear.
Even worse, White House spokesman Robert Gibbs proclaimed: "This isn't a choice between the government and the people of Egypt. This is not about taking sides." Are we indifferent to the outcome?
To top it all off, Joe Biden had this exchange on PBS's News Hour yesterday:
JIM LEHRER: Has the time come for President Mubarak of Egypt to go, to stand aside? JOE BIDEN: No, I think the time has come for President Mubarak to begin to move in the direction that -- to be more responsive to some of the needs of the people out there. These are -- a lot of the people out there protesting are middle-class folks who are looking for a little more access and a little more opportunity. And the two things we have been saying here, Jim, is that violence isn't appropriate and people have a right to protest. And so -- and we think that -- I hope Mubarak, President Mubarak, will -- is going to respond to some of the legitimate concerns that are being raised. JOE BIDEN: I know him fairly well. JIM LEHRER: Have you talked to him about this? JOE BIDEN: I haven't talked to him in the last three days. I -- last time I -- actually, I haven't talked to him in about a month. But I speak to him fairly regularly. And I think that, you know, there's a lot going on across that part of the continent, from Tunisia into -- all the way to Pakistan, actually. And there's -- a lot of these countries are beginning to sort of take stock of where they are and what they have to do. JIM LEHRER: Some people are suggesting that we may be seeing the beginning of a kind of domino effect, similar to what happened after the Cold War in Eastern Europe. Poland came first, then Hungary, East Germany. We have got Tunisia, as you say, maybe Egypt, who knows. Do you smell the same thing coming?
It's hard to conceive of a worse message to convey to the Egyptian people. It seems that the administration certainlyistaking sides: Mubarak's.
In case you thought it not possible, Biden went further:
JIM LEHRER: The word -- the word to describe the leadership of Mubarak and Egypt and also in Tunisia before was dictator. Should Mubarak be seen as a dictator? JOE BIDEN: Look, Mubarak has been an ally of ours in a number of things and he's been very responsible on, relative to geopolitical interests in the region: Middle East peace efforts, the actions Egypt has taken relative to normalizing the relationship with Israel. And I think that it would be -- I would not refer to him as a dictator.
A disgusted Capitol Hill staffer tells me: "You don't need to have an advance degree from Harvard's Kennedy School or, for that matter, even a Webster's to know when a leader suppresses dissent and disallows free elections he may qualify as a dictator." What else would we call a leader who rigs elections, suppresses opposition, denies freedom of speech and freedom of assembly? Our own State Department's human rights report released last March contained this on Egypt:
The government's respect for human rights remained poor, and serious abuses continued in many areas. The government limited citizens' right to change their government and continued a state of emergency that has been in place almost continuously since 1967. Security forces used unwarranted lethal force and tortured and abused prisoners and detainees, in most cases with impunity. Prison and detention center conditions were poor. Security forces arbitrarily arrested and detained individuals, in some cases for political purposes, and kept them in prolonged pretrial detention. The executive branch exercised control over and pressured the judiciary. The government's respect for freedoms of association and religion remained poor during the year, and the government continued to restrict nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). The government partially restricted freedom of expression.
This is another in a series of debacles in the making in the Middle East by the Obama administration. Once more, we are placing the United States on the wrong side of history. Egyptians have amassed for several days in numbers surpassing all expectations. The opportunist Mohamed ElBaradei is rushing back to get ahead of the parade. The New York Times reports:
But at least he understands the momentous events taking place, which is vastly more than one can say for the entirely inept Obama team.