Eight SAS men in undercover mission are seized in Libya - by the rebel forces they went to help
An eight-man SAS team and a junior diplomat were being held by rebels in eastern Libya last night after a bungled mission to put the envoy in touch with them.
The elite unit has been escorting the diplomat through rebel-held territory when they were captured.
The diplomat had intended to pave the way for a more senior British official to establish diplomatic relations with rebel forces.
But the appearance of SAS soldiers alongside the diplomat 'angered Libyan opposition figures who ordered the soldiers to be locked up in a military base', The Sunday Times reported.
The Ministry of Defence said: 'We neither confirm nor deny the story and we do not comment on the special forces.'
Opponents of Libyan leader Colonel Gaddafi are concerned he could use evidence of Western military interference to strength support for his regime.
The diplomat and his armed SAS escorts, who were in civilian clothes, were locked up inside a military base in Benghazi, the largest city held by rebels.
One of the opposition leaders is said to have warned the British government that it should recognise the rebels as Libya's legitimate leaders before attempting to open negotiations.
Sources admitted last night that there was huge embarrassment in Whitehall that the SAS mission had backfired.
But there was confidence the team and the diplomat would be released unharmed within 24 hours.
British service personnel have already been involved in the rescue of British nationals working on oil installations in remote desert camps.
The MOD said yesterday that around 200 troops had been placed on standby to help with the evacuation and humanitarian operations in Libya.
The troops, from the Black Watch 3rd Battalion The Royal Regiment of Scotland, are ready for deployment within 24 hours notice.
It comes after British Foreign Secretary William Hague urged Colonel Gaddafi to put an 'immediate stop' to the use of armed force against his people.
In a statement, he said: 'Given the continued levels of illegitimate violence within Libya we call upon Colonel Gaddafi to put an immediate stop to the use of armed force against the Libyan people.
'He must hand over power without delay to a government that will deliver greater democracy, justice, transparency, human rights and accountability in Libya.
'We understand the desire of Libyans to enjoy the freedoms which have been denied to them for many years and support them in this endeavour.'
Heavy gunfire has been reported in Tripoli this morning as hundreds of pro-Gaddafi supporters flooded the streets.
Libyan authorities claimed the gunfire was to celebrate the recapture of cities such as Ras Lanuf.