Syria suggests it might not withdraw forces by deadline
While insisting the Damascus government has acted in "good faith," Maqdisi put the onus on Annan for the peace plan to proceed -- saying the envoy "has not offered written guarantees to the Syrian government that the armed groups agreed to stop violence, nor has he offered guarantees that Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Turkey will commit to stop funding and arming terrorist groups."
And in a statement on state-run TV, Maqdisi said, "Syria will not repeat what happened during the (Arab League) mission, when it committed to the exit of its armed forces from the cities and surrounding areas, then the armed terrorist groups took advantage to arm its members and conduct all forms of terrorism." The statement referred to an Arab League monitoring mission that took place several months ago.
He described the situation in his country and, specifically, in Idlib province where he is, as "outrageous" -- with people having little food to eat or water to drink and living in constant fear amid countless accounts of "women being raped, houses being burned" and "people being slaughtered."
"There is no life here at all," el-Khalaf said. "There are snipers all over, just waiting for someone to stand on his legs (so they can) shoot him. They don't care whether he is male, female, elderly or child. They shoot for fun."
Some of the worst violence Sunday was in Idlib, where the network reported 28 killed throughout the province (10 if them in the village of Sahel Roh) and that "the village of Bashira was entirely destroyed."
Another 19 died in Homs province and 12 in Hama -- with seven of the people killed there belonging to the same family -- said the LCC. There were also five reported fatalities in Beit Jin outside Damascus, two in Daraa, two in Deir Ezzor and one in Aleppo.
Annan said in a statement Sunday that he was "shocked by recent reports of a surge in violence and atrocities in several towns and villages in Syria, resulting in alarming levels of casualties, refugees and displaced persons, in violation of assurances given to me.
"This is a time when we must all urgently work towards a full cessation of hostilities, providing the space for humanitarian access and creating the conditions for a political process to address the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people," Annan said.
"As we get closer to the Tuesday 10 April deadline, I remind the Syrian government of the need for full implementation of its commitments and stress that the present escalation of violence is unacceptable," he said.
"This regime is trying, as usual, to create obstacles preventing (the application of) any real and effective solution on the ground to stop the bloodshed," said Abu Fares, the political representative of the Homs Revolutionary Council. "... We can't lay (down) our arms because we don't trust this regime."
"We can't drop our guns until the regime withdraws from the cities," said Lt. Abdullah Odah of the Free Syrian Army, the armed Syrian opposition, in Istanbul. "We didn't start the mass murder. The regime started it. It has to stop killing and then automatically we will stop."
Specifically, the LCC said, the regime is attacking villages and farms around the eastern city of Rastan, where fighting a month ago forced out more than 80% of residents. They escaped to the nearby areas but are now coming under attack, the group said Saturday.
"Syrian citizens in all the Syrian provinces on Saturday flocked to the main squares to celebrate the 65th anniversary of the foundation of the Baath Arab Socialist Party," SANA said. "The participants in the rallies expressed the Syrian people, army and leadership's steadfastness in the face of the conspiracy hatched against Syria."
"The truth is we have become used to such massacres. We have seen people beheaded, children killed, bodies torn apart, and nothing surprises us anymore," Saleem said Saturday. "All we could do is pray to all for help and call on the world to intervene."