Egypt protests - as they happened
We're just about to wrap up the live blog here, but we'll finish with a summary of the main points on day seven of the protests in Egypt:
• Opposition leader Mogamed ElBaradei called for President Mubarak to step down at once as demonstrators massed in Cairo's central Tahrir square to ignore a night-time curfew. ElBaradei, who predicted change within "the next few days", said he wanted to negotiate about a new government with the army, which he described as "part of the Egyptian people".
• Western leaders pointedly declined to throw their support behind the country's embattled president. Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, said she wanted Egyptians to have a chance to chart a new future, but added: "It's not a question of who retains power. It's how are we going to respond to the legitimate needs and grievances expressed by the people."
• Al-Jazeera satellite TV was ordered to close because of its coverage of the protests. The channel denounced the move as an attempt to "stifle and repress" open reporting.
• Thousands of prisoners, including Muslim Brotherhood activists, escaped from four jails. Armed gangs took advantage of the chaos in Cairo and other cities to free the prisoners, starting fires and engaging prison guards in gun battles, officials said.
• The death toll over the past six days was reported to have risen to 102.
• Large-scale protests erupted in Alexandria, Egypt's second city, after the funerals of victims of the unrest.
• British nationals in Cairo, Alexandria and Suez were told to leave if it was safe.
• The US said it was organising flights to evacuate its citizens and urged all Americans in Egypt to consider leaving.
We'll be back in the morning with more live coverage. In the meantime, visit guardian.co.uk/world for all the latest. Thanks for reading.
America's highest-ranking military officer has praised the "professionalism" and restraint of Egypt's armed forces, following a phone call with a senior Egyptian commander. Admiral Mike Mullen, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told Lieutenant General Sami Enan, chief of staff of Egypt's armed forces, of his "appreciation for the continued professionalism" of the Egyptian military. "Both men reaffirmed their desire to see the partnership between our two militaries continue, and they pledged to stay in touch," a Pentagon spokesman announced.
Senior judges and scholars from Al-Azhar University are among those lending their support to the late-night demonstrators in Tahrir Square, Al Jazeera TV reports.
According to Egyptian state television, President Hosni Mubarak has promised that his new government will preserve subsidies, control inflation and provide jobs. "I require you to bring back confidence in our economy," Mubarak wrote in a letter to his new prime minister. "I trust your ability to implement economic policies that accord the highest concern to people's suffering."
Amr Shalakany, a law professor at the American University in Cairo, has written a piece for Comment is Free:
US says it is preparing to evacuate thousands of its citizens who want to leave Egypt starting on Monday. Assistant secretary of states Janice Jacobs expects it will take many flights to handle the number of Americans who want to depart.
Downing Street says that David Cameron supports President Obama's call for an "orderly transition" in Egypt. The statement from No 10 said:
Shots sound like they are coming from the east of the city, Peter Beaumont says. Tracer rounds from heavy calibre weapons suggest they are military. Bursts from the direction of the airport and Heliopolis – where the presidential palace is located. Tanks seen moving fast eastwards.
Peter Beaumont in Cairo reports hearing bursts of gunfire from several directions, sounds coming from somewhere far beyond Tahrir Square.
State TV broadcasts pictures of recaptured prisoners as well as Molotov cocktails, machetes and other weapons said to have been taken from demonstrators.
Human Rights Watch's Egypt researcher, Heba Fatma Morayef, says the mood in Tahrir Square is orderly and cooperative:
A White House statement details President Obama's round of phone calls to foreign leaders in Turkey, Israel Saudi Arabia and the UK:
There is feverish speculation regarding the whereabouts of Gamal Mubarak, the president's son who had been groomed for succession. He has not been seen in Egypt for several days. Arab and Iranian websites are claiming that he has fled the country.
Update from an official at the celebrated Egyptian Museum in the centre of Cairo reports that some damage has been done by intruders who broke into the Tutankhamun galleries. He says:
Ian Black, the Guardian's Middle East editor, has filed this on the president's attempted fightback:
Official security sources have announced that the curfew will be extended tomorrow, starting from 3pm local time until 8am on Tuesday. It has been ignored nationwide so far.
Army tank joins in protesters' procession through Alexandria, Al-Jazeera TV reports. The commander of the tank insisted that the army had "no intention of stopping this march", the station says.
Owen Bowcott here taking over from Matthew Weaver. According to the Press Association, foreign secretary William Hague is due to speak to Egypt's foreign minister Aboul Gheit later tonight.
European Union officials have said that the unrest in Egypt will top the agenda at a meeting of EU foreign ministers on Monday in Brussels, AP reports.
The Dutch foreign ministry urged its nationals to "seriously consider leaving," while Switzerland advised its citizens to leave until further notice. Turkey's Dogan news agency reported that the Turkish government is evacuating about 750 nationals.
Belgian foreign ministry spokesman Patrick Deboeck said ambassadors in Cairo assessed "the state of play" at a meeting Sunday and EU nations are not planning evacuations. He added that so far there have been no incidents involving EU citizens in Egypt.
Simon Tisdall, the Guardian's foreign affairs columnist, has this report on the mass prison breakouts, which security officials said took place at four jails overnight.
• Thousands of protesters have returned to the streets of Cairo on the sixth day of protests. There is a heavy military presence in Tahrir square. Protesters are demanding the resignation of president Hosni Mubarak, and his newly appointed deputy Omar Suleiman.
• Opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei has addressed protesters in Tahrir square. "We cannot go back on what we have begun," ElBaradei tells the crowds. "We have one main demand: the end of the regime and the beginning of a new stage, a new Egypt."
• Al-Jazeera has been taken off air in Egypt, in move that has been widely condemned as an attack on free speech. The network was also banned from showing live footage in Cairo.
• Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, has called on President Mubarak to hold free and fair elections – but said Washington was not considering a cutoff of aid to Cairo for now.
• The Muslim Brotherhood has called for a "national salvation government". Ian Black, the Guardian's Middle East editor, suggests it remains unlikely that Mubarak government will agree to negotiate with to ElBaradei, but the publication of the demand adds a significant new element to the political angle.
• There are reports of a mass prison breakout. Leading members of the opposition Muslim Brotherhood were among those freed, the organisation said. Residents have taken control of law and order in many neighbourhoods.
This is interesting - the police will return to the streets tomorrow, but not to tackle the protests, security sources told Reuters.
Egyptian TV viewers can't see the footage of ElBaradei because al-Jazeera continues to be blocked. State TV has been showing footage of security guards outside a government building, the network said.
Human Rights Watch urged the regime to allow the network to be allowed to broadcast.
"Shutting down al-Jazeera is a sign of just how desperate the government has become to cut Egyptians off from news, information, and communication," said Sarah Leah Whitson, Middle East and North Africa director at Human Rights Watch in an email. "But like all its other efforts to rein in access to information, this too seems destined to fail, as the world continues to hear and watch Egyptians demanding their freedom," she said.
"Change is coming in the next few days," ElBaradei told the crowd, according to Reuters.
"You have taken back your rights and what we have begun cannot go back... We have one main demand - the end of the regime and the beginning of a new stage, a new Egypt."
"I bow to the people of Egypt in respect. I ask of you patience."
"What we have begun cannot go back", ElBaradei tells the crowds according to Reuters.
ElBaradei is preparing to address the crowd in Tahrir Square and has been handed a megaphone, Jack Shenker reports.
"ElBaradei stared out at the crowd with a half smile on his face. There were waves of excitement and optimism as he arrived. But but a notable number chanted anti-ElBaradei slogans, asking 'how can you steal our revolution now?'", Jack told us in another phone update.
"It's certainly a key moment. Many people in the crowd feel this is the final hours of the Mubarak regime," Jack said before the line cut out.
"It's still unclear at the moment what his [ElBaradei's] reception will be. He's popular among some people, but there are those who felt he has joined the protests too late and is only arriving now once the danger is apparently over. Either way this is a special moment," Jack added.
Mohamed EBaradei arrives in Tahrir Square. Jack Shenker describes the moment in this audio report. People feel the regime is about to fall, he says.
The infuential Egyptian blogger Issandr El Amrani is suspicious about the absence of police.
He managed to get round Internet restrictions to post this on his Arabist blog.
Something very fishy is taking place — the Egyptian people are being manipulated and terrified by the withdrawal of the police yesterday, reports (some of them perhaps untrue) of widespread looting, and yesterday's (during the day) relatively low military presence in the city. I can only speak about central Cairo, I suspect the situation is much worse in the Suez Canal cities, Alexandria and the Delta, and perhaps most of all the Sinai. I spoke to my former bawaab (doorman) who is near Aswan, where is he the police is still out and there is no military, although the local NDP office was ransacked and set on fire. So the situation is different from place to place, and there is very little national-level visibility. There is a discourse of army vs. police that is emerging. I don't fully buy it — the police was pulled out to create this situation of chaos, and it's very probable that agent provocateurs are operating among the looters, although of course there is also real criminal gangs and neighborhoods toughs operating too. For me, Omar Suleiman being appointed VP means that he's in charge. This means the old regime is trying to salvage the situation. Chafiq's appointment as PM also confirms a military in charge. These people are part of the way Egypt was run for decades and are responsible for the current situation. I suspect more and more people, especially among the activists, are realizing this. I hope to have more steady internet access later. For now, the questions are: • Why was the NPD building fire not put out even though it risks spreading to the Egyptian Museum? • Why is Egyptian state TV terrifying people with constant pictures of criminal gangs? • Why was there such a small military deployment during the day yesterday? • Why were all police forces pulled out, and who made that decision? • What is the chain of command today in the military? Is Armed Forces Chief of Staff Sami Enan still in position? • If the reports about prison breakouts are true, how come these facilities have not been secured? • Why are we getting reports of intelligence offices burning documents, CDs and tapes? The situation is obviously very confusing at the moment. All I can say is that I have a hard time believing that Mubarak is still in charge, and that the hard core of the regime is using extreme means to salvage its position.
ElBaradei is on his way to Tahrir Square, Reuters confirms.
"Watch what happens" writes journalist Sultan Sooud Al Qassemi on Twitter, "If he's welcomed it is an important message."
"Every man seems to be carrying a stick."Al Jazeera reports on the efforts of residents to control order in a Cairo neighbourhood after darkness fell tonight. There are makeshift road blocks at almost every corner, the reporter says.
ElBaradei appears to be making his pitch to be head of any new unity goverment, my colleague Brian Whitaker tweets.
The New York Times's Lede blog has more ElBaradei comments from that CNN interview:
ElBaradei has changed his mind again about joining today's protests. His wife has been in touch with Jack for a third time. She says he is planning to go after all. She apologises for confusing Guardian readers, Jack reports.
Peter Beaumont hears from first aid workers at a makeshift treatment centre at a mosquein Cairo. In same audio report Jack Shenker describes chaotic scenes from last night as men scream after being gassed.
Also there's a photo gallery here by Peter of some of the scenes from last night.
False rumours that Mubarak had fallen were greeted by hugs and cheering by protesters in Tahrir Square, Peter Beaumont reports from Tahrir square. In an audio interview he talks about possible preparations by the army to crackdown against the protesters. Water cannons have been moved in and tanks have been split into two columns, he says.
"The mood amongst the people, who were very positive towards the army, does seem to be changing. People are very very suspicious of the army now. They want to know why a squadron of Egypt's best tanks is sitting in the entrance to square," he said.
ElBaradei's wife just called Jack to say he won't be going out to join the protesters after all.
Mohammed ElBaradei is planning to join the protest this afternoon, his wife just told the Guardian's Jack Shenker.
Joe Stork, deputy Middle East director from Human Rights Watch, has a grim update on the rising death toll in Suez.
Those lowing flying jets were captured on video by an al-Jazeera producer. The film also appears to show, stick-carrying residents, patrolling the streets below.
The Muslim Brotherhood has called for a "national salvation government". This is very significant according to our Middle East editor Ian Black.
More balancing act comments from Hillary Clinton to US TV.
Heba Fatma Morayef, from Human Rights Watch, has sent another email update from Cairo.
More fence sitting from the US? Hillary Clinton said the Egyptian military appears to be showing restraint against protesters, according to Reuters citing an interview with ABC's This Week.
The Guardian's Simon Tisdall describes the "excruciating" balancing act that the US has been trying to perform on Egypt.
ElBaradei has called on Mubarak to "leave today and save the country", according to CNN.
Fighters jets are flying very low over central Cairo, Peter Beaumont reports.
The Muslim Brotherhood says it would support the Nobel peace laureate Mohamed ElBaradei negotiating with the regime, Reuters reports, citing Arab TV channels.
Heba Fatma Morayef, a researcher for Human Rights Watch, reports on the mood in the square, before the new tank unit moved in.
"At first we trusted the army, but we don't trust them any more," protester Mohamed Ali tells Peter Beaumont as a new tank unit moves into Tahrir Square.
"People clearly sense that something different is going on. People feel very uncomfortable about all these tanks trying to enter the square," Peter Beaumont reports from Tahrir Square.
Modern US tanks are being deployed on the streets of Cairo for the first time, my colleague Peter Beaumont just told in a phone call from the streets. He counted seven as we talked. It appears to confirm rumours that some of the elite combat troops are being moved to Cairo from their units in the desert, he said.
• Thousands of protesters have returned to the streets of Cairo on the sixth day of protests. There is a heavy military presence in Tahrir square. Protesters are demanding the resignation of president Hosni Mubarak, and his newly appointed deputy Omar Suleiman.
• Al-Jazeera has been taken off air in Egypt, in move that has been widely condemned as an attack on free speech. The network was also banned from showing live footage in Cairo.
• The Foreign Office has advised Britons to leave Cairo, Suez and Alexandria. Many other countries, including the US, are planning evacuation flights.
• There are reports of a mass prison break out. Leading members of the opposition Muslim Brotherhood were among those freed, the organisation said. Residents have taken control of law and order in many neighbourhoods.
• Israel has expressed concern about stability and security in Egypt. Britain's foreign secretary, William Hague, said there was a danger of extremism taking hold.
Several countries, including the US and India, have announced plans to organise evacuation flights from Egypt. Harriet Sherwood has more:
AP has this raw footage peaceful protests and chanting in central Cairo this morning.
People are only being let into Tahrir Square in central Cairo after being searched for weapons, according to a Sky News. It showed footage of people lining up to be searched in single file behind a military checkpoint on the edge of the square.
An al-Jazeera reporter describes the mood in the square:
Al-Jazeera has been banned from showing live footage of Cairo, according to staff member Evan Hill. In this Audioboo clip he describes the moment that security forces raided the network's Cairo officers. No one was detained he said.
The Middle East analyst Juan Cole analyses why the Egyptian state has lost its legitimacy.
Hospitals are urging people to donate blood, according to the latest email update from Human Rights Watch's emergencies director, Peter Bouckaert, in Alexandria. He has also been told of that prison break out.
Mosques are being transformed into sickrooms for protesters with bullet wounds, according to this report from Jack Shenker and Peter Beaumont.
You can hear one of medic describe mortal bullet wounds in this audio interview with Jack last night.
34 members of the Muslim Brotherhood, including seven leaders, have escaped from prison, according to Reuters.
An Observer Q&A on the protests has this background on the Muslim Brotherhood.
Al Jazeera has just been taken off the air in Egypt, according to its reporter Ayman Mohyeldin.
Thousands of prisoners have escaped from jail in the Wadi Naturn prison, north of Cairo, according to AP.
It cited a "security official" for the information.
The US is offering its citizens evacuation flights out of Egypt.
"The US Embassy in Cairo informs U.S. citizens in Egypt who wish to depart that the Department of State is making arrangements to provide transportation to safehaven locations in Europe," a statement said, according to Reuters.
The Foreign Office is advising Britons to leave Cairo, Alexandria and Suez, Britain's foreign secretary William Hague told Sky News.
He also talked of the danger of "extremism" taking hold in Egypt. "There is a great danger of violence running out of control," he said.
Hague also urged the Egyptian government to show restraint and to allow freedom of expression. He condemned the closure of al-Jazeera's bureau in Cairo.
The Foreign Office has updated its travel advice on Egypt. It says:
Al-Jazeera has this video report on the efforts of Cairo residents to maintain order in the city.
One of the Guardian's Middle East experts Brian Whitaker reflects on the latest rumours in Cairo. Writing on his own blog, he says there are reports that Mubarak's sons, Alaa and Gamal, have fled, but also that there will be could be an army crackdown today.
There are more signs of Israeli nervousness, following those comments by Netanyahu. Our Jerusalem correspondent, Harriet Sherwood reports:
Al Jazeera has denounced the closure of its Cairo bureau. In a statement it said:
The government plans to shut down al-Jazeera's operations in Egypt, according to Reuters, citing the state news agency Mana.
"The information minister ordered ... suspension of operations of al-Jazeera, cancelling of its licences and withdrawing accreditation to all its staff as of today," a statement said.
The New York Times reports on the influential role of al-Jazeera in the protests.
The Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, has expressed concern about "stability and security" in the region, in his first comments on the Egyptian unrest.
"Local communities have taken security into their own hands," reports Jack Shenker from Cairo, after another "intense night".
He claims it is the people who are mobilising to maintain order, while plain clothes policeman try to create the impression of anarchy.
The military has blocked Tahrir Square, Jack reports. "The army and the people are on one hand," protesters are chanting in an attempt to stand with the military.
"I am with you," an officer told the crowd last night, Jack said.
Protesters are shaking hands with soldiers in Tahrir Square, according to this audio clips which purports to have been recorded today. The speaker predicts more people will take to the streets today.

On the sixth day of protests, more than 1,000 people gathered in central, Cairo this morning, demanding the resignation of president Hosni Mubarak and his newly appointed deputy.
In a bid to cling to power Mubarak appointed his intelligence chief and confidant, Omar Suleiman, as his vice president and possible successor yesterday.
The appointment is seen as an attempt to continue Egypt's military leadership. "This is a way of paving the way for a military-led regime in a so-called constitutional context. It is clearly the result of negotiations with the army," Ragui Assaad, a professor at the University of Minnesota told the New York Times.
Suleiman has become a new target for protesters. "Hosni Mubarak, Omar Suleiman, both of you are agents of the Americans," they shouted this morning. "Mubarak, Mubarak, the plane awaits," the demonstrators also chanted. Activist Hossam Hareedy, told the Guardian: "We want to get rid of a tyrant. Firing the cabinet was not what we had in mind. What we want is for Mubarak to be cut down."
Overnight "vigilante groups" took to the streets to the guard neighbourhoods against looting after police disappeared from the streets, according to Reuters.
There is a propaganda war over the nature of the unrest. The regime is trying to portray the protesters as thugs - arrested looters were paraded on state TV last night. Protesters point out that residents are intervening to stop the looting.
Opposition supporters urged the media against portraying the situation as anarchy, as they claim this plays into the regime's hand.
The Egyptian blogger Mona Eltahawy, is quoted on the New York Times' Lede blog, saying said: "I urge you to use the words 'revolt' and 'uprising' and 'revolution' and not 'chaos' and not 'unrest, we are talking about a historic moment."
The differing media treatment of the protests is reflected in today's front pages. The Sunday's Telegraph's splashes with "Bloodshed on the streets". It lead story starts: "The full horror of Egypt's political convulsions has emerged, as relatives gathered at morgues filled with bodies and doctors described their heroic efforts to save the wounded."
By contrast the Independent on Sunday's front page (left) carriers an army officer clutching a flower and being held aloft by protesters. "The streets of Cairo proved what the United States and EU leaders have simply failed to grasp. It is over," writes Robert Fisk.
You can follow all of yesterday's events as the unfolded on Saturday's live blog.