Syria's UN ambassador accuses Britain of conspiring with rebels in chemical weapons attack
The US and Britain blame President Bashar al-Assad’s military for using chemical weapons against a suburb of Damascus, leaving at least 355 people dead.
Attempts by the regime to accuse rebel fighters were undermined by photographs taken at the scene, showing rockets apparently used to deliver the chemical agents, which are thought to be unavailable to the poorly-armed opposition.
However, in an interview with The Daily Telegraph, Bashar Ja’afari made the outlandish claim that David Cameron’s government had in fact supplied Syrian opposition forces with the necessary arms in an attempt to fool the world.
“The delivery system was offered by Britain,” said Mr Ja’afari, who described the attack as a “heinous crime” committed by “terrorists”.
Asked to confirm he meant the rockets had indeed been supplied by the UK, he said: “Absolutely — to drag western powers into this war... Syria is a victim of foreign interference in our domestic affairs.”
He claimed rebel fighters put the chemical weapons together in “secret laboratories in Turkey” before using them to kill their compatriots. The allegations were dismissed as absurd by British sources.
On the eve of a Parliamentary debate on military action against the Assad regime, Mr Ja’afari cited the example of the divisive war in Iraq 10 years ago to urge Britons to oppose any intervention.
“The British government is manipulating the British public opinion on the reality of what’s going on in Syria,” he said. “Cameron is repeating Blair’s mistake on Iraq. The same mistakes.”
“They are blurring the public opinion, spurring speculations on the Syrian government’s position and harming the interests of the British people. After all, those who would die in any military confrontation would be your own sons, and our own sons.”
The UN envoy accused the US and British governments of pursuing a strategy of inflicting “creative chaos” on the Middle East in order to protect Israel and throw Islamic nations into disarray.
Mr Ja’afari spoke in a corridor at the UN headquarters in New York after a meeting of the Security Council’s permanent members finished discussing a British plan to authorise military action.
He repeatedly declined to rule out Syrian retaliation against Israel in the event of western attack. “We have the right to self-defence,” he said.
“It’s up to the military command — but all the options are on the table.”