Outrage over Cairo violence
After days of peaceful protests in Cairo and other cities in Egypt, today we see violent attacks on peaceful demonstrators and journalists. The United States denounces these attacks and calls on all engaged in demonstrations currently taking place in Egypt to do so peacefully. These attacks are not only dangerous to Egypt; they are a direct threat to the aspirations of the Egyptian people. The use of violence to intimidate the Egyptian people must stop. We strongly call for restraint.
The United States deplores and condemns the violence that is taking place in Egypt, and we are deeply concerned about attacks on the media and peaceful demonstrators. We repeat our strong call for restraint.
I am deeply concerned by the continuing violence in Egypt. I once again urge restraint to all the sides. Any attack against peaceful demonstrators is unacceptable and I strongly condemn it. We should not underestimate the danger of instability across the Middle East.
The attacks on Egyptian protesters are unnacceptable. If it turns out that the regime in any way has been sponsoring or tolerating this violence, that would be completely and utterly unnacceptable. These are despicable scenes that we're seeing. 
I'm extremely concerned, I mean this is yet another symptom, or another indication, of a criminal regime using criminal acts. My fear is that it will turn into a bloodbath. It seems to me that this is a regime that does not want to listen to the people, does not want to understand that they need to go, and in fact it strengthens the resolve of every Egyptian that Mr Mubarak has to go, has to go immediately before the country goes down the drain.
Now they want to get rid of millions of people who are demonstrating, and will continue to demonstrate, by scare tactics.
Even if I take him on his word, why do I have to keep a representative of a regime which I believe is turning into a regime of thugs? Why do Egyptians have to keep him for seven months of instability, of insecurity, of intimidation?
There seems to be an indication that the violence has been orchestrated by the authorities to stop the protests. The security forces that are normally in charge of policing and protecting demonstrators has not intervened to separate the two groups.
Witnesses in Mahala and Cairo have reported seeing lorries carrying pro-government supporters.
This wouldn't be the first time the Egyptian authorities used this kind of tactic to quell demonstrations, however, if this is the case that would be a very cynical and bloody way to quell the demonstrations.