Hacked Sony reportedly shuts production
Sony Pictures has abandoned film shoots because hackers have crippled its computer network, The Times of London reported Saturday.
The Times, quoting “a source,” said agencies filming for Sony had cancelled shoots because the hacking had left it unable to process payments.
Sony did not immediately reply to a request for comment.
A hacking collective itself the Guardians of Peace began the attack on Sony late last month, leaking four films and thousands of documents and wreaking havoc on the studio’s network, along with a huge dose of embarrassment.
Emails between top producers and executives belittling a number of major stars and projects, and even making racist jokes about President Barack Obama were leaked earlier this week.
In one email exchange, Sony co-chairperson Amy Pascal -- a prominent Democratic party donor and Obama supporter -- asked movie producer Scott Rudin ahead of a fundraiser what she should ask the President "at this stupid Jeffrey (Katzenberg) breakfast," to which Rudin quipped "would he like to finance some movies."
"I doubt it. Should I ask him if he liked DJANGO?" Pascal responded, Rudin then retorted: "12 Years."
In other exchanges between Pascal and Rudin, Angelina Jolie was called a “spoiled brat,” and unflattering comments were made about everyone from Tom Cruise to David Fincher, Aaron Sorkin and Adam Sandler.
The Jolie diss served as particular embarrassment for the company, with one source noting that Sony "is like a pariah" to A-list talent now.
The FBI has launched a probe into the attack. The agency also sent out an “FBI alert” to companies in the entertainment sector, describing the characteristics of the so-called “wiper malware” used in the attack.
The finger of suspicion has already pointed at North Korea. A source familiar with the FBI alert told Fox News that the highly destructive malware was written in Korean, further fueling suspicions that Pyongyang launched the cyber attack in retaliation for a Sony film, "The Interview," which parodies its leader, Kim Jong Un.