Occupy London protesters say they were asked to leave St Paul's services
At least five members of protest group camped outside cathedral say they were singled out as they tried to pay Remembrance Day respects
Members of the protest group camped outside St Paul's Cathedral have claimed they were asked to leave or were escorted from Remembrance Sunday services.
At least five people from Occupy London said they were singled out as they tried to pay their respects.
St Paul's denied any of its staff were responsible for the evictions, saying it was "very unhappy" to hear about them. Some of the cathedral's regular worshippers were also on the receiving end of what is thought to have been overzealous policing from private security firms protecting VIPs in the cathedral at the time.
St Paul's said one of its canons, Michael Hampel, had been alerted to what had happened and went out to apologise to people. A cathedral spokesman added: "It's the most important thing that everyone is able to attend our services. We would never say people weren't welcome. It will be something we look into."
Tammy, a protester from Sussex, went into the cathedral at around 12.45 on Sunday. Accompanying her was Jim, a homeless man who has lived outside St Paul's for a decade. She told the Guardian: "My relatives have been in the armed forces and some lost their lives, so I wanted to remember them."
She and Jim sat at the back, moving to the front with other people once the service had finished, she said.
"Some St Paul's workers and men in pinstripe suits and ear microphones came over and asked what we were doing. Jim wanted to talk to Canon Michael [Colclough]. I told them I wasn't there as a protester. I took off all my badges. I told them I had come as a member of the public."
She said: "They told me I couldn't be there because I was a member of Occupy London. They couldn't have protesters there. I said I had dead to mourn, and they replied they had royalty in the cathedral."
The 33-year-old, who is Christian, said she approached cathedral staff to ask for help. "What they said is that other churches will have you lot. I'm always in and out of the cathedral. I'm terribly distressed – they are ripping my faith away from me.
"We've complied with everything they've asked us to do … we haven't given them any grief."
In a statement, St Paul's said: "We were very unhappy to discover that some of our regular worshippers, as well as visitors, were turned away from Sunday morning's service and can assure people that this was not done by our staff, who are always specifically briefed to welcome all those who wish to worship in the cathedral.
"We had also leafleted the protesters outside St Paul's, inviting them to join our worship, and were pleased that some of them had come to join us."
The incidents could represent a setback in relations between the cathedral and the protesters, which have improved dramatically since St Paul's decided to suspend legal action against Occupy and instead engage in dialogue.