French Hostage Abducted in North Africa Is Freed
If there was a prisoner exchange, it again pits France against its allies, including the United States, on the question of how to free hostages held by Islamic extremists. In the past four months, including this past weekend, four United States citizens have been executed by Al Qaeda in Yemen and the Islamic State, an offshoot of Al Qaeda in Iraq.
Prisoner exchanges have usually been a secondary request, after ransom, said Mr. Rouiller, who has helped negotiate the release of other Europeans held by the same group that kidnapped Mr. Lazarevic. “They ask for prisoners if they can, but it’s money that is of the essence,” he said. “Money first, and fellow prisoners second.”
Pierre Martinet, a former French intelligence official, said French citizens would continue to be targeted by kidnappers “because they know it is among the governments that directly negotiates for their liberation.”
“I know very well that we have given money,” Mr. Martinet told the BFM television channel, The Associated Press reported. “It happens. We have to stop lying to ourselves.”
While governments in Europe deny paying ransoms, an investigation by The New York Times found that Al Qaeda and its direct affiliates have taken in at least $125 million in revenue from kidnappings since 2008, of which $66 million was paid last year alone.
In November 2011, Mr. Lazarevic and his colleague, the French geologist Philippe Verdon, were grabbed from their hotel rooms in the Malian town of Hombori, where they had gone to study the feasibility of opening a cement factory. The operation was carried out by Mr. Ag Acherif and a relative of Mr. Ag Wadossene, working as subcontractors for Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb. According to intelligence officials, the group had issued a “bid” for French hostages because it had experience dealing with the French government: It earned millions of euros in ransom for a French hostage, Françoise Larribe, just a few months earlier, according to one of the negotiators in that case.
Within days of their capture, Mr. Lazarevic and Mr. Verdon were handed over to Al Qaeda.
Last year, the kidnappers executed Mr. Verdon when he tried to make contact with an aircraft flying overhead, according to the former negotiator who asked not to be named because of the sensitivity of the case. Mr. Verdon’s body was later recovered by French soldiers.
Mr. Lazarevic, who is over 6 feet tall and weighed more than 260 pounds at the time of his capture, appeared in several videos pleading for his life. A video released in June alarmed his family because he appeared to have lost as much as a third of his weight. That, and the implicit threat of execution, may have pushed French officials to an agreement.