ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Heavy fighting is continuing in parts of the Libyan capital Tripoli, as rebel forces press on with their takeover of Moamar Gaddafi's last stronghold.
Two of Gaddafi's sons have been arrested by rebel forces, but the whereabouts of the Libyan leader himself are unknown.
Rebels say forces loyal to Gaddafi have stationed tanks near his Bab al-Aziziyah compound in central Tripoli and are resisting their attacks.
"The situation is not stable. There is gunfire everywhere. Gaddafi's forces are using tanks at the port and Al Sarine street near Bab al-Aziziyah," a rebel official in Tripoli, who gave his name as Abdulrahman, told Reuters by telephone.
"The revolutionaries are positioned everywhere in Tripoli, some of them are near Bab al-Aziziyah, but Gaddafi's forces have been trying to resist."
He says snipers are the main problem for the rebels and there has been "big numbers" of martyrs.
The Bab al-Aziziya compound has been blasted regularly since the start of the international military intervention in Libya on March 19 and most of the buildings in the complex have been flattened.
Al Arabiya TV says Gaddafi's son Khamis is leading a military force towards central Tripoli.
Another one of his sons, Seif al-Islam, has been arrested while another, Mohamed Gaddafi, was reportedly under house arrest.
Some reports have suggested Moamar Gaddafi has tried to flee the country but several foreign governments, including South Africa and Malta, say they will not offer him refuge.
British prime minister David Cameron says Gaddafi's regime is in "full retreat" and he should give up any hope he has of clinging on to power.
"His regime is falling apart and in full retreat," Mr Cameron said.
"Gaddafi must stop fighting, without conditions, and clearly show that he has given up any claim to control Libya.
"There will undoubtedly be difficult days ahead. No transition is ever smooth or easy, but today the Arab Spring is a step further away from oppression and dictatorship and a step closer to freedom and democracy and the Libyan people are closer to their dream of a better future, free from the terror of Gaddafi."
Gaddafi broadcast three defiant audio messages on Sunday, vowing he would not surrender and urging the people of Tripoli to "purge the capital", even as rebel forces swept through Tripoli and took over the symbolic Green Square at the waterfront.
US president Barack Obama said Gaddafi's 42-year autocratic regime was at a "tipping point" and that the "tyrant" must go, adding a call for the rebels to respect human rights and move to democracy.
"Tonight, the momentum against the Gaddafi regime has reached a tipping point. Tripoli is slipping from the grasp of a tyrant," Mr Obama said in a statement.
"The Gaddafi regime is showing signs of collapsing. The people of Libya are showing that the universal pursuit of dignity and freedom is far stronger than the iron fist of a dictator."
Thousands of residents poured onto the streets of Tripoli on Sunday night to welcome the rebels, congregating at Green Square, which they renamed Martyrs Square.
Footage showed jubilant crowds, with many people waving the red, black and green flag of anti-regime forces, dancing in joy and shouting Allah Akbar (God is greatest). Some fired rifles into the air.
Similar scenes of jubilation were witnessed in Benghazi, the rebels' bastion in the east, where tens of thousands of delirious residents danced and proclaimed the end of the regime.
In his audio messages, the 69-year-old strongman vowed not to surrender and urged the people of Tripoli to "purge the capital".
Government spokesman Mussa Ibrahim told a press conference 1,300 people had been killed in the rebel assault on the capital, describing the fighting as a "real tragedy".
But there was no independent confirmation of casualties, nor any immediate indication of how much resistance may have been put up against the rebels.
Mr Ibrahim insisted Libya's regime "is still strong and thousands of volunteers and soldiers are ready to fight" although the reality on the ground seemed to belie his boasts.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) is seeking the transfer of Seif al-Islam to The Hague to face charges of crimes against humanity.
Spokesman Fadi El-Abdallah told AFP the court was discussing his transfer with the Libyan rebel NTC.
Earlier on Monday, the court's prosecutor Louis Moreno-Ocampo said Seif al-Islam, 39, was arrested and in detention, calling for his swift transfer.
"We hope he can soon be in The Hague" to face judgement, Mr Moreno-Ocampo said.
Seif al-Islam is accused together with his father of orchestrating a plan to put down the Libyan revolt by "any means necessary" since it was sparked in mid-February.
This included the murder of hundreds of pro-freedom Libyan protesters and injuring hundreds of others when security forces shot a crowds using live ammunition, as well as the arrest and torture of numerous others.
Before the revolt erupted, Seif al-Islam was increasingly seen as a successor to his father, despite publicly ruling out any dynastic ambitions in the north African country.
In a brief telephone interview with Al Jazeera television broadcast on Monday morning, another of Gaddafi's sons, Mohammed, said he was holed up in his house, frightened to leave.
During the broadcast the sound of intense firing could be heard, interrupting the interview. When it resumed, Gaddafi spoke with a tone of panic.
Al Jazeera gave no indication of where the house is, or even whether it is in Tripoli.