Hostage crisis in Pak military compound after militant attack
Captured militants, who were being interrogated at a Pakistani military intelligence compound near the US consulate in Peshawar, overpowered their guards today, sparking a hostage crisis in the northwestern city.
The militants overpowered guards at the army detention centre located within Peshawar cantonment and took two sentries hostage, said chief military spokesman Major General Athar Abbas.
The militants, who were being investigated by a law enforcement agency, also took control of the building located a short distance from the US Consulate and an office of the Intelligence Bureau.
Earlier reports had suggested that a group of militants had entered the high security area and engaged security forces in a gun battle.
However, Abbas clarified that no terror attack had occurred and that no militants had entered the area.
"No terrorists came to the area from outside. Security forces have cordoned off the building and all-out efforts are being made to free the hostages," he told reporters.
"We are hopeful of resolving this problem soon," Abbas said.
He refused to give details due to security reasons.
The number of militants in the building too could not be immediately ascertained.
Local residents said they heard gunshots in the area near the US consulate at 6am local time.
Large contingents of soldiers and policemen quickly moved into the area and sealed it off. Key roads were blocked and traffic was diverted to other routes.
"All resources are being put in place to deal with the situation," General Abbas told media.
He avoided giving additional details and said that more information will be provided to the media later.
Peshawar's military airbase and the city's international airport are located a few kilometres from the building occupied by the militants.
Witnesses said the militants and security personnel had exchanged fire several times but there were no reports of casualties.
Security forces conducted a search operation in the area to check if any persons were helping the militants, sources said.
On April 5, militants armed with automatic weapons and suicide car bombs tried to storm the consulate, killing three persons. At least six attackers were gunned down or blew themselves up in that incident.