Pilots' bodies found as Syria, Turkey continue to spar over jet downing
"We would never allow outsiders to interfere in our affairs," al-Assad told the newspaper. "This initial desire to interfere in our internal affairs, unfortunately, made Turkey a party in all the bloody activities in the later process. Turkey has supplied all kinds of logistic support to the terrorists who kill our people."
"For example, why does he cry for the Syrian people in a hypocritical way but (is) not crying for those killed in the Gulf countries?" he asked. "Why doesn't he meddle with the democracy problems of those countries?"
Al-Assad's published comments came as the Turkish military reported finding the bodies of the two Turkish pilots of the downed jet. The bodies of Capt. Gokhan Ertan and First Lt. Hasan Huseyin were "found at the bottom" of the Mediterranean Sea, "shot by Syria in the international waters," the military said in a statement.
"The Turkish people are our brothers and something that would make them sad would never make me happy and it did not. If this was an Israeli plane, of course, I would have been happy," he said.
The plane was using the same flight corridor that Israeli planes had used three times before, he said. "Since we couldn't see it on our radars and no information was given either, the soldiers downed it. We learned that it belonged to Turkey after shooting it down."
But Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, in an interview with the Turkish newspaper, asked, "How many times have they fired at an Israeli plane before? Moreover, they are legally at war with Israel. That they launched such an attack on our plane even when no such attack has been launched against an Israeli plane shows that they do not have any goodwill towards us."
"Either the Syrian air defense is not as powerful as he claims or what he says is a clear lie. As soon as our plane takes off from Malatya, all the countries in the area can monitor the movements of it. This is not a secret but an open mission, and the profile of the flight is one that can be monitored by countries even with the simplest airspace systems. It is also wrong that they say they couldn't determine its identity because we also have records that they identified it.
"They say we would not shoot it down if we knew it was a Turkish plane. Let's say they didn't know the RF-4 was a Turkish plane, then why did they open fire on the Casa plane that was going for help? It was obvious that it was coming from Turkey," he said.
"That is when he says, 'If I knew it would be for the good of my country, I wouldn't stay even for a day.' That is very correct and he should do what this requires as soon as possible. He should not stay there even for a day," Davutoglu said.
A spokesman for the opposition Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said Wednesday that the group had tallied the total killed at 16,757. Of them, 11,657 were civilians, 4,227 were members of the military or security forces and 873 were defectors or members of the opposition Free Syrian Army, said Rami Abdulrahman, the spokesman.