ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The son of a retired Libyan academic who spoke out against Moamar Gaddafi's regime says he fears the worst for his father and three of his brothers after they were apparently kidnapped by the veteran leader's forces in Tripoli.
Abdul Rahman Sewelhi went to school with Mr Gaddafi and was insistent that he be identified when he spoke out in opposition to the crackdown during recent protests.
Now he has disappeared from his home in Tripoli and his son in London says he has been kidnapped along with other family members.
"On Monday morning my father called me from Tripoli to say that two of my brothers had been taken by Gaddafi forces from their place of hiding," Ahmed Sewelhi told The World Today from his London home.
"He was at another place of hiding and he told me that he was going to go back to our family home with another of my brothers and wait for Gaddafi's forces to pick him up as well.
"I tried to persuade him not to do that, however he said to me that he ... had done his job and was very vocal on Arabic TV throughout the protests against Gaddafi and now that Gaddafi's regime was coming to an end he didn't mind dying or being picked up by Gaddafi as they came to his house.
"So I got one of my relatives to drive past the family home and the place was swarming with mercenaries and uniformed troops.
"I've not heard anything since and to be honest I don't really expect to hear anything from anybody until this whole nightmare comes to an end."
The London-based doctor says many people have been kidnapped in the capital in the past three days.
"We believe that they've probably been taken to Gaddafi's command compound in the centre of Tripoli and that's the only place we could imagine, maybe to be used as human shields," he said.
"To be honest if he's going to die I can only hope that he and my brothers die a quick death, because I can't imagine what Gaddafi may do to him and to my brothers.
"I mean my youngest brother is 19 years old, he's a first-year medical student, all he's done is been involved in the protests. He has gone out in Tripoli, faced tear gas, shots."
Dr Sewelhi says his mother and two sisters are still in Tripoli.
"My mother is completely distraught and that's when I get upset, when I speak to her because you wouldn't imagine what kind of state of mind she's in," he said.
"She's feels that she's lost her husband and three sons and we don't know if they are going to come out of this alive. She is not worried about her own safety because she's gone beyond that."
He says Mr Gaddafi is capable of anything.
"This is very hard to even think about it, but I wouldn't be surprised - he could do that - he could go and start kidnapping the women as well. If it gets to that it'll be absolutely terrible," he said.
"I was expecting this to happen, to be honest, at any time, because the few people who have spoken out and had identified themselves on Arabic media, many of them had already disappeared."
Despite the danger, he says his father would not be persuaded against speaking out against the regime.
"I mean it was very hard to persuade him to actually leave our family home in the first place, let alone not identify himself," he said.
"He's not the kind of person who wants the people of Libya to know that there were real persons who were actually speaking against him [Gaddafi] because Gaddafi has always said, and is still saying, that there is no opposition to him and that these protests are people from abroad, and so my father felt that he needed to identify himself.
"Gaddafi I'm sure has been taking many people randomly, however in the case of my father, Gaddafi knows my father personally.
"My father went to the same high school as Gaddafi, and my father has met Gaddafi on two occasions in the past 10 years or so at Gaddafi's request."
Dr Sewelhi says when people started being killed he had to speak out against it.
"I am a psychiatrist but it doesn't need a psychiatrist to show that at the very least Gaddafi is a psychopath, because he doesn't care about whether people are hurt or killed," he said.
"I don't think he has any feelings about that whatsoever, and he may indeed be delusional and feel that the whole of the Libyan nation is with him, however he's a very shrewd and intelligent man at the same time."
And he warns no-one should underestimate the veteran leader.
"I don't think anybody can stay in power for 42 years against the will of the people and not be a shrewd, intelligent man," he said.
"He knows how to get where he wants and I'm very worried that this time - even though if you'd asked me three days ago I'd have said that Gaddafi is coming to an end - I'm a bit worried that the tide is turning and we are just watching, we are just watching another Hitler massacre his own people and then have to do a body count afterwards."
Listen to the full interview with Ahmed Sewelhi on The World Today website..