Nigeria: Gunmen Attack School in Yobe
Nigeria:  Gunmen Kill Seven Students, Two Teachers in Secondary School Attack in Yobe At least 11 persons have been confirmed dead after gunmen suspected to be members of Boko Haram attacked a secondary school and a military check post in Damaturu, the Yobe State… Read more »
Nigeria:  Gunmen Kill Seven Students, Two Teachers in Yobe School Attack At least 11 persons have been confirmed dead after gunmen suspected to be members of Boko Haram attacked a secondary school and a military check post in Damaturu, the Yobe State… Read more »
Nigeria:  Seven Students, Two Teachers Killed in Yobe Attack Seven students, two teachers and two Boko Haram insurgents have been killed in night attacks on Sunday in Damaturu, Yobe State. Read more »
Nigeria:  Seven Students, Four Others Killed in Boko Haram Attacks On Damaturu The deadly Boko Haram sect, which many thought had been routed by the ongoing clampdown by the military, struck again in Damaturu, the Yobe State capital, on Sunday night launching… Read more »
Hundreds of the Boko Haram fighters, who had been dislodged from their camps in northern and central parts of Borno State, have regrouped on the mountains that lie between Adamawa,… Read more »
The men of the Joint Task Force (JTF) a.k.a 'Operation Restore Order' in Maiduguri, the Borno state capital yesterday denied the purported letters/ leaflets being circulated by… Read more »
Nigeria:  Nigerian Military to Investigate Level of Involvement of Alleged Terrorists The Defence Headquarters (DHQ) on Monday promised that all suspects arrested in the communities where terrorists were active would be investigated to ensure their level of… Read more »
The youth groups, who are on a voluntary mission to help security operatives hunt suspected Boko Haram members, have arrested a young district head (Bulama) and handed him over to… Read more »
Nigeria:  Cleric Wants Government to Sustain Military Campaign Against Boko Haram The Catholic Bishop of Enugu, Callistus Onaga, has urged the Federal Government to sustain the military campaign against the Boko Haram Islamic sect in the country. Read more »
"See something? Say something!" That is the refrain regularly belted out from the public address system in all US airports. We have our local variant of the same admonition here.… Read more »