Syria Puts On Mass Rally in Support of Assad
The government, the official said, had canceled a day off — a national holiday called Teachers’ Day — and “forced all teachers and schools to go,” to prevent antigovernment protesters from gathering to mark the anniversary of the start of the uprising.
“We will not keep squares empty to let anti-Assad protesters fill them,” he said.
On March 15, 2011, demonstrations in the southern city of Dara’a turned sporadic protests into a nationwide uprising.
The government responded with violence. Some activists and defecting soldiers took up arms, which led to more crackdowns, and Syria’s became the most violent of the Arab revolts, with more than 7,500 people killed, the United Nations estimates. The government blames the killings on “terrorists” spurred on by Western countries that it says are angry at Syria’s defiance.
Those competing narratives dueled across Syria on Thursday. Hundreds tried to hold a protest just a few miles from the square, in the Damascus suburbs. Others marched in Aleppo, even as security forces fired on them, according to videos from activists. Troops hit pockets of rebellion in Homs, Idlib and Dara’a, activists said, even as pro-Assad rallies purported to celebrate the restoration of order.
Claims and counterclaims of battles, casualties and competing protests are difficult to corroborate because of government restrictions on journalists.
Syrian television borrowed from the youthful, grass-roots uprising in creating a Facebook page, “Likes for Syria,” and elaborate video advertisements in which young men and women, priests and imams declare over soaring music, “I’m going to the Global March for Syria.”
Not all of the support for Mr. Assad is manufactured. Some Syrians, like the soldier’s son at the rally, worry that his departure could usher in sectarian revenge against members of his minority Alawite sect. Many Christians fear rule by the Sunni Muslim majority. Others simply fear instability. The Assad government has stoked those fears by portraying itself as a protector of minorities and a bulwark of order.
A Syrian soldier reached by telephone, who gave his name as Samer, said no one had forced his family to attend the rally. “We danced the dabke,” a traditional dance, he said.
To him, the rally celebrated victory over traitors instigated by foreigners. “We won over the conspiracy,” he said.
But in Harasta, a northern suburb of Damascus, a 40-year-old employee of a state construction company said he had slipped away rather than attend.
He said his bosses had told workers to participate, threatening to punish those who did not. “I couldn’t participate in a pro-Assad rally while our brothers are killed and slaughtered in Homs,” he said.
He was not persuaded by official claims that the fighting was over; he had heard explosions and gunfire the night before. And, he said, while the government might bus in families from military dormitories to protests in the provinces, “every Syrian knows that no citizen in Dara’a will participate in a pro-Assad rally in Dara’a.”
“It is ridiculous to see a government force its workers to rally,” he said. “We need wise people to manage the crisis, not old-fashioned officials of the 1960s who solve problems by Soviet-style rallies.”
He complained that he could not get business done because the roads were blocked.
“The government thinks like a teenager — it organizes big rallies to show its popularity,” he said. “Popularity is measured by fair and democratic elections, not premade rallies.
“If President Assad has wide popularity,” he went on, “he should call for early presidential elections, not ask his soldiers, security men and their families to gather in public squares.”
Then there were those who seemed ambivalent. At the rally, a veiled woman stood with colleagues from a government ministry. As they listened, her words seemed to tread a careful line.
“I am asking God to protect Syria and its people and save us from the current crisis,” she said. “The Syrian people will overcome this crisis by their national unity and political sense. The world cannot understand what is going on in the country deeply.”
“We want stability and security with gradual reform measures,” she concluded. “I don’t want to say more.”