Airstrikes, casualties and fingerpointing leave Syrian truce in shambles
negotiated the truce U.N.-Arab League envoy Lakhdar Brahimi negotiated the truce , hoping to stem the killings that started in March 2011 when protesters inspired by the success of popular revolutions in Egypt and Tunisia began demanding al-Assad's ouster.
More than 32,000 people, according to the opposition, have been killed in the fighting that followed a brutal crackdown on demonstrators.
Amateur videos posted on YouTube appeared to support the claims of the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights that government airstrikes hit the capital city suburbs of Erbin, Harasta and Zamalka.
CNN cannot verify the authenticity of the videos, which showed fighter jets flying overhead and then black plumes of smoke rising into the sky.
Government forces clashed with rebel fighters for control of the capital suburb of Ghota, which has changed hands between al-Assad's forces and the rebels at least twice in recent weeks, according to the opposition Local Coordination Committees of Syria.
Raging battles and bombing attacks have escalated in recent months in and around Damascus and its surrounds, dealing a blow to al-Assad's government and cracking its image of invulnerability.
In the capital city itself, fierce fighting between rebels and government forces was reported in the neighborhood of Hajar Aswad, the LCC said.
About 40 soldiers loyal to the Syrian regime surrendered to rebels who had laid siege to their checkpoint in the village of Al-Alaneh near Turkey's border in the Idlib province, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said Sunday.
semi-official Anadolu Agency The Turkish military is denying media reports that additional U.S. troops have been deployed to Turkey as a precaution over the crisis in Syria, according to the semi-official Anadolu Agency
The United States has a number of military personnel based at Incirlik Air Base in Adana as well two other bases.
In a long video posted on jihadist websites In a long video posted on jihadist websites , al-Zawahiri said Muslims should spare nothing to help free the Syrians. He also encouraged the Syrians to rise up against the government.
"It is the right of Syrians to protect themselves in all ways possible from injustice, murder, killing and bombardment," al-Zawahiri said.
"He whose house is destroyed, children are killed, and brothers are tortured has every right -- all right -- to use every legitimate way to keep aggression away from him."