Arab League suspends Syria mission amid violence
Some will leave the country, he said. Others will stay on for the moment in Damascus, but they will not be conducting any missions, he said, adding that he did not have details on how many are leaving and how many are staying.
The Local Coordination Committees said two Damascus men on Sunday "tarnished the stairway of the Russian Cultural Center in red in an expression of their anger with the Russians' support of the regime." It did not provide further details.
There were reports Sunday of violent clashes between Syrian troops and rebel forces, made up primarily of military defectors, in the Damascus suburb of Ghouta, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a London-based opposition group. Three people were killed in the violence, the group said.
At least 10 Syrian troops were killed when a roadside bomb targeted a military vehicle in the mountains in the northwest province of Idlib, the Observatory group said. A rebel soldier was killed in clashes between the towns of Bloludan and Zabadani, the group said.
While the Syrian groups are willing to unite with the Arab opposition in Syria, they want more self-determination and autonomy in a post-Assad Syria. The Kurds also continue to reject taking up arms and say they are afraid of Islamic undertones in the opposition groups.
"We are calling for a decentralized government because Syria is a multi-ethnic and multi-religious country," Abdul Hakim Bashar, chairman of the Kurdish National Council, told CNN. "We demand a secular state, so Islamist movements don't try to interpret the system for their benefits by applying Islamic rules in a disfigured way."
"We have been working to unite Kurdish people and converge between different views within the Kurdish movement in Western Kurdistan and Syria," the party said in a statement. "This conference by the Kurdistan Democratic Party is a plan to divide rather than unite the Kurdish people."
In October, Russia and China issued a rare double veto of a resolution that lacked sanctions but would have condemned the violence in Syria. This latest draft also lacks sanctions but is tougher than the earlier version, which said nothing about transfer of power.
"Syria will not be Libya; Syria will not be Iraq; Syria will not be Somalia; Syria will not be a failing state," he told reporters.