Burkina Faso hotel attack leaves 20 dead; 63 hostages freed as Islamist group claims responsibility
Burkina Faso troops supported by French special forces are battling terrorist gunmen who stormed a hotel in the capital Ouagadougou, killing at least 20 people.
Sixty-three hostages were rescued, 33 of them wounded, from the four-star Splendid hotel about two hours after the masked Islamists attacked the building, where a fire raged and screams could be heard.
Heavy gun battles were still being waged on the top floors of the hotel, which often has United Nations staff among its guests and has security checks at its entrances.
Twenty people have been confirmed dead but the toll could rise further, as Interior Minister Simon Campaore said firefighters had seen 10 bodies on the terrace of a restaurant opposite the hotel.
It was not clear how many people remained trapped.
"We don't yet have a total tally of the dead. The Burkinabe forces are still combing the hotel," Mr Campaore told AFP.
Mr Campaore said it was unclear how many attackers were still inside the 147-room hotel, not far from the city's international airport.
The Islamist fighters had rigged with the hotel explosives, a security source said, slowing the progress of the counter-attack.
"What's making our job more difficult is that they've rigged the access to the upper floors," said a senior officer who asked not to be named.
The siege was claimed by Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), which if confirmed would be the first by Islamist militants in the West African city.
The "mujahideen brothers" of AQIM "broke into a restaurant of one of the biggest hotels in the capital of Burkina Faso, and are now entrenched and the clashes are continuing with the enemies of the religion", US-based monitoring group SITE quoted the group as saying.
The French embassy has called the incident a "terrorist attack".
Prior to the start of the counter-assault, the head of the city's main hospital confirmed at least 20 people had been killed and another 15 injured.
"We have had at least 15 wounded with bullet wounds and others who suffered injuries during the panic to escape," Ouagadougou hospital chief Robert Sangare said.
A US defence official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Washington could provide drone-based surveillance.
Several attacks have taken place in Burkina Faso in recent months, but no such assaults had hit the capital until now.
The Ouagadougou attack comes less than two months after a jihadist hostage siege at the luxury Radisson Blu Hotel in the Malian capital Bamako in November, in which 20 people died including 14 foreigners.
Witnesses said two bombs went off outside the hotel, and cars were set alight, before the masked gunmen burst inside on Saturday (local time).
The nearby Cappuccino restaurant, located in a busy, central area of the capital was also targeted.
A Cappuccino staff member, reached by telephone, said several people had been killed at the restaurant, without being able to give an exact toll.
A witness said gunmen emerged from the hotel and fired into the air. A vehicle carrying security personnel arrived and shortly afterward an intense gun battle began.
"We had just opened and there were a few customers we started to serve when we heard gunshots ... There were three men shooting in the air," said Vital Nounayon, a waiter at a restaurant across the street from the hotel.
"Lots of people left their cars and motorcycles and ran. [The attackers] set fire to the vehicles. They also fired on the Capuccino Restaurant across from the hotel before setting it on fire."
Amateur video footage showed a burning car on an empty street in front of the hotel. Gunfire and explosions could be heard.
The Burkinabe army meanwhile revealed that an armed group had carried out an attack earlier in the day near the border with Mali, killing two people.
"In the afternoon around 2:00pm, around 20 heavily-armed unidentified individuals carried out an attack against gendarmes in the village of Tin Abao," the army said in a statement, adding that an officer and a civilian had been killed and two more gendarmes wounded.
Last month, Burkina Faso swore in Roch Marc Christian Kabore as President, completing the troubled West African state's transition after the overthrow of its longtime ruler Blaise Compaore in 2014 and a failed coup attempt in September.
Burkina Faso, which produces gold and cotton, is diverse in religious terms and has a population that is around 60 per cent Muslim, according to Government figures.