Al-Qaeda fighters in Syria 'massacre' Druze villagers
Al-Qaeda-linked rebels in Syria have been accused of killing at least 20 members of the minority Druze sect, raising new fears of religiously motivated killing in the country’s civil war.
The killings happened in the town of Qalb Lawzah, in the northwestern Idlib province, and were initially triggered by an argument over a house which Jabhat al-Nusra , Syria’s al-Qaeda affiliate, had tried to commandeer.
The incident marked the deadliest attack against the Druze community, which practises a 10th century offshoot of Shia Islam, and could add their names to the list of sectarian targets in the four-year conflict.
The Druze, who amounted to 5 per cent of the country’s prewar population, have so far largely stayed out of the conflict but the massacre, in Idlib province, and fighting in the Druze-held area of Sweida in the south have suddenly plunged the community into the battle-front.
In recent months, Islamist militants, who have recently made major gains in Idlib, have forced Druze residents, whom they consider to be heretics, to covert to Sunni Islam.
• Islamic State vs Al Qaeda: the battle within jihad • Assad's forces defeated on roads north and south
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group, said several elderly residents and a child were among the victims of the killings.
The jihadists had captured the village as part of a broad offensive that has seen rebel groups dislodge regime forces from the provincial capital.
“Nusra had already seized the abandoned houses for their men - nobody protested against that. But this owner said no so his relatives intervenes, beating one militant with a shovel,” a local resident called Jawad, who only gave his first name to The Daily Telegraph, said. “Then the jihadists opened fire.”
Abdul Majeed, a Druze civilian from a neighbouring village, said Nusra fighters used walkie-talkies to call for backup, shooting at passers-by and nearby houses. “None picked up a weapon or even thought of resisting,” he said.
The Telegraph was provided with the names of 23 victims, including one of Jawad’s relatives, who were buried by sunset on Wednesday.
“We refuse the oppression of any sect of the Syrian people,” said Ahmed Kara Ali, a spokesman for Ahrar al-Sham. “Those involved must be held accountable.”
The Druze are viewed as heretical by the puritanical school of Sunni Islam espoused by al-Qaeda and by Islamic State, whose attempts to advance towards a Druze area of southern Syria have added to concerns.
Thc community has been divided by the country’s uprising. Some members have fought alongside the government while others have expressed sympathy for the opposition.
In a rare interview last month, Mohamed al-Golani, al-Nusra’s leader said Syria’s Druze would not be targeted. However, his group has been open in calling for “apostates” to return to the Sunni fold.
Wednesday’s mass killing underscored the uneasy nature of the al-Nusra alliance with other rebel groups, including the Salafist Islamist Ahrar al-Sham.
While the Nusra harbours transnational goals, Ahrar al-Sham is a strictly nationalist movement which is thought to be under instructions from Qatari backers to rein in the worst excesses of its jihadist allies.
Another advance by the Islamist alliance on Thursday, this time towards the Druze heartland of Sweida in the south, appeared to increase the likelihood that the group would be drawn deeper into the war, which has killed around a quarter of a million people and made another eight million homeless.
Regime-controlled Sweida has been largely unscathed by the war but yesterday (THURS), a rebel spokesman claimed that his forces that seized most of a military airport there, saying they were now carrying out “mopping-up operations against remaining forces”.
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the airbase was used for jets that bomb the provinces of Daraa and Damascus.
As the fighting crept closer to his doorstep on Thursday, Sahr Darwish, a Sweida Druze, said he feared for the days ahead. “The situation for Druze is good here for now but we are afraid of the fall of the regime,” he said.