Mubarak refuses to resign - Thursday 10 Fenruary
Time to wrap up the live blog for the night – and it looks like Friday will be another big day of protest in the wake of Mubarak's decision to stay in office.
The highlights of the day:
• Hosni Mubarak stunned Egypt and the rest of the world by maintaining that he was continuing as president, despite a day of speculation that he was stepping down
• Mubarak said he was transferring his powers to the vice president, Omar Suleiman, but it remained unclear what exactly that meant
• Pro-democracy protesters reacted with disbelief and fury to Mubarak's speech
• Suleiman told protesters "go back to your houses, go back to your work"
• Obama issued his strongest statement in response, with criticism of Mubarak's refusal to step down and conduct meaningful reform
• Demonstrators vow to make Friday's protests the biggest so far, as thousands camped out in front of the Presidential Palace and the state television building in Cairo
To follow the action from earlier in the day, see our live blog here. Thanks for reading.
Reactions to Obama's more aggressive statement are flooding in. The Guardian's Ewen MacAskill reports from Washington:
The Associated Press has a stronger reading of Obama's words:
The Washington Post has the transcript of Mubarak's address here. It translates the crucial part of the speech as:
CNN has posted a transcript of Omar Suleiman's address here.
The journalist Dima Khatib tweets on the protesters that have marched tonight from Tahrir Square to the presidential palace:
TV footage that appear to be from a helicopter taken earlier tonight show a stream of people walking towards the palace, while others are outside the state television and radio centre, spreading the zone of protest.
Fareed Zakaria, speaking on cable TV, says Obama's actions are "unprecedented" for a US president so quickly trying to push an ally out of power.
He points out that it took Ronald Reagan three years to turn against the brutal regime of Ferdinand Marcos in the Phillipines. And it took Bill Clinton a year and a half to lever Suharto out of power in Indonesia.
Looking more closely at the latest statement from Barack Obama, one line stands out:
That's the closest the US administration has come to aligning itself with the protesters and endorsing them as legitimately representing Egypt.
The statement from Barack Obama finally lands – and it is mildly critical of Mubarak's sluggish and stubborn response, saying that "it is not yet clear that this transition is immediate, meaningful or sufficient":
The Egyptian people have been told that there was a transition of authority, but it is not yet clear that this transition is immediate, meaningful or sufficient. Too many Egyptians remain unconvinced that the government is serious about a genuine transition to democracy, and it is the responsibility of the government to speak clearly to the Egyptian people and the world. The Egyptian government must put forward a credible, concrete and unequivocal path toward genuine democracy, and they have not yet seized that opportunity. As we have said from the beginning of this unrest, the future of Egypt will be determined by the Egyptian people. But the United States has also been clear that we stand for a set of core principles. We believe that the universal rights of the Egyptian people must be respected, and their aspirations must be met. We believe that this transition must immediately demonstrate irreversible political change, and a negotiated path to democracy. To that end, we believe that the emergency law should be lifted. We believe that meaningful negotiations with the broad opposition and Egyptian civil society should address the key questions confronting Egypt's future: protecting the fundamental rights of all citizens; revising the Constitution and other laws to demonstrate irreversible change; and jointly developing a clear roadmap to elections that are free and fair. We therefore urge the Egyptian government to move swiftly to explain the changes that have been made, and to spell out in clear and unambiguous language the step by step process that will lead to democracy and the representative government that the Egyptian people seek. Going forward, it will be essential that the universal rights of the Egyptian people be respected. There must be restraint by all parties. Violence must be forsaken. It is imperative that the government not respond to the aspirations of their people with repression or brutality. The voices of the Egyptian people must be heard. The Egyptian people have made it clear that there is no going back to the way things were: Egypt has changed, and its future is in the hands of the people. Those who have exercised their right to peaceful assembly represent the greatness of the Egyptian people, and are broadly representative of Egyptian society. We have seen young and old, rich and poor, Muslim and Christian join together, and earn the respect of the world through their non-violent calls for change. In that effort, young people have been at the forefront, and a new generation has emerged. They have made it clear that Egypt must reflect their hopes, fulfill their highest aspirations, and tap their boundless potential. In these difficult times, I know that the Egyptian people will persevere, and they must know that they will continue to have a friend in the United States of America.
The Guardian's Jack Shenker was among the thousands inside Tahrir Square when Mubarak's speech was screened live. Here's what he saw:
The Egyptian blogger Zenobia is in no doubt about what's behind Mubarak's behaviour:
Meanwhile, the military command was supposed to have made a statement this evening but it appears that has been postponed until Friday morning.
Disturbing news from Iran, with the BBC confirming that its Persian television service is being jammed tonight inside Iran, following its coverage of the unrest in Egypt. The BBC's World Service director Peter Horrocks said:
The heavy electronic jamming is of satellites the BBC uses in the Middle East to broadcast the BBC Persian TV signal to Iran. The BBC said technicians have traced that interference and have confirmed it is coming from Iran.
"Utter deflation" is the mood at Tahrir Square, says Jack Shenker, who sends the latest from Cairo tonight:
Opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei gives his reaction via Twitter:
Asked on CNN about Mubarak's transfer of power to Omar Suleiman, ElBaradei said: "How can you be a president without any power?"
Stephen Grand, an expert on US-Islamic world relations at the the Brookings Institution in Washington, says the US must "use all of its leverage to get Mubarak to recognise that he needs to leave" and move forward:
The White House is saying President Obama will put out a statement soon, we'll post it as soon as we get.
It's well past 1am in Egypt but the streets of Alexandria are still filled with thousands of protesters, based on al-Jazeera's live coverage.
There are reports of some shots being fired but generally things are calm. Tomorrow, though, the biggest protest so far is being anticipated.
Human Rights Watch calls for military aid to Egypt to be cut in the wake of Mubarak's stubborn refusal to leave or make meaningful reforms:
Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch, said: "Mubarak's speech is far from the needed break with the abusive system of the past 30 years. Cosmetic changes are not enough to meet the Egyptian people's demands for democracy and human rights."
Senator John McCain says Mubarak's reaction tonight is "deeply unfortunate and troubling":
Here's reaction from Egyptians who watched Mubarak's speech tonight, from Reuters:
Here's what we know, based on what's coming out of the Egyptian government right now: Hosni Mubarak is president in name only, after transferring all the powers of the presidency to his vice president Omar Suleiman.
Egypt's ambassador to the US, Sameh Shoukry, confirms that Hosni Mubarak has transferred all powers of the president to vice president Omar Suleiman.
In response to questions from CNN's Wolf Blitzer, Shoukry said that Mubarak was "the de jure president" and that Suleiman was now the "de facto president". "I'm getting this [information] from the vice president," Shoukry said.
"He [vice president Suleiman] is now undertaking all the authority of the presidency under the constitution," Shoukry.
Was Mubarak now in effect powerless? "That is certainly an interpretation you can make ... he remains the de jure head of state," said Shoukry.
Asked in Mubarak could reclaim the full powers of the presidency at a later date, Shoukry said: "That's a technical constitutional issue that I unable to speak to."
The Guardian's Chris McGreal, on the ground in Cairo and watching the reaction on the streets, gives his take on Hosni Mubarak's speech tonight:
There seems to be huge confusion over what Mubarak really did say this evening, and exactly what power he handed over to the vice president, Omar Suleiman.
CNN is saying that it has now got a "precise translation" with Mubarak saying he was "delegating power" to Suleiman – not "the power" or "all power," but a frustratingly vague use of language.
The Associated Press also says it has a better translation of Mubarak's exact words, which it says read:
According to AP, the Egyptian constitution allows the president to transfer his powers if he is unable to carry out his duties "due to any temporary obstacle," but it does not mean his resignation.

"There are only two options: death or freedom. And we shall have freedom, Inshallah," says a young male protester in Tahrir Square on CNN, with many vowing a huge turnout tomorrow.
What will you do now? asks the CNN journalist. "I am ready to die," says the man. "Give me liberty or give me death," says another, in an echo of the American revolutionaries.
Ewen MacAskill reports on the humiliation the White House has received from Mubarak, after Barack Obama's speech this afternoon and various US officials briefing that he was stepping down:
The Associated Press is reporting that Hosni Mubarak has transferred his powers to Omar Suleiman and retains only the title of president – a more substantial move than others have suggested, based on his speech tonight, that only some of his powers were being transferred:
This is interesting: the BBC's Paul Adams reports that people in Cairo are receiving text messages from the high council of the army, saying that it is monitoring how events unfold and will decide how to act.
Mubarak's address was watched by President Obama onboard Air Force One. He is planning to go straight from his plane to meet with his national security team at the White House.
"This is not what the [US] administration was told President Mubarak was going to do," reports CNN political correspondent John King.
"Mubarak sang his own praises," says the Guardian's Middle East editor, Ian Black, after watching the president's performance tonight:
Anderson Cooper on CNN listens to Omar Suleiman and says: "What we've heard from the vice president is the same lies we've heard before."
The next day or two is going to be very interesting.
Vice president Omar Suleiman now speaking live on television – and like Mubarak he's not giving much away. In fact like Mubarak he's just taking much the same line as the regime has done in recent days:
My colleague Matt Wells has just spoken to Jack Shenker in Tahrir Square, where the mood is one of fury.
Jack says the people were huddled around radios listening to the speech in silence. But once it became clear that Mubarak intended to stay on, the mood changed to anger.
Omar Suleiman is going to make a televised statement shortly.
It seems that crowds from Tahrir Square are moving towards the state television headquarters in Cairo, while in Alexandria protesters are said to be moving towards the nearest military base.
State television has reverted to its old trick of showing the protesters in the distance, showing that it at least remains firmly under the control of the regime.
The Guardian's Brian Whitaker gives his analysis of Mubarak's speech:
We'll be posting reaction from the Guardian's crack team around the globe but here is the key quote from Mubarak's speech:
At that point protesters erupted in jeers and shoe-waving.
Tahrir Square is filled with a huge, angry crowd – although state television isn't showing any of it. Same in Alexandria.
A clear translation of Mubarak's words will take a while so it's hard to know exactly what Mubarak was saying. But from the reaction on the ground, it seems that these minor concessions will not be enough.
There was little that was new in Mubarak's speech, and he granted some powers to Omar Suleiman, but little else and far less than many were expected.
None of this meshes with the statements issued by the military leadership today: that hints at a palace civil war going on behind the scenes.
No one in Tahrir Square is listening to the rest of the Mubarak speech. The chant is: "Get out, get out."
"We will be dignified until the very end, may God preserve Egypt, may peace be upon you," is Mubarak's final remark.
No sign he's leaving. The "I have been ignoring international pressure" line suggests this was a "I fight on" speech by Mubarak.
Mubarak's not stepping down, that much seems clear, although exactly what that means with his previous statements about the army implementing change isn't clear.
Tahrir Square is going nuts, based on the live footage.
"I have spent most of my life in defence of our homeland," says Mubarak. "I have never succumbed to any international pressure.... I have my dignity intact."
So he's not stepping down, it seems.
Mubarak says he's asked for the amendment of articles 76, 77, 88, 93 and 181 of the constitution, and abolishing the controversial article 179 "when the time is right".
Article 179 is the emergency law that has been a huge issue and a major demand of the protesters. The rest involve the powers and terms of the presidency but we'll get more details later.
In any case, "when the time is right" means: not right now, I'm guessing. This is not going to go down well.
Mentions that the reforms will be "implemented by our armed forces," and on-going dialogue.
Talking about a "national dialogue" and a "road map that is very clear on a specific timetable ... until September," but follows this by talking about the various committees he has had set up.
I'm not sure more committees are going to cut it right now in Tahrir Square.
Mubarak speaking: talking of a "smooth transition of powers" but not much detail yet.
Mubarak reaffirms that he's not standing for election as president and that power will be transfered to "whoever the electorate chooses in the new fair and square elections".
Mubarak speaking: mistakes were made, he says.
Says he will "respond to your demands and your voices" and carry our promises.
More breaking news from Al Arabiya television, who says that Mubarak will say in his speech tonight that he apologises to the victims of Egypt's unrest and that he is convinced by the honest intentions of the youths protesting.
Al Arabiya also said Mubarak would say that he was amending five articles in the constitution and cancelling a sixth, and that he would not accept orders from outside.
It claimed he will also confirm pledges to prepare for honest elections, say again that he will not run for another presidential term, and could announce the lifting of the country's emergency laws.
More to come on this so stay tuned.
Al Arabiya television is reporting what it claims are details from Mubarak's speech this evening, citing what it called trusted sources, that Mubarak will announce a transfer of power to his vice president, though it was unclear just when that would happen.
More to come.
More from the #ReasonsMubarakIsLate hashtag now burning up Twitter:
After Egypt? There are big protests promised for Algeria on 12 February, while Morocco saw more protests in Rabat, where around 1,000 people took to the streets to demand jobs.
State television is now reporting that Mubarak's speech will begin shortly. We'll see.
On Twitter the hashtag #reasonsmubarakislate is trending. Here are some of the many suggestions:
Chris McGreal in Cairo reminds us that last time Mubarak went on television to make an address, he was scheduled to speak at 10pm but didn't appear until midnight, local time.
If tonight's announcement sees Egypt swapping Mubarak for vice president Omar Suleiman at the head of government, many in Tahrir Square and elsewhere will not be happy:
Others are even more emphatic.
On the information minister's statement (below) that Mubarak is "definitely not going to step down," my colleague Chris McGreal in Cairo comments:
Still waiting for Mubarak to appear on television.
Egypt's information minister Anas el Fekky has told Reuters: "The president is definitely not going to step down", shortly before Hosni Mubarak's address to the nation is broadcast.
And if you can't believe the information minister, who can you believe? Two words: Baghdad Bob.
It will be a footnote in history, if that, but Egyptian prosecutors have filed charges today against three former ministers and a prominent businessman of abusing their position and misusing public money, according to state television.
Only 15 minutes until Mubarak is due to speak on television – but don't be surprised if there's a delay.
The Associated Press tries to make sense of the Egyptian military moves today, after its leadership announced on national television that it had stepped in to secure the country and promised protesters that all their demands would be met.
And here's more detail on the announcement:
For a taste of the atmosphere in Tahrir Square right now, have a look at this Guardian video that we have just posted, as the protesters await word from Mubarak.
ABC's veteran correspondent Christiane Amanpour tweets about a chance meeting with the man of the moment, Wael Ghonim:
Reports are that now even state television, Nile TV, are screening live footage of the pro-democracy demonstrators in Tahrir Square and elsewhere – an abrupt change from the pro-regime footage it had been showing in recent days, including interviews with supposed "protesters" who made wild claims of US and Mossad involvement.
Now William Hague has weighed in, speaking at a press conference in Bahrain:
The Al Arabiya television channel is reporting that Hosni Mubarak will announce new constitutional procedures before handing over his powers to vice president Omar Sulieman, according to its correspondent. There were no further details.
(Technical issues have been slowing this live blog done but those should now be resolved.)
A statement released by Egyptian military about half an hour ago, although it doesn't make things any clearer:
If that was the statement that the army promised "that will meet protesters' demands" then this isn't likely to do it.
Barack Obama has just addressed events in Egypt before a speech he was giving just now, although he didn't have much to say:
There are reports that the Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak, is about to announce his resignation. Follow live updates here.
If you want to catch up on earlier events then see our live blog of events earlier today.