(2nd LD) S. Korea on high alert over N. Korea's possible provocations
SEOUL, Aug. 22 (Yonhap) -- South Korea is on high alert Saturday to retaliate against North Korea for any possible provocations amid a looming deadline to defuse the latest tensions on the Korean Peninsula.
North Korea has set 5 p.m. Saturday as the deadline for South Korea to halt anti-Pyongyang propaganda broadcasts along the heavily fortified border and dismantle all loudspeakers.
The North has threatened to launch "a strong military action" if South Korea defies its ultimatum. North Korea also warned late Friday that it is prepared to engage in "all-out war."    The harsh war rhetoric raised tensions on the Korean Peninsula to the highest level in recent years. The two Koreas are still technically at war because the 1950-53 Korean War ended in a truce, not a peace treaty.
Cheong Wa Dae, South Korea's presidential office, plans to hold a National Security Council session around 5 p.m. to discuss countermeasures if provoked.
"We are closely monitoring the situation," presidential spokesman Min Kyung-wook said. "We are ready to strongly respond to any North Korean provocations."    A possible military clash between the two Koreas is looming large on the divided peninsula as South Korea has vowed to continue the psychological warfare, which Pyongyang claims insults its dignity.
The North has bristled at South Korea's propaganda campaign amid concern that an influx of outside information could pose a threat to its leader Kim Jong-un.
North Korea deployed towed artillery with a 76.2 mm diameter inside the demilitarized zone that separates the two Koreas, a military source said, for its possible strike on South Korean loudspeakers that blare anti-Pyongyang messages.
"There are also moves from artillery corps in the rear area," the source said.
Eight fighter jets -- four F-16s from the United States Forces Korea and four South Korean F-15Ks -- swept through the sky of South Korea earlier in the day in the latest show of force against North Korea, according to the South Korean military.
Fears of a military clash sent more than 3,700 residents near the border with North Korea scurrying for shelters. The evacuation is set to finish by 4 p.m., one hour before the North's deadline.
The North's recent moves underscored the desperate attempt to protect what it calls the "dignity" of its leader Kim Jong-un -- a top priority among North Koreans.
South Korea has resumed the propaganda broadcasts along the border for the first time in 11 years in retaliation against North Korea for a recent landmine attack that left two South Korean soldiers severely injured.
South Korea accused the North of planting the mines inside the military buffer zone, a charge denied by North Korea.
Separately, Foreign Minister Yun Byung-se has cut short his visit to Costa Rica to deal with the escalating situations. Yun is to arrive in Seoul on early Sunday, a day ahead of schedule, according to the Foreign Ministry.
Kim Young-woo, spokesman of the ruling Saenuri Party, warned that North Korea could face self-destruction if it carries out provocations. The party plans to hold a meeting of its top officials to discuss the latest situation at 5 p.m.
The main opposition New Politics Alliance for Democracy urged North Korea to hold dialogue with South Korea to defuse the tension, saying the North's threats won't be helpful to inter-Korean affairs.
Top officials of the rival parties also held a meeting later in the day to discuss how to deal with North Korea's possible provocations.