Turkish police arrest six after Russian ambassador Andrey Karlov shot dead in Ankara
Turkish police have detained six people over the killing of the Russian ambassador, who was shot in the back as he gave a speech in Ankara by an off-duty police officer shouting "Don't forget Aleppo" and "Allahu Akbar".
Russia's ambassador to Turkey, Andrey Karlov, was making a speech at the opening of a photographic exhibition when he was shot and killed by Melvut Mert Aydintas, a 22-year old member of Ankara's riot police squad.
Aydintas was later killed in a shootout with police, while three others were wounded in the attack, authorities said.
The state-run Anadolu media agency said the attacker's mother, father, sister and two other relatives have been held in the western province of Aydin, while his flatmate in Ankara has also been detained.
Police paced up and down behind a cordon on Tuesday morning outside the art gallery where the ambassador was shot. A crime scene investigation van was parked outside the building.
Aydintas was wearing a dark suit and tie and fired at least eight shots, at one point walking around Mr Karlov as he lay motionless and shooting him again at close range.
A video showed the attacker shouting: "Don't forget Aleppo, don't forget Syria!" and "Allahu Akbar" ("God is Greatest") as screams rang out.
"We are the descendants of those who supported the Prophet Muhammad, for jihad," he also yelled in Arabic.
He paced about and shouted as he held the gun in one hand and waved his other hand in the air.
The United States said its three missions in Turkey would be closed for a day after a gun was fired in front of the US embassy in Ankara on Monday night.
The embassy was near the art gallery where Mr Karlov was shot and Turkish police detained a man over the incident, state media reported.
Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan said he and his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin had agreed in a telephone call that their cooperation in fighting terrorism should be even stronger after the killing.
Mr Putin said it was aimed at derailing Russia's attempts to find, with Iran and Turkey, a solution for the Syria crisis.
The countries' foreign ministers were meeting on Tuesday.
Turkey faces multiple security threats, including from the Islamic State militant group. A spokesman for the hard-line Sunni Muslim group urged sympathisers around the world this month to carry out a fresh wave of attacks, singling out Turkish diplomatic, military and financial interests as preferred targets.
However, a senior Turkish security official said there were "very strong signs" the gunman belonged to the network of the US-based cleric Fethullah Gulen, who Ankara says orchestrated a failed coup in July.
The official also cited the fact the attacker had taken July 15-17 as a holiday. The Government may argue the timing of his holiday demonstrated foreknowledge of the July 15 coup.
Mr Erdogan has denounced Mr Gulen as a terrorist, but the cleric, a former ally, denies the accusation, and has also denied any role in the assassination.
Russia is an ally of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and its air strikes helped Syrian forces end rebel resistance last week in the northern city of Aleppo.
Turkey, which seeks Mr Assad's ouster, has been repairing ties with Moscow after shooting down a Russian warplane over Syria last year.
Australian Foreign Minister Julie Bishop condemned the "shocking" attack on Twitter and extended her condolences to his family and the Russian people.
Russia's Ambassador to Australia, Grigory Logvinov, worked with Mr Karlov for decades in North Asia and the Russian diplomatic service. He said Mr Karlov's death was a tragedy.