Deadly day in Syria as diplomats talk
The statements came on what may be the bloodiest day since the unrest's start 21 months ago: At least 399 people were killed Saturday, the opposition Local Coordination Committees said,the highest daily death toll the group has ever reported.The figure includes 201 people who a captured Syrian soldier said had been executed in Deir Balbah, outside of Homs, after Syrian forces won a battle there, an LCC spokesman said.
The Syrian government has not commented on the alleged mass execution in Deir Balbah. But Syrian state TV did show images of dead bodies and seized weapons in tunnels in that city it claims were being used by "terrorists," the term it routinely uses to describe opposition fighters.
"I think Sergey Lavrov is absolutely right that the conflict is not only more and more militarized, it is more and more sectarian," Brahimi told reporters after the talks in Moscow.
Moscow remains opposed to any foreign intervention. But as the conflict rages and the casualty count climbs to an estimated 40,000, Russia appears willing to look at options for a political transition in Syria.
Lavrov also called for reviving the plan, which was crafted during a Geneva, Switzerland, conference that included representatives from world powers that had been at odds over the Syrian conflict. It called for a cease-fire, a transitional government and a new constitution, though it did not specify whether al-Assad would have to step down.
But neither the opposition nor al-Assad's government has signaled a willingness to sign on to it. In fact, fighting escalated since then and rebels now control a number of locales they'd seized from al-Assad's forces.
"The Syrians disagree violently. On one side, the government says we are doing our duty to protect our people from ... terrorists. On the other side, they say the government is illegitimate," Brahimi said. "They are not talking about the same problem. They are talking about two different problems."
Still, they said those disagreements -- and the earlier failure to get both sides to agree on the Geneva plan -- shouldn't prevent them from trying again to reach a political solution.
Ahmed Moaz al-Khatib -- head of the Syrian National Coalition, which the United States and other nations have called the legitimate representatives of the Syrian people, a move panned by Russia -- said his group is open to talks, but not in Russia. He said Russia has overlooked atrocities in Syria and must condemn such crimes before his group engages in talks involving them.
"We sent signals to the coalition to change their position and support the Geneva agreement. We had a contact with Khatib. We offered to meet in Moscow. He suggested to meet in any other country. We agreed on that," the foreign minister said.
The Free Syrian Army took the town, which lies along the Daraa-Damascus highway, on Friday, according to the LCC. Al-Assad's forces surrounded the town Saturday and fired rockets and mortar rounds, the opposition group said.