Syrian refugees in Turkey: Police are forcing us from homes
"I told one cop, 'What if I don't leave?'" said a male Syrian refugee who asked not to be named to protect him from Turkish and Syrian government reprisals. "He said, 'We will take you to the police station and force you to evacuate'" your home.
"The first time the police came, they asked for my passport, took a look at it, and then one of them said, 'You have three months, you can stay here for three months,'" said another Syrian man who asked to be named as Abu Ahmed to protect his family members still living in Syria.
"We are trying to guide and suggest people who arrived legally or 'illegally' to go either into the camps, if they have arrived illegally, or suggesting the others to move to nearby or different cities," said a Turkish official, who asked not to be named because he was not authorized to be interviewed by the press.
United Nations refugee agency But Turkish diplomats estimate there are another 40,000 to 50,000 unofficial Syrian refugees who have chosen to live in Turkey outside of the camps. On Tuesday the United Nations refugee agency said that the number of Syrian refugees in neighboring countries has more than tripled since June to over 300,000.
Clutching signs that said "No to war," "Turkey Syria Brothers," and "Damn American Imperialism," the crowd accused the government of allowing foreign jihadists and members of al Qaeda to travel through Antakya to join the rebel movement in Syria. Demonstrators also demanded the closure of the Apaydin refugee camp, which for more than a year has housed defected Syrian army officers who now claim to lead the rebel Free Syrian Army.
That violence continued Tuesday, with at least 160 deaths reported by the Local Coordination Committees of Syria. That included 54 in Damascus and its suburbs, 29 in Daraa, 30 in Aleppo, 21 in Deir Ezzor, 18 in Homs, 3 in Hama and 5 in Idlib. Seventeen of those killed in Damascus suburbs were victims of shelling in Harasta, the LCC said.
Over the past month, Turkish authorities have partially shut their "open door" policy to Syria, leaving thousands of displaced Syrians languishing at the border. Turkish officials said more camps had to be built before new waves of refugees could be let in.
"We are trying to see that all provinces in Turkey share the load of the Syrian nationals in a more equitable way, so we can have more sustainable assistance to all people," said the official in the Turkish capital, who asked not to be named.