Crimean parliament presidium offers May 25 as referendum date. - Feb. 27, 2014
“Two issues will be put forward: holding the Crimean-wide referendum on May 25 on the broadening of powers for the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. The second issue: the economic situation in the Crimea and government reports. We are planning to consider these issues to meet the demands of those people who today are out in the streets and outraged, seeing no future prospects,” Konstantynov said in a public video appeal on Feb. 27.
The Crimean parliament continues working as usual, despite the events occurring in Ukraine and the Crimea, he said.
“The situation remains tense. A conflict started yesterday. Radical elements did not allow us to hold an extraordinary session of the Supreme Council. Following my resolution today I organized the extraordinary Supreme Council session where we shall discuss issues of vital importance for autonomy,” Konstantynov said.
It was reported earlier that the presidium of the Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea initiated a referendum across the republic on the subject of “improving autonomous status and broadening its powers” and made the relevant announcement, Crimean Verkhovna Rada Chairman’s Secretary Oksana Korniychuk said.
The statement says, in particular, that the quiet in the Crimea is under threat as a result of “the non-constitutional seizure of power in Ukraine by radical nationalists supported by armed gangs,” Crimean media outlets said.
“Under these conditions, the Crimean Supreme Council, being the highest representative body of power in the Crimea, and based on the will of the Crimeans who elected it, is taking upon itself full responsibility for the fate of the Crimea. According to the fundamental democratic canons, the Presidium of the Crimean Parliament considers the application of the principles of direct people’s rule the only possible way of exiting the current situation. We are convinced that only a Crimean-wide referendum over the improvement of the autonomous status and broadening of its powers will enable the Crimeans to decide the future of the autonomy without any outside pressure,” the statement said.
The Supreme Council session was scheduled to begin at 2 p.m. (4 p.m. Moscow time) on Feb. 27, but its agenda is unknown. It is also unknown whether the Crimean Supreme Council deputies have accepted the Presidium’s proposal.