Jordan challenges ISIS claim U.S. hostage killed
Amman, Jordan (CNN)Was an American hostage held in Syria killed by a Jordanian airstrike? That's what ISIS said in an online posting Friday, claiming that she died in the group's de facto capital, Raqqa.
The posting Friday included a picture of a collapsed building and a claim that the woman -- confirmed by her family to be Kayla Mueller -- was being held there.
But it did not show a body or provide any proof of death.
Jordanian government spokesman Mohammed al-Momani said his country is looking into the claim. But, he said, "we are highly skeptical" because of ISIS's proven lack of credibility, and he questioned whether they could identify Jordanian warplanes so high in the sky or would hold a hostage in a "weapon warehouse."
Later, he told CNN that ISIS uses "these events to manipulate facts and to manipulate public opinion."
"After going to extraordinary efforts to keep Kayla's name out of the media for so long, by securing the cooperation of journalists throughout the world, her name was released today. This news leaves us concerned, yet, we are still hopeful that Kayla is alive. We have sent you a private message and ask that you respond to us privately."
Before that, Mueller graduated from Northern Arizona University and spent years traversing the world -- including India, Israel and her native Arizona, where she worked in an HIV/AIDS clinic and volunteered at a women's shelter. Her going to Syria in late 2012 with the Danish Refugee Council and Support to Life humanitarian agency aligned with that same mission to help others.
What drove her? According to her family, Mueller would say, "I find God in the suffering eyes reflected in mine. If this is how you are revealed to me, this is how you are revealed to me, this is how I will forever seek you."
After the video came out, Jordanian officials said they have reason to believe al-Kasasbeh was actually killed in early January. That suggested that during the month between, while signaling its openness to a prisoner exchange with Jordan, ISIS had known all along that the pilot was dead.
"We all know that (the U.S.-led military coalition's) intelligence ... in Syria is not as good as we have in Iraq now," Reese said. "So it is plausible (Mueller was killed), and it could be unfortunate. But sometimes ... that happens in these wars."