Burkina Faso attack: At least 29 dead in hotel siege
(CNN)Attackers raided a luxury hotel in Burkina Faso overnight, shooting some and taking others hostage in a siege that lasted hours and ended with 29 people dead.
An al Qaeda-linked terrorist group claimed responsibility for the assault at Splendid Hotel -- a popular meeting place for Western diplomats in the capital, Ouagadougou.
The attack began Friday night and dragged on under the cover of darkness. Security forces circled the perimeter to assess the situation before they stormed in hours later.
Burnt-out cars sit in front of the Splendid Hotel after an overnight attack in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, on Saturday, January 16. Attackers raided the luxury hotel late Friday, opening fire and seizing hostages in a siege that lasted several hours and ended with at least 23 people dead.
The outside of the Splendid Hotel in Ouagadougou is seen after the siege ended. Security forces launched an assault against gunmen, state broadcaster RTB said early Saturday.
Freed hostages are escorted to safety by special forces.
Armed forces secure the hotel following the siege.
French special forces gather while taking positions near the Splendid Hotel and a restaurant during the siege.
Burkina Faso soldiers take position outside the hotel.
A wounded man receives medical care outside the Splendid Hotel late on Friday, January 15.
"Everyone was panicked and was lying down on the floor. There was blood everywhere, they were shooting at people at point blank," said Yannick Sawadogo, who survived the siege.
Security forces entered the hotel early Saturday and freed 126 hostages, half of whom were hospitalized, according to Burkina Faso's foreign minister, Alpha Barry.
Of the 29 people who died, 22 have been identified, Ouagadougou prosecutor Maïza Sereme said, according to state broadcaster RTB.
President Roch Marc Christian Kabore told the nation more than 50 people were wounded. The injured included two Burkinabe police officers, one soldier and one service member from France.
It was unclear whether the death toll included the three attackers that Kabore said were killed.
"We could hear them talking and they were walking around and kept shooting at people who seemed alive," Sawadogo told CNN affiliate BFMTV.
Sawadogo said he escaped through a broken window, and could barely see because of smoke.
The West African nation's forces received logistical support from American and French troops. Shortly after the forces stormed the hotel, the sounds of gunshots faded.
The assault appeared well-planned, with some of the attackers coming to the hotel during the day and mingling with guests, authorities said. When darkness fell, more attackers joined them.
Before the hotel assault, they attacked the Cappuccino café across the street, which had about 100 people, according to the state broadcaster.
They then took off to the Splendid Hotel, where they seized hostages.
Two French nationals were among the dead, BFMTV reported. Canada said six of its citizens were killed.
Four of the dead came from the same Ukrainian family and included a 9-year-old girl. Two of the deceased were from Switzerland, that nation's Foreign Ministry said.
"We extend our condolences to the family of Michael James Riddering. Our thoughts and prayers are with his family at this difficult time, as they are with all those affected by this brutality," State Department spokesman John Kirby said.
Other victims included seven Burkinabe, four Canadians, two Swiss, one Dutch, one Libyan and one Portuguese, Sereme said, according to RTB.
Al Qaeda-linked Al-Mourabitoun said it conducted the attack, which had similarities to the one in neighboring Mali in November.
French President Francois Hollande said he stands with the nation against the "odious and cowardly attack."
The U.S. Embassy condemned the attack, describing it as a " senseless assault on innocent people."
Abductors have seized two Australian doctors, who are married, Kabore said.
The couple was taken in the town of Djibo near the border with Mali early Saturday. They worked in a clinic there.
Australian authorities did not immediately comment on the kidnapping.