Adoption of declaration to certify that Armenia recognizes Greek and Assyrian genocide: 
Eduard Sharmazanov
YEREVAN, 23 MARCH, ARMENPRESS. The declaration of the National Assembly “On the Genocide of the Greeks and Assyrians Perpetrated by Ottoman Turkey between 1915 and 1923” means that the Republic of Armenia recognizes the Greek and Assyrian genocide.
This is what Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia Eduard Sharmazanov said in response to Deputy of the faction of the Republican Party of Armenia of the National Assembly Koryun Nahapetyan's question. “We have chosen to adopt a declaration because the National Assembly of Armenia adopts declarations in very important cases. In this case, we proposed, discussed and came to the conclusion that the adoption of a declaration would be more appropriate because the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia doesn't always adopt a declaration. In this sense, by submitting the draft as a declaration on condemnation, we want to show society, our Greek and Assyrian brothers and sisters and the international community once again that the National Assembly of the Republic of Armenia and all the political forces attach importance to condemnation of the genocide perpetrated against the Greeks and Assyrians,” Sharmazanov underscored, as “Armenpress” reports.
In response to Koryun Nahapetyan’s other question regarding the reason for a limited number of cases of recognition of the Greek and Assyrian genocide, Sharmazanov said perhaps that was also due to the fact that the Greeks and Assyrians haven’t succeeded in working together. “One thing that I can emphasize is that when the resolution condemning the genocide of the Armenians, Greeks and Assyrians was adopted in Sweden, it was adopted through the combined efforts of the three communities. We have to be united. We have to combine all our efforts so that we can fight against the denial of the Turks,” the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly emphasized.