IAEA chief to visit Iran for nuclear talks
The head of the UN nuclear watchdog will arrive in Tehran on Monday morning for a day of negotiations with the Iranian government on its co-operation with the agency, at the start of a week that is likely to be critical to an international effort to defuse tensions in the Gulf.
Yukiya Amano, director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), will hold talks with Iran's chief nuclear negotiator, Saeed Jalili, and senior officials from the country's nuclear programme, with the aim of reaching a breakthrough agreement on inspections of sites and access to scientists suspected of having been involved in work on nuclear weapons.
Two days later, Jalili will meet the EU foreign policy chief, Lady Ashton, and senior diplomats from six world powers – the US, UK, France, Russia, China and Germany – in Baghdad to discuss other confidence-building measures, including limits on Iranian uranium enrichment.
The degree of progress at both meetings is likely to have an important bearing on the level of tension surrounding Iran's nuclear programme, the likelihood of an Israeli military strike against Iranian nuclear sites, and global oil prices.
Amano's trip to Tehran is the first by an IAEA director general since his predecessor, Mohamed ElBaradei, visited in 2009. If the Japanese diplomat succeeds in securing an agreement on the IAEA investigation into alleged Iranian work on nuclear weapons, it would vindicate his tough approach to Tehran in the face of criticism that he is too closely aligned with the west.
"The focus of the visit will be on the issue of a framework. We hope the two sides can reach an agreement and draw up a new framework to answer [IAEA] questions and clear up ambiguities," the Iranian foreign minister, Ali Akbar Salehi, told local media at the weekend.
The Iranian government has insisted on establishing such a framework before allowing IAEA inspectors to visit sensitive sites such as the Parchin military base, where the agency wants to investigate intelligence reports that Iranian technicians tested high-explosive components of a nuclear warhead.
Iran has denied ever having conducted development work on nuclear weapons.
The independent Institute for Science and International Security in Washington published satellite photos this month showing recent activity that could be an attempt to clean up the Parchin site.
The IAEA chief inspector, Herman Nackaerts, who will be accompanying Amano to Tehran, has been reluctant to enter into any agreement with Iran that would tie the hands of his inspectors in conducting their investigation. Amano's decision to fly to Tehran to try to seal an agreement suggests he believes a compromise can be found.
Diplomats who have followed the long history of negotiations with Tehran since its uranium enrichment and heavy water programmes were first revealed in 2002 point out that a previous agreement on a IAEA "work plan" to investigate allegations of weapons work fell apart in 2008 before inspectors could interview key nuclear scientists.
An IAEA agreement in Tehran could have a positive impact on the Baghdad talks on Wednesday. The negotiations between Jalili, Ashton and the six-nation group will seek to build on a similar meeting in Istanbul last month, where Jalili agreed in principle to negotiate over Iran's nuclear programme.
Western diplomats hope the Baghdad talks will make progress towards a confidence-building deal by which Iran would stop making 20% enriched uranium, a more concentrated material than the fuel used in modern power stations, which is closer to the level of purity needed for making weapons.
In return, the west would provide fuel for a medical research reactor in Tehran and provide advice and equipment to improve safety standards at that reactor and at a nuclear power station at Bushehr, on the Gulf coast.
Western officials said Tehran appeared to be keen to strike a bargain as it was faced with broad and damaging sanctions, including an EU oil embargo, the threat of Israeli military action and the substantial weakening of its only significant ally in the region, the Assad regime in Damascus.
"These negotiations could, if the parties have a real and serious will [for them to succeed], and on condition that realism reigns, open the road to a compromise which would permit on one hand the alleviation of the concerns of the west, while on the other hand bring Iran the assurances it needs on the pursuit of nuclear activities and uranium enrichment on its soil for completely civil purposes," the Iranian ambassador to Paris, Ali Ahani, wrote in Le Monde on Friday, in what appeared part of a public relations offensive before the Baghdad talks.