ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
North Korea has shown off its long-range rocket to foreign journalists as it prepares to send what it claims is a satellite into orbit, which its neighbours believe is a ballistic missile test.
In a rare move, the regime allowed the rocket to be viewed on the launch pad in the country's north-west.
The launch could take place any time between Thursday and next Monday.
Pyongyang says the rocket will send a satellite into orbit to observe the Earth and will be used for weather observation and to collect data on natural resources.
But the United States, South Korea and Japan say the launch is a ballistic missile test, and both Tokyo and Seoul have vowed to shoot the rocket down if it comes near their airspace.
North Korea says it will respond with merciless punishment if the rocket is brought down.
"To say this is a missile test is really nonsense," Jang Myong-Jin, head of the Tongchang-ri space centre, said.
"This launch was planned long ago, on the occasion of the 100th birthday of (late) president Kim Il-sung.
"We are not doing it for provocative purposes."
Chinese foreign affairs minister Yang Jiechi has told his South Korean and Japanese counterparts that peace on the Korean peninsula was in the interests of all, according to a statement.
Journalists, who arrived by a special train, were able to observe the rocket from 50 metres away. It was painted in white with sky-blue lettering.
The rocket is 30 metres high with a diameter of 2.5 metres.
Reporters were also able to see close up what officials said was the satellite: a 100-kilogram box with five antennae, covered by solar panels to supply it with electricity.
On Saturday, Japan deployed missile batteries in central Tokyo, and prime minister Yoshihiko Noda has given the green light to shoot down the rocket if it threatens Japan's territory.
But the head of the North's space centre sought to appease the worries of neighbouring countries.
"We can press the button to destroy the rocket, and there is also a device in the launching vehicle which can judge whether it is out of the range and destroy itself if it deviates," he said.
It is the first time North Korea has allowed foreign journalists to go to the new space centre built on the Cholsan peninsula, 50 kilometres from the Chinese border.