Iran nuclear talks break down sparking fears of showdown over regime's pursuit of atomic weapons
Catherine Ashton, the EU's foreign policy chief, said the talks reached a stalemate on Saturday after Iran laid down preconditions for discussing its nuclear programme. The conditions, Lady Ashton said, related to Iran's uranium enrichment programme.
Iran also called for an end sanctions imposed by the United Nations in 2006, which were tightened last summer.
William Hague, the foreign secretary, said Iran's "insistence on preconditions that were clearly unrealistic, is extremely disappointing."
Saeed Jalili, Iran's chief nuclear negotiator, denied that Iran had imposed preconditions, but said it had underlined "certain necessities that need to precede any meaningful talks."
Iran and a six-nation group called the P5+1 – the United States, United Kingdom, Russia, China, France plus Germany – began negotiations in Istanbul on Friday, fifteen months after an earlier round of negotiations broke down.
The two sides, separate British and French diplomatic sources told The Sunday Telegraph, failed to find common ground on three issues.
First, Iran demanded an end on sanctions before further discussions on its nuclear programme. The international group responded that the sanctions could only be lifted if Iran met the UN's demands to make its nuclear programme transparent.
Secondly, Iran called on the world powers to recognise its right to enrich uranium under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, an agreement which commits states without nuclear weapons not to produce them. The group responded that while the treaty did concede this right, it was on the condition that signatories not seek nuclear weapons – which in Iran's case, is in question.
Finally, Iran called for discussions on tightening the Nuclear Proliferation Treay – a diplomatically-worded call for action against Israel's nuclear weapons. The international group, though, wanted the talks to focus on Iran's own programme.
Both sides said they were open further talks, but did not set a date.
"Iran found the P5+1 united in its resolve," a British senior diplomat said. "I think when it studies the lessons from Istanbul, it will realise it has to engage in meaningful talks."
"Iran's negotiating position was in essence that what they had wasn't negotiable, while what the P5+1 wanted was, said Bruno Tertrais, a French nuclear expert.
"The P5+1 has made clear that this isn't going to work, which is a good thing."
Some experts, though, suggested the road ahead would be rough. Mustafa Kibaroglu, a Turkish nuclear expert, said the breakdown of talks made clear that Iran was willing to ride out the sanctions.
"Last year when Turkey and Brazil stitched together a fuel-swap deal, the P5+1 wouldn't listen. Now, Iran wants a much higher price in return for giving up its nuclear option," Dr Kibaroglu said.
The talks in Istanbul centred around proposals for what is called a "fuel-swap": the surrender of Iran's enriched uranium in return access to civilian nuclear technology and fuel for its nuclear reactors.
Experts argued that Iran's enrichment facilities are far in excess of its legitimate needs, and give it the know-how to further refine its uranium stockpile to weapons grade at short notice. They have also pointed to Iran's work on long-range ballistic missiles – weapons that are useful only if they carry nuclear warheads.
Iran's uranium enrichment is believed to have been slowed down by a combination of technical problems, and sabotage alleged to have been carried out by Israel's secret services.
Meir Dagan, the former head of Israel's intelligence services, said it was unlikely to be able to produce a working weapon until 2015.
But several diplomats also voiced fears that the breakdown in talks could strengthening the hands of hardliners in Saudi Arabia, Israel and the US, who have been calling for military strikes on its nuclear facilities.