16th NAM summit concludes
Sit-in protest against land mafia continues into fourth day in Rautahat district Rautahat, June 27 Locals of Rautahat district headquarters Gaur continued their sit-in protest for the fourth consecutive day today demanding protection of property belonging to Gaur Rice and Flour Mills worth millions. They staged the sit-in protest in front of the office of Gaur Municip...
Heat-stable drug could save thousands from post-childbirth bleeding: WHO LONDON: A new formulation of a drug to prevent excessive bleeding in women after they give birth could save thousands of lives in poorer countries, according to a study co-led by the World Health Organization (WHO). The drug, called carbetocin and made by Ferring Pharmaceuticals, could prove ...
Goals in each half secure top spot in Group E Brazil through to face Mexico in last 16 Serbia finish third and go out MOSCOW: After Germany's exit and Argentina's nerve-shredding escape,Brazil made more serene World Cup progress on Wednesday when goals by Paulinho and Thiago S...
Budget monitoring is a continuous process by which we ensure action plan is achieved  in terms of expenditure and income. Regular monitoring also ensures that resources are used for their planned purposes and are properly accounted for The federal budget announced on May 29 has drawn flak from...
Child labour creates a vicious cycle of inescapable poverty Kathmandu It is said that children are the pillars of the world and their overall development should be the utmost priority of every country. However, according to a joint data provided by UNICEF, Labour Organisation (ILO) and W...
Revamped collider to shine brighter light on physics mysteries at CERN GENEVA: Europe's physics research centre CERN launched an upgrade of its Large Hadron Collider (LHC) on Friday, six years after the huge particle accelerator solved an enduring riddle by confirming the existence of the elusive Higgs boson. Staff said the overhaul will boost the "luminosity"...