Little support for proposed CHOGM democracy commissioner
TONY EASTLEY: The Queen will officially open the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting this morning, but behind the scenes there is disquiet amongst some members about the lack of will to reform the organisation.
The Eminent Person's Group recommendations to set up a Commissioner for Democracy, Human Rights and the Rule of Law has received scant support.
Regardless, the Secretary-General and Australia's Prime Minister are talking up the prospects of the Perth conference being a landmark event.
SABRA LANE: Details about the opening ceremony for the 21st Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting are still secret, so too are the findings of the so-called Eminent Person's Group - the panel of nine outsiders charged with making recommendations to reform the Commonwealth.
Some countries and lobby groups are unhappy the report's been kept under wraps; claiming CHOGM's preparing to water-down the findings.
Britain's foreign secretary, William Hague, strongly put the case for full transparency before a public forum last night.
WILLIAM HAGUE: We've been discussing the recommendations of the Eminent Person's Group, recommendations as I was saying in the earlier meeting I think should have been published in advance for all of you and other people to comment on in advance of the meeting.
SABRA LANE: But the prime minister of Trinidad and Tobago, Kamla Persad-Bissessar, argues the organisation is following proper procedure.
KAMLA PERSAD-BISSESSAR: I'm a lawyer, now a head of government. It was in 2009 that the heads of government commissioned an EPG report and therefore it was my respectful view that before the report be released publicly that the heads of government should receive it.
SABRA LANE: It's known the group's recommended a charter of Commonwealth principles and a Commissioner for Democracy, Human Rights and the Rule of Law.
WILLIAM HAGUE: The case for reinvigorating the Commonwealth is abundantly clear and Britain wholeheartedly supports the recommendations of the EPG, in particular we welcome their focus on promoting the values of the Commonwealth.
The modern Commonwealth has always been an association based on strong values. We also support recommendations to institute a Commonwealth Commissioner for Democracy, Rule of Law and Human Rights. This is a controversial recommendation.
But whatever we decide about the rest of the EPG's recommendations, re-emphasising values of the Commonwealth family should not be about one group of countries lecturing another, but about learning from each other.
SABRA LANE: AM's been told only six or so nations favour the idea of a commissioner. The Prime Minister was asked about the wavering support - so far Julia Gillard's declined to say where Australia stands.
JULIA GILLARD: I'm not going to speculate as to what may emerge in discussions between leaders.
KAMALESH SHARMA: It's not enough to point to a train wreck, everybody can see that. You have to take an interest when the wagons are wobbling on the rail lines.
SABRA LANE: But Mr Sharma concedes decisions to reform the organisation must be agreed to by all parties.
KAMALESH SHARMA: We've heard one person's view which we must respect of course and there are views of 54 member states of the Commonwealth that have to be taken into account on going forward on an important decision like this. But we are about to embark on what I'm convinced will be a landmark for CHOGM.
SABRA LANE: We'll know if that's the case on Sunday.