North Korea missile threat: latest live
• Britain told to consider evacuating Pyongyang embassy • China 'shifts position' on North Korea • North Korea moves second missile to coast • Pictures: North Korea missile threat • Video: Kim Jong-un at target practice • Kim Jong-un steps up security detail • Biggest nuclear threat since Cuba, says Castro • Tension fails to halt building of bridge to China • North Korean embassy: all quiet on the Ealing front
18.14 That's all for this blog today but our live coverage will continue tonight with rolling news stories, video footage and fresh pictures, so keep checking our World news page for updates.
17.51 After North Korea's warnings to the British embassy in Pyongyang, the Telegraph's Alex Spillius paid a visit to the hermit state's embassy in London, where he reports it is all quiet on the Ealing front.
He also spoke to locals in the area, whose descriptions paint images of envoys who play golf, shop at Harrods, and are just 20 minutes from Heathrow - in case they need a quick getaway.
Five thousand miles away North Korea’s leaders may be banging the drums of war, but on the western front of London W5 it was all quiet.
17.37 The US has warned Pyongyang that "further provocative action would be regrettable"
"Missile tests outside their international obligations would be a provocative act. They need to follow international norms and abide by their commitments," Pentagon spokesman George Little told reporters.
16.38 And we're back to (slightly) menacing, as the North Korean state news agency releases a new video of Kim Jong-un apparently attending target practice with a handgun.

16.27 A moment of light-heartedness in the deepening crisis: a new picture has emerged of South Korean army reservists performing their compatriot, rapper PSY's hit "Gangnam Style" dance with a cheerleader before their Foundation Day ceremony at a gymnasium in Seoul, South Korea.
Well, why not.
16.16 The Foreign Office has released a new statement. The full statement is below - the key passage remains the middle one:
Earlier today, the North Korean Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed a number of Embassies of foreign countries in Pyongyang, including the British Embassy, and representatives of international organisations that they would be unable to guarantee the safety of Embassies and international organisations present in the country in the event of conflict. They invited the Embassies and organisations present at the meeting to inform them by 10 April what assistance they would require from the DPRK should they wish to be evacuated from DPRK or to be relocated elsewhere.
We are consulting international partners about these developments. No decisions have been taken, and we have no immediate plans to withdraw our Embassy.
In recent weeks, the North Korean Government has raised tensions on the Korean peninsula and the wider region through a series of public statements and other provocations. We condemn this behaviour and urge the North Korean Government to work constructively with the international community, including over the presence of foreign Embassies.”
15.41 America's top military official has given his assessment of the situation: worrisome, but does not appear to point to war.
Speaking to the Associated Press, General Martin Dempsey, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, said the rhetoric so far follows the pattern of provocation followed by non-violence accomodation.
What's different this time, he says - as has been pointed out many times elsewhere - is that Kim is a younger and relatively unknown leader that the US lacks understanding of. The North's threat to launch a nuclear attack on the US is also "new", he says, adding it is not clear that they have reached the point where they can fit a nuclear warhead atop a missile that could reach distant targets.
I wouldn't say I see anything to lead me to believe that this is a different kind of cycle... Though we've always said that North Korea has been a bit opaque to us, in the past we've understood their leadership and the influencers a little better than we do today.
And so the extent to which this cycle (of provocation) is a little more unpredictable, it's because of him. We know less about him. But the pattern is very similar."
Army reservists salute the flag during a Foundation Day ceremony of the local reserve forces in Seoul on April 5. Picture: Yonhap/Reuters
15.12 North Korea is being "left with no choice but to confront" the US, an Iranian commander has said.
Agence France-Presse are reporting that Brigadier General Masoud Jazayeri, the armed forces deputy chief, has blamed tensions in the region on "excessive demands by the United States... and its tightening of the noose on North Korea".
He added: "Independent countries do not submit to American adventurism".
Pyongyang and Tehran have enjoyed good ties since the 1979 Islamic revolution. Both are both under UN Security Council sanctions for their ballistic missile and nuclear programmes.
A 2011 UN sanctions report said Tehran and Pyongyang were suspected of sharing ballistic missile technology.
South Korean soldiers prepare 155 mm howitzers for a military exercise today in the border city between two Koreas, Paju, north of Seoul. Picture: AP
14.41 Powerful 6.2 earthquake reported in Russia near North Korea border. No immediate reports of damages, according to AFP.
14.32 Fidel Castro has called on North Korea and the United States to avoid confrontation and reminded both sides of their "duties" towards peace. In a front-page article in Granma, the Communist Party's newspaper, Castro wrote:
If a war breaks out there, there would be a terrible slaughter of people (In the North and South) ... with no benefit for either of them.
Castro urged North Korea to remember that "such a war would affect ... more than 70 percent of the planet's population," and decried "the gravity of such an incredible and absurd event" in such a densely populated region.
Castro said the present crisis presents the most serious risk of a nuclear war since the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, a two-week standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union over placing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Britain has no intention of evacuating its embassy in North Korea, the Foreign Office has confirmed.
A spokesman said there were "no current plans" to withdraw staff from the mission in Pyongyang, despite the regime warning that it would be unable to guarantee the safety of foreign embassies in the event of war breaking out.
The spokesman said that Britain had not seen this as a recommendation to leave. Instead, North Korea was merely pointing out that "were this situation to escalate to conflict", then it might be unable to protect embassies in accordance with the Vienna Convention. In response to this message, the British Embassy had decided to continue as normal.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: David Blair - Foreign Office says "no current plans" to evacuate the British Emb in N Korea&lt;/noframe&gt;
13.57 Meanwhile, in South Korea, at a restaurant in downtown Seoul that sells kimchi stew and fried cutlets, owner Lee Chul-je tells AP he wasn't worried about the threats, as news about them poured from a TV in the corner.
"North Korea does this all the time," the 65-year-old said as he dropped slices of raw meat into a tenderizer. "I'm sure things will become OK again."
Office worker Park Geun-san is more interested in next week's Seoul concert by "Gangnam Style" singer PSY than in the North's dark pronouncements.
"My life isn't affected by them," he said. "I'm really excited about going to the concert. North Korea doesn't distract me from looking forward to it."
Ready for war? Any sign of weakness might be politically fatal for North Korean leader Kim Jong-un
13.23 Despite the increased tensions in the region, the construction of a major new bridge connecting North Korea to China is apparently proceeding as planned.
The new bridge will link border cities in both North Korea and China over the Amnok River — also known as the Yalu River - and has been hailed as a symbol of close economic ties between the two neighbours.
The showcase project, which is being payrolled by China at a cost of £235m (2.22 billion Chinese yuan), is due to be completed next year.
Despite recent events on the peninsula, construction work, which will link the North Korean city of Sinuiju to China’s Dancong, was underway as scheduled this week, according to reports from Yonhap news.
13.04 Britain has had an embassy in Pyongyang since 2001 concentrating on counter-proliferation and human rights, according to the Foreign Office.
"We support small-scale projects aimed at improving the lives of the most vulnerable," says the blurb on the Foreign Office website.
There is also a British Council project to train English language teachers in North Korea and a consular section to serve the needs of the handful of British citizens working in the North Korean capital.
The current ambassador to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is Michael Gifford, formerly the British ambassador to Yemen and the deputy head of the mission in Cairo.
One junior diplomat at the embassy, Barnaby Jones, hit the headlines last summer when he was photographed on a roller coaster two rows in front of Kim Jong-un.
North Korean leader Kim Jong-un enjoying a ride at the Rungna People's Pleasure Ground in Pyongyang. Barnaby Jones is in the row in front.
12.45 Russia is reportedly in close contact with the US, China and South Korea over their embassy request, according to RIA, citing Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister.
12.35 Malcolm Moore has more on the British embassy evacuation. A Foreign Office spokesman told us the following:
We can confirm that the British Embassy in Pyongyang received a communication from the North Korean government this morning.
It said that the North Korean government would be unable to guarantee the safety of embassies and international organisations in the country in the event of conflict from April 10.
The Foreign office declined to disclose how many staff are working in Pyongyang, but said no decision had yet been taken on whether to pull out. "We are considering next steps," the spokesman said.
12.25 We've just been told that the British embassy has, like their Russian counterparts, been advised to leave Pyongyang. Britain is reportedly considering the advice.
12.20 So what does North Korea hope to gain from all this tub-thumping belligerence? David Blair says that an instructive guide to diplomacy, Pyongyang-style, is provided by the tale of the nuclear facility at Yongbyon.
As part of his strategy of escalation, Kim Jong-un declared on Tuesday that he would reopen this plant. The regime had agreed to shut it down in 2007. Kim probably hopes to win a concession in order to refrain from actually restarting Yongbyon — and keep the agreement that his regime has already made.
That is the general pattern of North Korean behaviour. The country makes an agreement in return for food aid or economic help. Then it breaks the deal.
Then it wins another concession in returning for promising to keep the agreement that it has already made (and broken). Robert Gates, the former US defence secretary, ruefully described this as “selling the same horse twice”.
As for Yongbyon, it would take at least six months to get this plant up and running. And North Korea probably has little use for it anyway. The regime’s first two nuclear bombs were made with plutonium extracted from Yongbyon. But North Korea has since developed the alternative route to a Bomb via uranium enrichment. There are signs that the most recent nuclear test in February could have used a device made from uranium.
So Yongbyon is almost certainly surplus to requirements: the regime could build nuclear weapons without this plant. In any case, it already has enough plutonium in stock to build up to a dozen devices. So if this crisis is defused by a North Korean agreement to refrain from restarting Yongbyon, this would be a pretty meaningless concession.
You can sum this up as follows. North Korea is effectively saying “remember that nuclear plant which we agreed to shut down six years ago and we don’t need anyway? Well, we’re going to start it up again. Now give us a concession and we might keep the earlier deal. And if we do leave Yongbyon lying idle, we lose nothing anyway.” How do you deal with a regime like that?
12.02 The Guardian tells us that we should be worried about April 5 - and the number 9.
Jang Jin-sung, editor-in-chief of New Focus international, claims that the number is leading Kim Jong-un's actions. It can be seen in the founding date of DPRK (September 9 - or 9/9), while Kim Il-sung's personal bodyguard corps was named 963.
The country's first nuclear test took place on 9 October 2006. The second long-range rocket launch was on 5 April 2009 (5+4=9 and nine of 2009, double nine). The next one was successfully launched on 12 December 2012 (1+2+1+2+1+2=9). There was a nuclear test on 12 February (20)13 (1+2+2+1+2=9). A recent North Korean propaganda video released on YouTube, in which the east coast of the US is consumed in a "sea of fire", features a rocket labelled No 9.
So, it all adds up. Three generations of the Kim family seem to have been fixated on nines. In the current climate this suggests that we should all be on our guard today, Friday 5 April (5+4=9). If we make it safely to Saturday, the world is probably safe from a nuclear attack until the 14th or, perhaps, the 23rd.
11.44 Russian embassy spokesman, Denis Samsonov, said that Russia was examining the request but was not planning to evacuate at this stage, and that there were no outward signs of tension in the North Korean capital.
11.33 North Korea asks Russia to consider possibly evacuation of embassy staff in Pyongyang - Reuters.
11.14 Germany has summoned North Korea's ambassador over the crisis. A German foreign ministry spokesman said:
The serious concern of the German government in light of the escalation on the Korean peninsula for which North Korea is responsible was conveyed to him in no uncertain terms in the name of the foreign minister (Guido Westerwelle)
11.10 Another piece we did yesterday - worth a read if you haven't seen it - Harriet Alexander has profiled South Korea's president Park Geun-hye - the woman facing Kim's nuclear threat head on.
As leader of the world's 12th largest economy, the unmarried and childless Ms Park planned to turn the page on this bitter inheritance, and devote herself to peaceful progression.
That now looks an increasingly unachievable aim.
11.05 Malcolm Moore on Kurt Campbell, the former head of the US State Department in Asia stating there are clear signs that China is losing patience with North Korea:
For several decades, China has been North Korea's closest ally, largest trade partner and primary source of aid.
However, Kurt Campbell, the former head of the State department in Asia, said there are signs that a relationship once described by Chairman Mao to be "as close as lips and teeth" is wearing thin.
"There is a subtle shift in Chinese foreign policy. Over the short to medium term, that has the potential to affect the calculus in north east Asia," Mr Campbell said at a forum at John Hopkins university.
"You have seen it at the United Nations (Security Council). We have seen it in our private discussions and you see it in statements in Beijing," he added.
11.04 Some analysis from Chief Foreign Correspondent David Blair on whether there is a 'real threat' posed by North Korea to the South and the United States:
11.03 North Korea has placed two of its intermediate range missiles on mobile launchers and hidden them on the east coast of the country in a move that could threaten Japan or US Pacific bases, South Korean media reported on Friday.
The report could not be confirmed. But any such movement may be intended to demonstrate that the North, angry about joint US-South Korean military exercises and the imposition of UN sanctions, is prepared to demonstrate its ability to mount an attack.
11.00 (03.00 Washington 19.00 Pyongyang) Good morning (good evening to our North Korean readers) and welcome to our live rolling coverage as North Korea moves a second missile to its east coast.