Aid ship carrying activists from Germany heads to Gaza
A ship carrying nine Jewish activists from Germany, Britain, Israel and the US set sail on Sunday to deliver aid to the Gaza Strip.
The British boat "Irene" departed Sunday from Famagusta in Cyprus in protest against Israel's blockade of the Palestinian territory.
"It is a sacred duty for me, as a [Holocaust] survivor, to protest against the persecution, the oppression and the imprisonment of so many people in Gaza, including more than 800,000 children," Moskovitz said.
The trip - which was coordinated by the German Organization Jewish Voice for Just Peace in the Near East and the British group Jews for Justice for Palestinians - intends to bring school supplies, musical instruments and fishing nets into Gaza.
It comes after Israel's deadly raid of a Gaza-bound aid ship last May, resulting in the deaths of nine Turkish activists. Israeli Defence Minister Ehud Barak has repeatedly warned that Israel will intercept any ship nearing Gaza.
While Abbas's spokesman told reporters that there was no progress in a US-led push to extend the moratorium, Israeli Defence Minister Barak maintained until the last minute that an extension would be possible.
"I think that the chance of achieving a mutually agreed understanding about [a] moratorium is 50-50," Barak said in a BBC interview in New York where he was meeting with US officials, adding, "I think that the chances of having a peace process is much higher."
As the official moratorium came to an end, Israeli settlers were poised to begin construction on new developments in Palestinian territory.
Settlers and their supporters held a rally in the settlement of Revava to mark the end of the freeze. In another settlement the foundation stone for a new kindergarten was laid.
But it was not expected that there would be a massive surge in construction activity.
"We are getting back to business as usual and building but we will respect the prime minister's request," said David Ha'ivri, head of the Samaria regional council.
Over 430,000 Jews live in more than 100 settlements across territory in the West Bank and East Jerusalem that Israel captured from Jordan in 1967.