Pope Francis urges religious unity at Mass in Africa
What issues would you like the Pope to tackle in Africa? Tell us using the hashtag #MessageToThePope.
(CNN)Pope Francis celebrated a historic Mass in Kenya on Thursday before delivering a stern environmental warning just days ahead of a key climate change conference in Paris.
"It would be sad, and I dare say even catastrophic, were particular interests to prevail over the common good and lead to manipulating information in order to protect their own plans and projects," the Pope said, urging nations to reach an agreement over curbing fossil fuel emissions.
He urged politicians to work together with the corporate and scientific worlds, and civil society leaders in finding solutions to stop environmental degradation.
No country, he said, "can act independently of a common responsibility. If we truly desire positive change, we have to humbly accept our interdependence."
The Pope spoke at the world headquarters of the United Nations Environment Programme in Nairobi, the Kenyan capital. The U.N. climate change conference opens next week.
He said Africans cannot afford to remain silent on the illegal trade in precious stones and the poaching of elephants for ivory, which "fuels political instability, organized crime and terrorism."
Climate change, like poverty, is a hallmark issue for Francis, the first leader at the Vatican who hails from the developing world. Other popes have visited Kenya, but the welcome was particularly warm for the populist Pope.
"I appeal in a special way to the young people of the nation," he said. " ... May you always be concerned for the needs of the poor and reject everything that leads to prejudice and discrimination, for these things, we know, are not of God."
When he got to the University of Nairobi, the site of his first Mass in Africa, choirs and traditional dancers swayed to Swahili Christian music as they waited.
His visit will include a stop in Kangemi, a shantytown in Nairobi.  In the Central African Republic, he will visit a refugee camp.
The Pope's message of hope, peace and reconciliation will reach out to a continent with the faith's fastest growing population.
Catholic Relief Services "The Catholic population there (Africa) has grown by 238% since 1980 and is approaching 200 million," said Bill O'Keefe, a vice president at Catholic Relief Services , a church-affiliated U.S. humanitarian group that does work in Africa. 
Francis' predecessor, Pope Benedict, also visited several countries in Africa. During his nearly three decades in the papacy, Pope John Paul II also made dozens of trips to the continent.  
Like most countries, the nations he's visiting have their own narratives of success and heartbreak.
Kenya and Uganda have been victims of the Islamist militant group Al-Shabaab, which has unleashed terror and mayhem in those countries, together with Somalia, where it's based.
His visit comes as dispirited Kenyans condemn their leaders over a series of corruption scandals, and Islamist militants' repeated attacks that have killed hundreds in recent years.
"Experience shows that violence, conflict and terrorism feed on fear, mistrust, and the despair born of poverty and frustration," he said.
He also called for the protection of traditional family values and children, whom he called a blessing.
Aside from visiting a region that will shape the face of the Catholic Church, the Pope's plan to stop at a mosque in the Central African Republic sends a powerful message.
"May my visit to Africa be a sign of the Church's esteem for all religions, and strengthen our bonds of friendship," Francis tweeted.