Otto Warmbier, US student freed from North Korean prison after 17 months, dies
United States student Otto Warmbier, who was imprisoned in North Korea for 17 months before being returned home in a coma less than a week ago, has died in an Ohio hospital, his family said in a statement.
The 22-year-old was detained in North Korea for allegedly stealing a propaganda sign, and was only returned home to the US last week after his health deteriorated.
North Korea said he fell into a coma after taking a sleeping pill; however, this is disputed by US doctors.
"Unfortunately, the awful torturous mistreatment our son received at the hands of the North Koreans ensured that no other outcome was possible beyond the sad one we experienced today," the family said in a statement.
They said they were choosing to focus on the time they were given with their "warm, engaging, brilliant" son instead of focusing on what they had lost.
Mr Warmbier, who was arrested in North Korea while visiting as a tourist in December 2015, had been described by doctors who examined him last week as having suffered extensive brain damage that left him in a state of "unresponsive wakefulness".
Mr Warmbier was sentenced in North Korea to 15 years in prison with hard labour, convicted of subversion after he tearfully confessed he had tried to steal a propaganda banner.
The University of Virginia student had been in a coma since March 2016, shortly after he was sentenced, the family said.
Doctors said he returned with severe brain damage, but it was not clear what caused it.
President Donald Trump condemned North Korea's brutality after Mr Warmbier's death, saying the US mourned its latest victim.
"Melania and I offer our deepest condolences to the family of Otto Warmbier on his untimely passing," he said in a statement.
"Our thoughts and prayers are with Otto's family and friends, and all who loved him.
"Otto's fate deepens my administration's determination to prevent such tragedies from befalling innocent people at the hands of regimes that do not respect the rule of law or basic human decency."
Mr Warmbier's parents Fred and Cindy said on the day of his release they wanted "the world to know how we and our son have been brutalised and terrorised by the pariah regime", and expressed relief he had been returned to "finally be with people who love him".
Mr Warmbier was freed after the US State Department's special envoy on North Korea, Joseph Yun, travelled to Pyongyang and demanded the student's release on humanitarian grounds, capping a flurry of secret diplomatic contacts, a US official said last week.
North Korea's official KCNA news agency said in a one-line report the student was "sent back home on June 13, 2017 on humanitarian grounds, according to the adjudication made on the same day by the Central Court of the DPRK".
Tensions between the US and North Korea have been heightened by dozens of North Korean missile launches and two nuclear bomb tests since the beginning of last year.
Pyongyang has also vowed to develop a nuclear-tipped intercontinental ballistic missile capable of hitting the US mainland.
Susan Thornton, the US acting assistant secretary of state for East Asia, said earlier on Monday that the US was concerned for the welfare of the three other US citizens still held in North Korea.
The organisers of the North Korea tour that Mr Warmbier was travelling on meanwhile said they will no longer take US citizens to the country.
Young Pioneer Tours said on its Facebook page that the death of Mr Warmbier showed that the risk American tourists face in visiting North Korea "has become too high".
Other well-known North Korea tour operators, including Koryo Tours, founded by British expatriates in Beijing, and Uri Tours, with offices in New Jersey and Shanghai, said they were "reviewing" their policies for American citizens ahead of a possible travel ban that has been mooted by US Secretary of State Rex Tillerson.
China, North Korea's longtime communist ally and biggest source of economic and diplomatic assistance, provides the largest numbers of tourists to the country by far.
Mr Warmbier was among the estimated 5,000 non-Chinese who visit North Korea every year on packages that often include trips to Pyongyang as well as the demilitarised zone separating the two Koreas, Mount Paektu and sometimes the Masik ski resort.