Centuries-old rule of succession in British Royal family scrapped by Commonwealth
The historic constitutional changes were agreed unanimously today by the 16 nations of which Queen Elizabeth II is monarch.
The 16 "realms", including the UK, Canada and Australia, also agreed to scrap outdated laws which ban the spouse of a Roman Catholic from taking the throne.
The changes were announced by David Cameron, the Prime Minister, at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, attended by the Queen, in Perth, Australia.
Mr Cameron said the historic rules were "at odds with the modern countries that we have become".
Announcing the proposed changes, he said: "Put simply, if the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge were to have a little girl, that girl would one day be our queen."
The Most Reverend Vincent Nichols, the Archbishop of Westminster and President of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of England and Wales, welcomed the changes.
He said: “This will eliminate a point of unjust discrimination against Catholics and will be welcomed not only by Catholics but far more widely.”
The changes herald an end to more than 300 years of English constitutional tradition under which the Crown passed to the oldest male heir.
Under the current rules of primogeniture, any male child takes precedence in the order of succession over his sisters. That would have meant that any son born to Prince William would have become King even if he had an older sister.
Speaking before the meeting in Perth, the Prime Minister said the rules are “outdated and need to change”.
He said: “The idea that a younger son should become Monarch instead of an elder daughter, simply because he is a man just isn’t acceptable any more. Nor does it make any sense that a potential Monarch can marry someone of any faith other than Catholic.
“The thinking behind these rules is wrong. That’s why people have been talking about changing them for some time. We need to get on and do it.”
The Commonwealth summit was a “great moment to grasp this issue and sort it out”, he said. “I’m very hopeful that we can reach agreement in principle and get on with changing these rules in all the countries affected.”
The Queen, who arrived in Australia this week, will attend next week’s Commonwealth meeting. Buckingham Palace has indicated her approval for changes in the succession rules.
A Realms “working group” will now be established under the leadership of New Zealand to make sure the necessary legislation is acceptable to all countries and that the process is co-ordinated.
Mr Cameron intends to introduce the legislation in the next session of Parliament.
The rules on the Royal succession are set down in several different pieces of legislation passed in the 17th and 18th Centuries, including the Act of Settlement, the Bill of Rights, the Royal Marriages Act and Princess Sophia’s Precedence Act.