Next Syria talks to include Syrians as bloodshed continues
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Diplomats seeking a political solution to end the four-year Syrian civil war agreed Friday to resume talks with the participation of representatives of the Syrian government and opposition groups.
The talks wrapped up as dozens of people were killed Friday in a rocket attack on a rebel-held suburb of Syria's capital Damascus.
A joint statement issued by the 19 countries that participated in the meeting said Syria is to remain unified and its state institutions will remain intact, but did not say when or if Syrian President Bashar Assad would leave power. The countries agreed to resume talks next week, according to Iran's semi-official Islamic Republic News Agency.
While the meetings were ongoing Friday, Syrian government forces fired more than 11 missiles at a market in Douma, killing at least 40 people and injuring dozens more, according to the Associated Press. The fighting has killed more than 250,000 people and displaced about half of Syria's population of 22 million, contributing to the European migrant crisis.
Secretary of State John Kerry and his Russian counterpart, Sergey Lavrov, spoke cautiously after the talks, which also included Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and, for the first time in a summit about Syria, Iran — the most important ally of Syrian President Bashar Assad.
“Four-and-a-half years of war, we all believe, has been far too long,” Kerry said in a news conference with Lavrov and the U.N. special envoy to Syria, Staffan de Mistura.
“I did not say that Assad has to go or that Assad has to stay,” Lavrov said.
The diplomats seek a cease-fire plan, followed by a transitional government that would include Assad and opposition members, according to the State Department.  While many elements of the new plan are similar to one laid out in 2012, more countries participated in Friday's outcome, and all agreed that the Islamic State group, which did not exist in 2012, must be defeated, said State Department spokesman John Kirby.
Also, Kerry "made clear the process moving forward needs to be Syrian owned and Syrian led," Kirby said. "For this to be successful it can’t be pushed on the Syrian people, they have to be part of this."
The United States does not want Assad to stay in power, and thinks his presence motivates his opponents to join extremist groups such as al-Qaeda and the Islamic State. The latter has seized large swaths of eastern Syria and western Iraq.
In a separate development Friday, the White House said it would send "fewer than 50" U.S. special operations forces to work in Syria to assist local forces there. It is described as a shift, not a major change, in U.S. policy.
Kerry said the USA seeks two goals in Syria, to resolve the civil war and defeat the Islamic State.
Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Amir Abdollahian told Iranian media that Tehran may agree to Assad's departure. "Iran does not insist on keeping Assad in power forever," he said, according to Reuters.
Abdollahian later said there's been "no change" in Iran's policy to support Syria in its fight against what he called terrorism. "Those who intend to bypass Bashar Assad know well that only the Syrian people should decide about their fate within the specified political framework," he said, according to the Fars News Agency.
Kerry sounded cautious Thursday when he arrived in Vienna for the talks.
“I am hopeful that we can find a way forward,” he told reporters. “It is very difficult.”
The U.S. and its allies want to see if Iran “is serious” about reaching a political transition in Syria, Kirby said.
Kirby said that despite Iran's involvement in the talks, "there is no change in our policy" toward Iran.
The U.S. is still committed to ending Iran's "destabilizing behavior" in the region, he said.
The goal of the U.S. and its allies is for the Syrian people to form a representative government "that's strong enough, independent enough and viable enough to push back on that kind of influence," Kirby said, referring to Iran's support of militant groups such as Lebanon-based Hezbollah.
But Iranian cooperation over Syria is not without risks, according to Suzanne Maloney, a former State Department Iran analyst who's now at the Brookings Institution.
She said U.S. policy makers may not intend "to cede anything to Iran," but they may not be able to prevent Iran from maintaining its relationship Hezbollah. Syria provides Iran with a geographical link to Hezbollah.
In 1983, the group killed 241 U.S. service members in Lebanon and it has fought several wars with Israel, a close U.S. ally.
Iran has spent billions of dollars propping up Assad, and it has lost hundreds of fighters, including two generals in recent weeks, protecting him. Iran views itself as the protector of Shiites across the Middle East, which include Assad's Alawite sect, Maloney said.
'I don't see any possibility that Tehran would willingly surrender those interests," she said.