Chávez Meets with His New Colombian Counterpart
Mr. Chávez, 56, arrived in Santa Marta with various flourishes, carrying red flowers for his hosts and wearing a colorful jacket with the design of Venezuela’s flag.
After the meeting, he denied that Venezuela was harboring Colombian guerrillas, telling Mr. Santos, “Count on my friendship.”
The leaders may have had little choice but to hold their noses and shake hands. Mr. Chávez has said he plans to be re-elected to a new six-year term in 2012, while Mr. Santos may already be eyeing a second four-year term in 2014.
“That means they both expect to be in power cheek to cheek until 2018,” said Myles Frechette, a former United States ambassador to Colombia. “Therefore, it’s in both of their interests to learn to get along.”
Still, that did not mean that the leaders’ encounter would not be infused with tension over comments each had made in the past.
In April, Mr. Chávez referred to Mr. Santos as “a wolf dressed up as Little Red Riding Hood,” while also contending that Mr. Santos had been part of a conspiracy to assassinate him.
Mr. Santos, for his part, has been among the most outspoken members of Colombia’s political establishment in deriding Mr. Chávez. In an essay written before he was elected president, Mr. Santos acknowledged that Mr. Chávez had been legitimately elected, but added, “as were Hitler, Mussolini, Aristide and Fujimori, and so many other demagogues turned tyrants.”
Some of the tension between the countries can be traced to the relations each has with the United States. Colombia, a major recipient of American security aid, is Washington’s top ally in Latin America.
Mr. Chávez has nurtured an antagonistic relationship with the United States. He said last weekend that he would refuse to accept Larry L. Palmer, the newly designated American ambassador to Venezuela, after Mr. Palmer referred to the problem of low morale in Venezuela’s armed forces.
Relations between Venezuela and Colombia recently deteriorated beyond their long-festering tension after the Uribe government presented detailed claims that Colombian guerrillas were operating from inside Venezuela.
But economic ties between Venezuela and Colombia seem to have overridden other concerns.