Kenneth Bae worried about his health in North Korean camp
"I know if I continue for the next several months here, I will probably be sent back to the hospital again," Bae says in a video of a conversation with a Swedish diplomat recorded Friday.
Wearing a gray jacket with the prisoner number "103" marked on it, Bae tells the Swedish diplomat, Cecilia Anderberg, that he thinks his weight has already dropped as much as 10 pounds since he was transferred back to the camp a few weeks ago.
"I'm glad that he's holding strong, but I'm really concerned about his health," Chung said. "And the fact that he's been moved to the labor camp, we're really discouraged by that."
The 45-year-old Bae, of Lynwood, Washington, was arrested in November 2012 in Rason, along North Korea's northeastern coast. Pyongyang sentenced him last year to 15 years of hard labor, accusing him of planning to bring down the government through religious activities. He is widely reported to have been carrying out Christian missionary work in North Korea.
U.S. civil rights leader Jesse Jackson has offered to go to North Korea to help get Bae released, a move the U.S. State Department says it supports. "We're just waiting and hoping for a positive response," Chung said.
"Every day we hold out hope that there is going to be some good dialogue between the two countries that will lead to Kenneth's release soon," she added.
In the video, he expresses hope that North Korea will allow a U.S. envoy to visit for talks about his case -- but those hopes appeared to have been dashed over the weekend.
The brief KCNA report Monday didn't state the purpose of the visit by Gregg, the chairman of the Pacific Century Institute, a U.S. nonprofit group that aims to promote education, dialogue and research in the Pacific region. But U.S. State Department spokeswoman Marie Harf said Gregg was traveling with other former diplomats on a trip to "build bridges," and his visit was unrelated to Bae's case.
In a written statement earlier Monday, Chung said the family was "saddened to hear" that King's invitation had been rescinded. But she added, "While we reel from this heartbreaking news, we are encouraged by the growing chorus of advocates asking for Kenneth to be released."
a development his family described as "devastating." He was transferred to a hospital last year after his health deteriorated. But last week the United States said he had been moved back to a labor camp, a development his family described as "devastating."
But says he is concerned that if his situation isn't resolved soon, it could "drag on" for months longer. He notes that annual U.S.-South Korean military drills due to start later this month may deepen tensions in the region, as they did last year.
State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki on Sunday expressed disappointment that King's visit was called off and noted North Korea had said it wouldn't use Bae as a "political bargaining chip." It is the second time North Korea has canceled a planned visit by King.
North Korea has been urging the South not to take part in the drills -- a call that Seoul and Washington have rejected. Jackson said he hoped a visit would break "that cycle of terror and fear and irritation" between the two countries.
"We again call on the (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) to grant Bae special amnesty and immediate release as a humanitarian gesture so he may reunite with his family and seek medical care," Psaki said Sunday. "We will continue to work actively to secure Mr. Bae's release."