North Korea long-range rocket launch fails after one minute
A North Korean soldier stands guard at the rocket site before the launch. There was no immediate comment on Friday's launch from North Korea's official media, but an official statement was expected. North Korea said it wanted the Unha-3 (Galaxy-3) rocket to put a weather satellite into orbit, although critics believed it was designed to enhance the capacity of North Korea to design a ballistic missile to deliver a nuclear warhead capable of hitting Australia or the continental United States. Such a move would be banned by United Nations resolutions. The regime spent more than $800 million on the rocket, enough to feed millions in the impoverished country, London's Daily Telegraph reported.
The rocket launch was the first under new North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un. The UN Security Council will meet in emergency session today to "to decide its next step" following the launch, a UN diplomat said. Japan's Defence Minister Naoki Tanaka said that North Korea had launched a "flying object" that fell into the ocean after a short flight. "We have the information some sort of flying object had been launched from North Korea" around 7.40am, the minister told reporters.
"The flying object is believed to have flown for more than one minute and fallen into the ocean. This does not affect our country's territory at all." Immediately after the launch, South Korea issued an order urging residents near the inter-Korean border to seek shelter to protect themselves from any debris that might fall from the rocket, Yonhap newswire said. North Korea said its rocket launch was not a banned missile test and that it had every right to send the satellite up, to coincide with Sunday's centenary of the birth of its founding leader Kim Il-Sung. The 30-metre rocket had been positioned at a newly built space centre on the country's north-western Yellow Sea coast. North Korea has invited up to 200 foreign journalists to Pyongyang for the launch and the weekend commemorations, the largest number of overseas media ever welcomed in to the reclusive state.
North Korea is in the midst of cementing a power transition between the former leader Kim Jong-il who died last December and his untested son Kim Jong-un who is in his late 20s. US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton had earlier warned North Korea of UN Security Council action if it pressed ahead with the launch. "If Pyongyang goes forward [with the launch] we will all be back in the Security Council to take further action," Mrs Clinton told reporters after consulting with her counterparts from the Group of Eight industrial nations. "There is no doubt that this [launch] would use ballistic missile technology," she said, urging Pyongyang to refrain from "pursuing a cycle of provocation".
Her comments were followed by an unusually strongly worded statement issued by foreign ministers of the Group of Eight, which "demanded" that North Korea abandon the launch. South Korea also condemned the rocket launch as a "provocative act" that posed a threat to peace and security on the Korean peninsula and in North-East Asia. "North Korea's launch... is a clear breach of the UN resolution that prohibits any launch using ballistic missile technology. It is a provocative act threatening peace and security on the Korean peninsula and North-East Asia,’" Foreign Minister Kim Sung-Hwan said. Late 1970s: Starts working on a version of the Soviet Scud-B (range 300 kilometres). Test-fired in 1984.
July 5, 2006: North test-fires seven missiles, including a long-range Taepodong-2, which explodes after 40 seconds. July 15, 2006: United Nations Security Council adopts Resolution 1695, demanding halt to all ballistic missile activity and banning trade in missile-related items with the North. Oct 14, 2006: UN Security Council approves Resolution 1718, demanding a halt to missile and nuclear tests. Bans the supply of items related to the programs and of other weapons.
Feb 18, 2011: Satellite images show the North has completed a launch tower at its new west coast missile base at Tongchang-ri, experts say. May 15, 2011: North Korea and Iran are suspected of sharing ballistic missile technology, according to a UN sanctions report, diplomats say. March 16, 2012: North Korea announces it will launch a long-range rocket between April 12 and 16 to put a satellite into orbit. April 13, 2012: Rocket is launched from the Tongchang-ri base and appears to have disintegrated soon after blast-off and fallen into the ocean, South Korean authorities said.