China, Turkey to establish strategic cooperative relationship
ANKARA - China and Turkey would establish a strategic cooperative relationship for better economic and political ties, Chinese and Turkish leaders said Friday.
Visiting Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan made the announcement at a press conference following their meeting during Wen's visit here.
Wen said he and Erdogan reached broad consensus during the talks, noting the decision to set up the strategic cooperative relationship would have an important effect on world peace and development.
China and Turkey both faced the threat of the three evil forces of terrorism, separatism and extremism and shared common interests in safeguarding the integrity of territory and sovereignty, Wen said.
He said China would continue to deepen mutual political trust and take active measures to promote trade with Turkey, whose influence in regional and international affairs China attached importance to.
China would encourage investment by Chinese enterprises in Turkey and facilitate cooperation in various economic fields, such as power projects, bridge construction and the financial sector, Wen said.
Erdogan said he had very successful talks with Wen and Turkey and China would take a new step in bilateral relations.
"China and Turkey have a long history of friendship. Our relations are now entering a new stage of development," Erdogan told reporters.
Turkey wanted closer cooperation with China in international organizations, Erdogan said.
In the economic field, the two countries agreed to increase their annual trade volume to $50 billion by 2015 and 100 billion dollars by 2020, Erdogan said.
Trade volume between China and Turkey exceeded 10 billion dollars in 2009, according to official statistics.
He also said Turkey hoped the two countries could use their own currencies in bilateral trade.
China and Turkey signed eight pacts on cooperation in areas that included trade, railway construction, infrastructure, communications and cultural exchanges before the press conference.
Erdogan said Turkey planned to build 4,500 to 5,000 km of railways and wanted China's cooperation in those projects.
China had agreed to provide financial support for the railway projects when conditions were appropriate, he said.
Erdogan said Turkey also intended to build a railway connecting Turkey's largest city, Istanbul, and the Chinese capital, Beijing.
There were other multiple fields where Turkey and China could further cooperate, such as energy, air transport, culture and tourism, Erdogan said.
Wen said better cultural communication would also serve to improve China-Turkey ties, saying the two ancient civilizations should have more dialogue and exchanges.
A cultural event named "Experience China in Turkey" will be held in the Turkish capital, Ankara, and Istanbul after Wen's visit, which Wen said would enhance the Turkish people's understanding of China.
Wen arrived here Thursday night after visiting Greece, Belgium and Italy. He will travel to Istanbul later Friday.