Hillary Clinton condemns Lockerbie bomber's early release
On first anniversary of Megrahi's release, secretary of state says US continues to 'categorically disagree' with Scottish ministers
Hillary Clinton has condemned the early release of the Libyan convicted of the Lockerbie bombing, accusing the Scottish government of ignoring "repeated" US demands to keep him in prison until he died.
The US secretary of state said the first anniversary today of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi's early release from prison was "regrettable".
Intensifying the pressure on Alex Salmond, the first minister, she implied strongly that Megrahi's release, and his continued survival long beyond the three months predicted by Scottish ministers, meant justice for the families of the dead had been denied.
Clinton said the US "continues to categorically disagree with the decision" to allow the former Libyan intelligence agent to return to Tripoli as a free man.
A US embassy memo sent to the Scottish ministers before Megrahi was released argued against his release, but accepted the Libyan could be freed to live at home or in hospital in Scotland. It also urged ministers to get rigorous external medical advice to prove Megrahi was close to death, advice they ignored.
"As we have expressed repeatedly to Scottish authorities, we maintain that al-Megrahi should serve out the entirety of his sentence in prison in Scotland. We have and will continue to reiterate this position to the Scottish and Libyan authorities," Clinton said. "We extend our deepest sympathies to the families who lost loved ones and share their desire for justice to prevail."
The remarks came as Megrahi enjoyed muted celebrations at his home in Tripoli, exactly a year after he was released from Greenock prison on compassionate grounds eight years into a 27-year-minimum sentence for killing 270 people in the bombing.
The Libyan, who continues to insist he was wrongly convicted, is terminally ill with inoperable prostate cancer. The disease is understood to have spread to his glands, internal organs and bones, but other sources in Libya say he could yet live seven years after getting enhanced medical treatment in Tripoli.
A group of four US senators pressing for a fresh inquiry into Megrahi's release said today a "cloud of suspicion" and "outstanding questions" still hung over the decision. Robert Menendez said there was "anger and frustration" in the US that the Libyan was "still very much alive and very much free".
Salmond insisted again today that his government had released Megrahi "in good faith" after receiving expert advice from Dr Andrew Fraser, the head of medical services with the Scottish prison service. Fraser was a "physician of great experience" and personal integrity, Salmond said on BBC Radio Scotland.
"Obviously people are going to have a range of views about the rights and wrongs of the decision ... all we ask people to do is to accept it was a decision that was made in good faith following the due procedures that we have under the legislation and under the tenets of Scots law."
However, a new opinion poll found Scottish public opposition to Megrahi's release had hardened, adding weight to suspicions that the controversy could damage the Scottish National party's election prospects next year.
The Ipsos/Mori poll, carried out for STV, found that 54% of Scots disagreed with Mergrahi's early release, with 35% agreeing. In August last year opinion was far more evenly split, with 46% against his release and 42% in favour.
Iain Gray, the Scottish Labour leader, said today that Kenny MacAskill, the Scottish justice minister who decided to release Megrahi, had been "incompetent" in failing to get clear and unequivocal medical evidence that Megrahi's death was imminent.
Gray said: "A year ago I said this decision was wrong because the balance between justice and compassion was wrong, but a year later even that element of the decision, the medical evidence, now has very significant doubt cast on it. That evidence should be published, and then I think the Scottish government should admit that they got this decision wrong. If I had been first minister, Megrahi would not have been released."
Other critics allege Megrahi was freed either to help British business interests in Libya – particularly a £590m BP oil deal – or to thwart his appeal against his conviction. Many observers believe Megrahi was wrongly convicted and that crucial evidence is being suppressed by the UK and US governments.
Anger over al-Megrahi's continued survival has grown after it emerged that none of the four external specialists used by Fraser had explicitly said he had three months to live. Several said they were not consulted about the decision to release him on medical grounds.
One of the four, Grahame Howard, a consultant oncologist from the Edinburgh Cancer Centre, confirmed today that he had not been involved in the decision to free al-Megrahi, but defended Fraser's conduct. He said the physician's report was "a fair reflection of the specialist advice available at the time".
Ministers in Edinburgh now tacitly admit that Fraser's medical assessment has been proven wrong, but Salmond insisted there was no hidden or secret motive in the decision to free al-Megrahi, describing it as a process of "complete integrity".