George Soros gives $1 million to Prop. 19 campaign
One week before the election, the big-buck donors have shown up in the battle over marijuana-legalization Proposition 19 fight — so we can probably expect more ads.
About $3 million total had been raised by both sides, but with a few big donations in the past few days, that number is more than $4 million, with all but about $300,000 of that going to Prop. 19 advocates.
The biggest cash came Tuesday from billionaire financier George Soros, who tossed $1 million at the Drug Policy Alliance, one of the main committees pushing the pro-pot measure. No big surprise here, considering Soros has long been a backer of pro-pot issues, but opponents pointed out that the donation is coming a tad late in the game — perhaps signaling a sense of panic?
“We’ve been outspent from day one, but the more they spend, the more the public becomes aware of the flaws of Prop. 19 and the further they drop in the polls,” said Roger Salazar, spokesman for the anti-19 side.
No way, the pro-side says. Surveys such as last week’s Los Angeles Times/USC poll, show the measure losing narrowly — but weed advocates say they have their own polls, such as one from Survey USA, that show them winning.
“It’s mostly really fear and ignorance we’re fighting,” and the more people hear, the more they support the measure, countered Prop. 19 spokeswoman Dale Sky Jones at a press conference Tuesday touting the measure’s support from former law enforcement officers.
The Soros cash is “better late than never,” she said.
As for cash on the anti-19 side, a teacher from Northern Virginia tossed in $50,000 this weekend — but the campaign’s coffers still sit far below the 2 million that needed to spread ads all over the state for a week.
No worries there, said Salazar.
The Pro-19 side has begun airing a television ad featuring former San Jose Police Chief Joseph McNamara saying the war on drugs is a failure, and presumably will now air more ads with the new Soros bucks — but Salazar’s side is benefiting from radio ads being run by the state Chamber of Commerce saying the measure would be bad for employers.
“Our message is getting out there,” said Salazar. “We feel we’re in a pretty good position.”