Bhutan urges India, China to engage to de-escalate tensions
India, China have engaged in a war of words where Bhutan the main stakeholder has been a silent participant. (Picture for representation/ PTI Photo)
With no let-off at the border and an unrelenting China continuing with its aggressive posturing, the Kingdom of Bhutan is feeling 'sandwiched' between two 'Asian giants'. Sources in Bhutan speaking to India Today say that the 'perception of a small state' usually makes the state 'vulnerable'.
While the disagreement over (Doka La) Doklam tri-junction continues, the strategic importance of the region is not lost on anyone. Speaking to a few people in Thimphu, India Today learnt that the internet data connectivity to Bhutan comes through Siliguri and any occupation by the Chinese could pose a great threat to Bhutan's internet connectivity and contact with the rest of the world. On the other hand, for India, any road construction by the Chinese in Doklam moving southwards towards the 'chicken's neck', an area that connects North-East of India to the rest of the mainland, is seen as a strategic hazard. Hence, it is important to maintain status quo till the final resolution of the boundary question.
Highly placed sources indicate the caution with which Bhutan is approaching the entire issue because it cannot 'afford' to upset either of the two nations. Speaking to India Today a source said, "we only hope that the two powerful, responsible nations would have the sense of responsibility to de-escalate the situation at the border and bring back normalcy".
Boundary talks that have been going on since 1985 and that's how boundary issue should be resolved without any 'sudden changes' is what the Bhutanese side hope for.
India, China have engaged in a war of words where Bhutan the main stakeholder has been a silent participant. Barring one statement and a demarche to honour bilateral agreements between Bhutan and China, Bhutan has not said anything further. This even as India and China are disputing over violations of territorial integrity.
India, China should engage with each other; Bhutan needs to have diplomatic ties with Beijing: Karma Phuntsho