Hu Jintao given hostile reception at US Congress
The Chinese president, Hu Jintao, today received a sceptical and hostile reception when he visited the US Congress.
Both Republicans and Democrats attacked China's human rights record and alleged currency manipulation at America's expense, and accused Beijing of bullying its neighbours.
Hu held private meetings with John Boehner, the House Speaker, and the Senate majority leader, Harry Reid, both of whom rejected invitations to the state dinner for the Chinese leader last night.
The Republican leader in the Senate, Mitch McConnell, also turned down an invitation to the dinner. The only member of the Congressional "big four" to attend was the Democratic leader in the House and former Speaker, Nancy Pelosi.
The chilly reception on Capitol Hill contrasted with Hu's day at the White House yesterday, where Barack Obama pressed the Chinese leader on human rights but otherwise emphasised common ground.
Reid – the most powerful Democrat in Congress – referred to Hu as a "dictator" in an interview on Tuesday. He made a half-hearted retraction yesterday, saying: "Maybe I shouldn't have said 'dictator,' but they have a different type of government than we have – and that is an understatement."
Members of the House and Senate have expressed anger towards China over the strength of its currency – which they claim is being deliberately manipulated by Beijing – and threatened punitive measures.
The House foreign affairs committee held a meeting yesterday to coincide with Hu's visit to the White House.
Among those at the meeting was Republican congressman Dana Rohrabacher, who told CNN that Hu's China was "a gangster regime that murders its own people". In a separate interview, Rohrabacher described the Chinese government as "Nazis".
More than 80 members of Congress have signed a letter saying US patience with the currency dispute is exhausted, and more than 30 signed a separate letter calling for the release of the Chinese dissident and Nobel peace prizewinner Liu Xiaobo.
Sherrod Brown, a Democratic senator, said he would join the Republican senator Olympia Snowe to propose legislation to allow US companies to seek higher duties on some Chinese goods to compensate for China's built-in currency advantage.
Although Pelosi attended the state dinner, her office issued a statement critical of China. "Since the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989, there has been bipartisan concern in the Congress about the human rights situation in China and Tibet, the support of the Chinese government for rogue states, and China's unfair trade practices, which have ballooned our trade deficit from $5bn a year to $5bn a week," she said.
John McCain, one of the Republicans due to meet Hu, told Reuters before the meeting: "I will emphasise that China cannot be a major influence in the world and abuse human rights. They have not met our expectations and the predictions of many."