WikiLeaks  nominated for Nobel
OSLO, Wednesday A Norwegian member of parliament said today he had nominated WikiLeaks for this year’s Nobel Peace Prize, saying the whistleblower website was a gauge of transparency in the world, including in democratic societies.
Jailed Chinese dissident “Liu Xiaobo was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize last year for his struggle for human rights, democracy and freedom of speech in China,” Snorre Valen, a member of the Socialist Left Party that is part of the ruling left-leaning coalition, pointed out on his blog.
“Likewise: Wikileaks have (sic) contributed to the struggle for those very values globally, by exposing (among many other things) corruption, war crimes and torture — sometimes even conducted by allies of Norway,” he wrote, implicitly referring to the United States.
After releasing hundreds of thousands of confidential US documents about the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, WikiLeaks has in recent months been slowly publishing more than 250,000 leaked US diplomatic cables, earning the website’s founder Julian Assange powerful enemies in Washington.
The deadline for this year’s Nobel Peace nominations expired on Tuesday, with thousands of people eligible to submit proposals, including members of parliament and government worldwide, university professors, previous laureates and members of several international institutes.
The names of nominees are kept secret for 50 years, but those entitled to nominate candidates are free to reveal their picks for the prestigious award, which will be announced in October. Among WikiLeaks’ accomplishments is the role it played in the recent Tunisian Jasmine Revolution, Mr Valen said Wednesday.
“By disclosing the economic arrangements by the presidential family in Tunisia, Wikileaks have made a small contribution to bringing down a 24-year-lasting dictatorship,” he wrote.
Several Nobel experts interviewed by AFP last week expected WikiLeaks and Mr Assange to figure on the list of candidates, but pointed out they probably would not be among the favourites to actually win the honour.
“The reason for that is that they are the targets of harsh and legitimate criticism for having released a lot of information that could be detrimental to some individuals and for diplomacy,” he said. (AFP)