5th Tibetan in week sets self on fire&sbquo dies
Kathmandu Although prefab was an option available in the market for construction since the year 2003, the demand for prefab structures skyrocketed after the Gorkha Earthquake in 2015. Fast forward two years later, private companies now have the consumers’ attention with the introduction of p...
The Garden City of the East-Yangon A city that balances tradition, culture and modernity, making it a must-see for anyone who wants to experience a different side of Asia One of the best places to visit in Asia is Yangon, Myanmar’s largest city. Nature lovers will appreciate the city’s stunning lakes, shady parks and verdant...
Clinton-Patterson novel sells 250,000 copies its first week NEW YORK: Bill Clinton’s debut novel had the year’s biggest opening so far for a work of fiction. “The President is Missing,” the thriller he co-wrote with James Patterson, sold 250,000 copies its first week. Alfred A. Knopf and Little, Brown and Co., the book’s co-publishers, annou...
OnePlus 5T: Better than its predecessor Kathmandu Acclaimed to be the best phone of 2017, the OnePlus 5T is doing really well internationally. The phone promises to deliver user experience like no other. But does it? Stunning with narrower bezels The striking difference between OnePlus 5T and OnePlus 5 is the design. The beze...
OAC Mountain Festival to be organised in Thamel on May 29 KATHMANDU: The Outdoor Adventure Centre Nepal has said that 'OAC Mountain Festival' will be organised at Thamel, in Kathmandu, on May 29. Addressing a press meet in Kathmandu on Thursday, programme coordinator Sonam Jangbu Sherpa informed about various events during the festival. Sherpa fu...
Budget monitoring is a continuous process by which we ensure action plan is achieved  in terms of expenditure and income. Regular monitoring also ensures that resources are used for their planned purposes and are properly accounted for The federal budget announced on May 29 has drawn flak from...