Iran ready for talks with 5+1 based on respect and justice
ARDEBIL - President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad says Iran is ready for talks with the six majors powers of the 5+1 group in November, but the Islamic Republic’s previous conditions for holding talks should be met.
“Iran is ready for negotiation, but it should be based on justice and respect,” Ahmadinejad told a cheering crowd in the northwestern city of Ardebil on Sunday. “You (world powers) should say whether you are bound to the regulations of the (International Atomic Energy) Agency or not,” he said. “You should clarify whether your purpose for negotiation is hostility toward Iran or cooperation,” he stated. The world powers should also announce their positions on the Zionist regime’s nuclear weapons, he added. “Anyway, we will enter into negotiation with you, even though you express other views, but our negotiation with those who seek cooperation and friendship differs from our negotiation with those who have hostile intentions,” he stated. On Thursday, European Union foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton put forth the proposal to hold talks in Vienna from November 15 to 18. Earlier, Iranian Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki had proposed holding the talks in late October or early November. Dialogue between Iran and the 5+1 group (the United States, Britain, France, China, Russia, and Germany) has been stalled since October 2009. The main bone of contention between Tehran and the West is Iran’s uranium enrichment program. Iran says all its nuclear activities are totally peaceful and it has the legal right to produce nuclear fuel for its research reactors and nuclear power plants. Elsewhere in his remarks, Ahmadinejad said that since Iran became self-sufficient in gasoline production earlier this year, Western countries have been trying to sell gasoline to Iran. “Not only do we produce the gasoline we need, but we also export gasoline to other countries. After they (Western countries) observed Iran’s success, they began lining up in the Persian Gulf to sell their gasoline to us at a lower price,” he added. “Iranian youth and industrialists will manufacture the sanctioned goods and will export them to other countries in the world,” he stated.