Israel and Palestinians poles apart ahead of direct talks
The goal of two states living in peace and security sounds more like an aspiration for an ideal world than an agenda for talks, writes Ian Black
Agreement to resume direct peace negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians is an achievement for American arm-twisting, but it will be an uphill struggle to overcome deep mistrust and yawning gaps between the sides.
Months of procedural wrangling barely mask disagreement on the hypersensitive "core" issues of the Middle East conflict: settlements, Jerusalem, and refugees. Still, no face-to-face talks have been held since late 2008, when Israel attacked the Gaza Strip, so their resumption in Washington on 2 September, with a tight deadline of one year, will be closely watched.
Israel's prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, had insisted he would only return to negotiations without preconditions, and there is no sign that his rightwing coalition will agree to extend the partial 10-month moratorium on settlement building in the West Bank when it expires in late September. Crucially, there is no such demand in the carefully worded Quartet invitation to direct talks, though it is not hard to decode the call to refrain from "provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric".
Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president, who has been under heavy pressure from the US and EU to resume talks, will approve of the goal of reaching an agreement "that ends the occupation which began in 1967 and results in the emergence of an independent, democratic, and viable Palestinian state living side-by-side in peace and security with Israel". But that sounds more like an aspiration for an ideal world than a working agenda in the real one.
Western-backed Jordan and Egypt, which already have peace treaties with Israel, will like that language. So will Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states. But there is nothing for Syria, which wants Israel to give back the Golan Heights.
The Quartet announcement shows no signs of a shift by either party — apart from agreement to talk. Leaving aside the core issues, tensions are high over Israel's blockade of Gaza and settlement activity in East Jerusalem as well as restrictions on Palestinian movement. Nor has there been any progress in ending the split between Hamas in Gaza, which rejects negotiations with Israel, and Abbas's Fatah movement in the West Bank.
Barack Obama has made much of prioritising Israeli-Palestinian talks and his tone towards Israel has been more critical than any previous president. But few expect him to turn the screws tighter before the mid-term congressional elections. The big question is whether envoy George Mitchell will submit US "bridging" proposals on the central points of dispute or try to impose an international plan.
The gloomy but familiar conclusion must be that there is to be more process, but not much chance of a workable peace agreement at the end of it.