Attackers Risk ‘Iron Fist,’ Ayatollah Khamenei Says in Iran
The supreme leader of Iran added his voice on Thursday to the country’s bellicose backlash against the incriminating United Nations report about the Iranian nuclear program, warning any potential military attackers they would face a “strong slap and iron fist.”
The remarks by the leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, escalated Iran’s portrayal of itself as the victim of a campaign to foment “Iranophobia” mounted by corrupt foreign states. But the remarks also appeared to reflect growing concern in the Iranian hierarchy that Israel and possibly the United States might use the report as a justification to bomb sites in Iran suspected of harboring facilities for the development of nuclear weapons.
The report, released Tuesday by the International Atomic Energy Agency, the nuclear proliferation watchdog of the United Nations, cataloged Iranian behavior in recent years that made what it called a credible case that Iran had been working on a nuclear bomb. The report also suggested that Iran had been working on ways to deliver such a bomb via a missile warhead. The conclusions amounted to the biggest credibility challenge Iran has faced in its effort to convince the world that its nuclear program is only for peaceful ends.
Iranian officials denounced the report as a fabrication that they said had been dictated by the United States, and they focused on its possible use by Iran’s enemies to justify a pre-emptive military strike. But up until Thursday, only Ayatollah Khamenei’s subordinates had publicly castigated the report’s findings.
“If the thought of invasion against the Islamic republic of Iran crosses anybody’s mind he must ready himself to receive a strong slap and iron fist,” the ayatollah said in an address to officers at a Tehran military academy that was publicized in Iran’s state-run news media.
“The enemies, especially the United States and its puppets and the Zionist regime, should know that the Iranian nation will not invade any country or nation, but it will respond to any invasion or threat with full force in a way that it will break up invaders from within,” the ayatollah said.