Xi Jinping in Russia to Promote Cooperation
But the trip was also intended to be more than symbolic, with plans for the signing of a deal with Rosneft, Russia’s state-owned oil company, worth up to $30 billion.
In their talks, Mr. Xi told Mr. Putin that the two governments should “resolutely support each other in efforts to protect national sovereignty, security and development interests,” Xinhua reported.
For months, China has been engaged in a bitter dispute with Japan over islands in the East China Sea claimed by both countries, and Russia has been among China’s strongest diplomatic supporters in the quarrel.
Mr. Xi’s reported comments did not mention Syria, Iran, North Korea or other international flash points over which China and Russia have sometimes joined forces in the United Nations Security Council to resist Western pressure for a firmer response. Mr. Xi said they would “closely coordinate in international regional affairs, protecting the shared strategic security of the two countries,” Xinhua reported.
Mr. Putin thanked Mr. Xi for choosing Russia for his first trip abroad. Mr. Xi in turn talked about Russia and China as good friends who treat each other “with open souls.”
Mr. Putin, in an interview with the Itar-Tass news agency timed to coincide with Mr. Xi’s arrival, stressed the countries’ shared role on the Security Council.
“That is why the strategic partnership between us is of great importance on both a bilateral and global scale,” said Mr. Putin, adding that Russia-China relations were “the best in their centuries-long history.”
“They are characterized by a high degree of mutual trust, respect for each other’s interests, support in vital issues,” he said. “They are a true partnership.”
Since returning to the presidency in May, Mr. Putin has distanced Russia from the West while putting a new focus on Asia, particularly relations with China — a point he stressed when Russia played host to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit meeting in Vladivostok in September.
Mr. Putin and Mr. Xi are headed to South Africa for the fifth summit meeting of the so-called Brics bloc of emerging economies — Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa.
Mr. Xi, who was appointed China’s president last week, concluding a leadership transition begun when he became Communist Party chief in November, sought to distinguish himself from his immediate predecessor, Hu Jintao. But on domestic issues, he has continued Mr. Hu’s wooing of Russia for diplomatic support and energy supplies. Russia was also Mr. Hu’s his first foreign destination after he was appointed president, in 2003.
“The fact that I will visit Russia, our friendly neighbor, shortly after assuming presidency is a testimony to the great importance China places on its relations with Russia,” Mr. Xi told a small group of invited journalists at a briefing on Tuesday in Beijing. “The two sides have had closer strategic coordination on the world stage.”
Recently, both governments expressed misgivings that the United States, in response to threats from North Korea, plans to deploy 14 new missile interceptors in Alaska, where 26 of the existing 30 are already in place,.
A joint declaration issued by Mr. Putin and Mr. Xi after their talks repeated those qualms, without singling out the United States by name. It said that their governments “oppose a country or a bloc of countries unilaterally and without limit strengthening antimissile capabilities, harming strategic stability and international security.”
The deal said to be in the works with Rosneft would potentially entail a loan of $30 billion from China, to be repaid in oil. A similar loan in 2005 for $6 billion helped finance Rosneft’s purchase of a subsidiary of Yukos, once Russia’s largest oil company. Western critics said that deal made China complicit in the Russian government’s takeover of Yukos.
In 2009, another loan, of $25 billion split between Rosneft and Transneft, the state-controlled pipeline company, is to be repaid with about 2.5 billion barrels of oil through 2030.
The agreements signed by the two presidents included promises of cooperation on numerous fronts, among them travel and tourism, agriculture, education, scientific research and banking. The greatest focus was on energy development, not only the oil deal with Rosneft, which will sharply increase the amount of oil supplied to China by Russia, but also an agreement to move forward with a deal on natural gas, something the two countries have been struggling to negotiate for years.
Despite the increasing ties on energy and other issues, and the recent displays of good will, experts say the relationship is still burdened by Russian wariness and Chinese frustrations.
Some Russians worry that China’s growing economic and military strength could eventually displace their country’s influence, especially in the sparsely settled regions of the Russian Far East.
China has long sought to draw Russia’s Gazprom into agreeing to supply natural gas along a proposed pipeline from east Siberia.
“Pipeline oil and gas cooperation is a good thing that benefits both sides,” the Chinese vice foreign minister, Cheng Guoping, told reporters in Beijing this week. “It suits both sides’ energy security needs and national interests.”
But longstanding disagreements over pricing have frustrated the proposed gas deal, and Mr. Putin’s spokesman said on Thursday that an agreement was unlikely during Mr. Xi’s visit.
For the Chinese leader, the visit appears to be as much about consolidating his stature at home and abroad as about bilateral ties. The domestic fame of Mr. Xi’s wife, a professional singer, once overshadowed his own, and popular Chinese newspapers and Web sites have dwelled as much on her planned activities as on his.
Like Mr. Hu, Mr. Xi describes himself as an admirer of Russian culture. During his news briefing this week, he reeled off the names of Russian authors whose works he said he had read as a youth, including Pushkin, Tolstoy and Chekhov, and he praised Mr. Putin, whom he has met before.
“We found a lot in common during our talks,” Mr. Xi said.