South China Sea: Hague rules in favor of Philippines over China in maritime dispute
Hong Kong (CNN)An international tribunal in The Hague ruled in favor of the Philippines in a maritime dispute Tuesday, concluding China has no legal basis to claim historic rights to the bulk of the South China Sea.
Chinese President Xi Jinping rejected the decision by the Permanent Court of Arbitration, which is likely to have lasting implications for the resource-rich hot spot, which sees $5 trillion worth of shipborne trade pass through each year.
"China will never accept any claim or action based on those awards," Xi said. China had boycotted the proceedings.
The tribunal concluded that China doesn't have the right to resources within its "nine-dash line," which extends hundreds of miles to the south and east of its island province of Hainan and covers some 90% of the disputed waters.
China's Ambassador to the United States, Cui Tiankai, accused the tribunal of "professional incompetence" and "questionable integrity." Speaking at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, he accused the United States of engaging in military exercises that constituted "military coercion."
State Department spokesman John Kirby asserted that the United States, and the world, expect China to commit to nonmilitarization. "The world is watching to see if China is really the global power it professes itself to be, and the responsible power that it professes itself to be," Kirby said.
"If China's nine-dash line is invalid as to the Philippines, it is equally invalid to those States and, indeed, the rest of the international community," the lawyers who led the Philippines' legal team said in a statement.
Vietnam, which like China claims the Paracel and Spratly islands, strongly supports Tuesday's ruling, the country's foreign affairs ministry said. The Spratlys in particular are heavily contested, with China, Taiwan and Vietnam claiming all of them, and parts claimed by the Philippines, Malaysia and Brunei.
"Vietnam strongly supports the resolution of the disputes ... by peaceful means, including diplomatic and legal processes and refraining from the use or threats to use force, in accordance with international law," ministry representative Le Hai Bình said.
The United States is a major player in the region and has sent warships and military aircraft around the South China Sea, including near disputed reefs and shoals, citing international law and freedom of movement but triggering harsh warnings from China.
as China has been at pains to point out, But as China has been at pains to point out, the United States isn't among the 180 countries that have ratified the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea -- potentially undermining its clout on this issue.
The tribunal also found that none of the sea features claimed by China were capable of generating what's called an exclusive economic zone -- which gives a country maritime rights to resources such as fish and oil and gas within 200 nautical miles of that land mass.
Because China had no rights to the area as an exclusive economic zone, the tribunal found that some of its activities in the region were in breach of the Philippines' sovereign rights.
The Philippines and China have long been at odds over Beijing's claims of sovereignty over large swaths of the South China Sea, and Manila took its fight to the court in 2013.
"Pending final settlement, China is also ready to make every effort with the states directly concerned to enter into provisional arrangements of a practical nature, including joint development in relevant maritime areas, in order to achieve win-win results and jointly maintain peace and stability in the South China Sea," the Chinese government statement said.
While the ruling in The Hague is regarded as legally binding, there is no mechanism to enforce it.
"In terms of enforcement, much will depend on what the Philippines is now prepared to assert against China based on the award and China's responses to those assertions," said Natalie Klein, an international law professor at Macquarie Law School in Australia