Terror alert to US citizens abroad in Europe – Channel 4 News
After a State Department terror warning to US citizens in Europe, the Foreign Office tells Britons abroad there is a “high threat” of attacks in France and Germany.
The Foreign Office has raised the terrorism threat level in its advice for citizens travelling to Germany and France to “high” from “general”, after a week of media reports suggesting new intelligence has indicated the possibility of attacks on mainland Europe.
The Foreign Office move follows a statement issued by the US State Department this afternoon, which states: “Current information suggests that al-Qaida and affiliated organizations continue to plan terrorist attacks.
“European governments have taken action to guard against a terrorist attack and some have spokes publicly about the heightened threat conditions.”
The warning continues: “US citizens should take every precaution to be aware of their surroundings and to adopt appropriate safety measures to protect themselves when travelling.”
It recommends that US citizens should register their travel plans with the consular section of the US embassy through the State Department’s travel registration website.
Today’s warning comes after British intelligence officials intercepted an Islamist-linked terror plot last week.
The plot would have involved commando-style raids in London and other cities in France and Germany, similar to the Mumbai terror attacks in November 2008 in which at least 166 people died.
Today’s move by the State Department could have significant implications for tourism in Europe, with tourist sites likely to be identified as possible targets.
However, a senior official is quoted as saying: “The bottom line is travel, but be vigilant.”
Last Tuesday the Eiffel Tower in Paris was evacuated after a bomb threat which, it later transpired, was a hoax.
The terrorism threat rating in the UK has been at “severe” – the second highest level – since January.
On Friday Sweden announced it had raised its threat alert to its highest level ever because of an increased threat of terror attacks.
In August the State Department renewed a “worldwide alert” warning against the terror attacks on Americans overseas.