Syria’s Assad Seeks Help from BRICS Countries
In a passage that was welcomed by rights groups, which have been critical of the Assad government’s control over where and how international humanitarian aid is distributed inside Syria, the communiqué urged all parties “to allow and facilitate immediate, safe, full and unimpeded access to humanitarian organizations to all in need of assistance.”
Carroll Bogert, the deputy executive director for external relations at Human Rights Watch, who was observing the BRICS meeting, said that passage was potentially significant, particularly if Russia and China, the two members that have defended Mr. Assad’s government, now press him on the aid issue. If that pressure is not forthcoming, she said in a telephone interview, “they’ve made a pretty weak statement on Syria.”
Russia and China, which are permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, have repeatedly thwarted attempts by Western and Arab members to punish Mr. Assad for his repression of a political uprising that began two years ago and that has turned into a civil war.
Brazil, India and South Africa have sought to be more neutral, urging antagonists in the conflict to negotiate a political solution.
On Wednesday, Russia expressed its unhappiness about the Arab League’s decision to award the Assad government seat to the opposition group, the National Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, done with fanfare at a summit meeting in Doha, Qatar, the previous day. Syria was suspended from the 22-nation Arab League in November 2011.
The Russian Foreign Ministry said in a statement posted on its Web site that the Arab League’s decision in filling the seat was “unlawful and invalid” and “completely counter to the common understanding of the need for a peaceful political settlement in Syria and ways to achieve it.”
The opposition coalition’s leader, Sheik Moaz al-Khatib, who took the seat to the applause of fellow Arab League members, castigated Mr. Assad’s government in an emotional acceptance speech, asserting, “What is happening in Syria is a struggle between freedom and slavery, between justice and injustice.”
In terms that oddly foreshadowed Mr. Assad’s own plea to the group of five countries, Sheik Moaz said the uprising was a reflection of resolve by all Syrians who “can no longer tolerate the ongoing slaughter of the Syrian people,” and vowed that his group would now seek wider recognition, including Syria’s seat at the United Nations.
Russia’s disapproval of the Arab League decision was echoed by Iran, Mr. Assad’s only regional ally. Iran’s deputy foreign minister for Arab and African affairs, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, criticized what he called “hasty measures taken by certain countries by giving the Syrian government’s seat at the Arab League to unauthorized people,” the official Islamic Republic News Agency reported. It quoted him as saying the decision signified “the end of the role of the Arab League in the region.”
Sheik Moaz also used his Arab League acceptance speech to call on NATO publicly to expand its Patriot missile defense shield, now deployed in southern Turkey, to include insurgent-held areas of northern Syria. But NATO, which has made clear that it does not want to become entangled militarily in the Syrian conflict, rejected that request.
The NATO rejection irked Sheik Moaz, who made his feelings known on Wednesday at a ceremony in which Qatar, a major supporter of his coalition, allowed it to occupy Syria’s embassy, which has long been vacant. “Frankly, I got surprised today,” Sheik Moaz said. “I had made a request yesterday, to extend the umbrella of the Patriot missiles to cover 100 kilometers for civilians to defend themselves. For the people, not the revolution. A few hours later they made a statement saying they won’t do that.”