In China, Catholics Are Split Between Two Authorities
The Vatican does not recognize the “patriotic” church and instead works with Chinese priests secretly — with apparently growing success. Up to 85 percent of priests in the state-run church privately recognize the spiritual authority of the pope, said Meng Weina, a Catholic and founder of Huiling, an organization for the mentally disabled financed by overseas church organizations.
Catholicism is flourishing here. Since 2004, about 100,000 Chinese have joined the church annually, and 300 new churches have been built, bringing the number to 6,300, according to official figures. Twenty-five new bishops have been consecrated. The state church says there are more than six million Catholics. Some experts believe the true number could be twice that, when the underground church is included.
Many ordinary Catholics dislike the strife between Beijing and Rome and seem comfortable with a pragmatic blend of the two. And in recent years, the state church has tacitly sought compromise and cooperation, ordaining bishops after behind-the-scenes consultation with the Vatican.
An exception was the appointment in 2006 of Joseph Ma Yinglin as bishop of Kunming, in the southwestern province of Yunnan. The Vatican automatically excommunicated Bishop Ma for being ordained without the pope’s approval.
Then, in November, the Chinese religious authorities ordained Joseph Guo Jincai as bishop of Chengde, acting without the Vatican’s approval for the first time in four years. Tensions mounted this month when the state church convened the Eighth National Congress of Catholic Representatives and selected a new leader of Chinese bishops — the same Bishop Ma.
Many Catholics saw a series of calculated insults. The Vatican said Beijing forced bishops to take part in the congress and accused the Chinese government of a “persistent desire to control the most intimate area of citizens’ lives, namely their conscience.”
At least one bishop, Bishop Joseph Li Liangui, reportedly refused to attend the congress and has disappeared, according to the Union of Catholic Asian News, an Asia-wide Catholic news service. Some Catholics who have heard of his disappearance believe he is in hiding.
They also say Wei Jingyi, the underground bishop of the Qiqihar Diocese, has issued a pastoral letter supporting the Vatican’s criticisms and calling on Chinese Catholics to join him.
The Vatican’s statement was “imprudent and ungrounded,” asserted Xinhua, the official news agency. It quoted a spokesman from the State Administration for Religious Affairs as asking: “Does a Chinese religious organization have to get a ‘majestic authorization’ or ‘gracious approval’ from a foreign group to elect its leadership?”
Ms. Meng is calling on Catholics to “cry” for the church this Christmas.
“Cry for our church which has been split, cry for the bishops who attended the meeting, cry for our own weakness, cry for our government’s muddle, cry for how the Holy See and the religious authorities have not been able to find a solution for decades,” she said in a statement posted on the Internet.
But she criticized Rome, too, for not appreciating that many Chinese Catholics have found a satisfying outlet for their devotions through the state church.
“The Holy See is fixated on the underground church and does not see how Chinese society is really quite pluralist by now,” she said, urging greater cooperation between the two sides.
She predicted difficulties ahead. “For us Catholics, this Christmas is going to be very different,” she said. “The government will watch us very closely.”
Last Sunday at the state-run South Cathedral, where Matteo Ricci once preached, the accommodations Chinese Catholics make were on display. About 500 people had gathered for a mass baptism of 167 new converts.
Baptisms also took place at East Cathedral and North Cathedral in Beijing. The Rev. Justin Liu Zhe, an assistant parish chaplain at South Cathedral, said around 400 people were baptized in the city that day.
Afterward, Wang Yunpeng, 22, wearing a short white gown like all the new members of the Church, stood outside in the cold wind with her religious guide and “sister,” Jenny Jiang, celebrating her new status.
“The Church gives me a direction in life that I can’t even put into words,” she said. “It’s a feeling, and I can’t get it anywhere else.”
Another “sister” — each convert was accompanied by a “sister” or “brother” — confided that she was a follower of Rome. “I listen to Rome,” she said, requesting anonymity because of the sensitivity of the subject. “But I’m here because this is our local church, and we want to be here.”