'Don't date Arabs' letter sparks Israeli controversy
A letter published by a group of rabbis in Israel has sparked calls for their dismissal.
The letter, signed by the wives and daughters of prominent rabbis, instructs Jewish women not to date or even work with Arab men.
Human rights groups and more liberal rabbis say the letter whips up hatred and are calling for those behind it to be sacked.
The letter was published in some of Israel's mainstream papers and is signed by the wives and daughters of 27 of Israel's most senior and prominent rabbis, among them Rabbi Ovadia Yosef, who is the spiritual leader of the ultra orthodox Shas party - a key partner in Israel's coalition government.
It urges Jewish women not to date or even work with non-Jews - read Arabs - or even serve alongside them in the Israeli Army.
"They ask to be close to you and try to find favour with you," the letter reads, "and give you all the attention in the world. But their behaviour is only temporary. The moment you are in their hands, in their village, under their control, everything changes."
Rabbi Levi Chazen represents the organisation which drafted the letter - Lahava - which works to prevent Jewish assimilation.
"Throughout the ages the Jewish people always kept the fine line of marrying amongst themselves and not intermarrying amongst other peoples, otherwise we wouldn't be here today," he said.
"And so it's very unfortunate that we do come back to the land of Israel after 2,000 years of exile and we find ourselves with a problem of assimilation with Jewish women and Arab men."
On its own, critics might dismiss the letter as the rant of a group that does not represent the Israeli majority, most of whom are secular Jews.
But human rights groups say it is part of a growing tide of anti-Arab sentiment in Israeli society.
Earlier this month another letter by municipal rabbis urged Israeli Jews not to rent properties to non-Jewish residents.
And another group of rabbis have lobbied an Israeli hospital to abandon plans for a prayer room for its Muslim patients.
In a country where 20 per cent of Israelis are Arabs, the letter has shocked many, including other liberal rabbis such as Yehiel Grenimann from the organisation Rabbis for Human Rights.
"Personally if someone wants to marry out of the faith that's their choice," he said.
"I deeply believe that God gave us freedom and any repression of freedom is to me anti-God; anti the most essential element of what I understand faith to be."
Israeli Labour Party leader Ehud Barak has warned the rabbis' letter could lead to a wave of racism that threatens to take over Israeli society.
But a survey published on the same day suggests Israelis are evenly divided - 44 per cent of Israeli Jews it says supported the rabbis' calls while 48 per cent were opposed.