North Korea fires missile, South Korea says
(CNN)North Korea fired two missiles Wednesday morning from its eastern coast, according to South Korean and U.S. officials.
Both are believed to be Musudan intermediate-range missiles, fired from the North Korean port city of Wonsan, said Cmdr. Dave Benham, spokesman for the U.S. Pacific Command
"According to the U.N. Security Council resolution, any launches that involve ballistic missile technology are a violation of the treaty and we think this is clearly a provocation towards us," South Korea's Unification Ministry spokesman Jeong Joon Hee said at a regularly-scheduled press briefing.
The Musudan is an intermediate-range missile with a strike range of 2,500 to 4,000 kilometres (1,553 to 2,485 miles).
The first missile flew 93 miles (150 kilometers), and is considered a failed launch, according to a South Korean military official.
The second missile traveled 249 miles (400 kilometers) and the data is still being analyzed by the South Korean military, the official told CNN.
Both missiles were tracked over the Sea of Japan, also known as the East Sea, "where initial indications are they fell," Benham said. Benham said the missile launches did not pose a threat to North America.
"We would like to continue taking a close coordination with the U.S. and South Korea and working on North Korea (at) the United Nations, so that North Korea would not conduct such an action again."
Gen Nakatani Japan's Defense Minister Gen Nakatani told reporters that the first missile launch did not affect the country's security, but he also called for immediate meetings to take all possible measures to protect Japan. He made the comments before the second missile launch.
The U.S. State Department condemned the recent missile tests in a statement: "We are aware of reports that the DPRK fired two ballistic missiles. We are monitoring and continuing to assess the situation in close coordination with our regional allies and partners."
The United States advised North Korea to stop its ballistic missile tests and said it only strengthened the international community's resolve to press forward with U.N. sanctions. The United States said it would also defend its allies, South Korea and Japan, and called its commitment to them "ironclad."
"(Kim Jong Un) is interested in being the leader of NK who has been able to create a deliverable nuclear weapon and clearly they're counting on this intermediate range Musudan missile to do that," Christopher Hill, the former U.S. Ambassador to South Korea, told CNN.
"The key element of it is that it's mobile. The fixed launch points, we know precisely where they are, but if this thing pops out a forest we don't."
"The missile didn't reach nearly its full range, but it didn't blow up on the pad and it flew far enough that patient engineers might have learned something from it.
"But as they didn't stop to figure out what went wrong after today's first test, it is pretty clear that they aren't working patiently and trying to learn from their mistakes."
he wrote in an opinion piece for CNN. "It showed up in North Korea over a decade ago, and it seems to be based on a 1960s-era Soviet design with some local modifications." The Musudan with its intermediate-range capabilities could deliver a nuclear warhead as far as the U.S. base in Guam, he wrote in an opinion piece for CNN.
"You can develop a nuclear device, but unless you can deliver it, it has no strategic value," he said. Without an air force or a technically capable submarine, the missiles are the only route.
"The farther along they are, the higher bribe price the external community has to pay for them to give it up," he said.
CNN's Paula Hancocks In an interview with CNN's Paula Hancocks earlier this month, South Korean Defense Minister Han Minkoo pointed out that during the 18 years of Kim Jong Il's reign in North Korea, the country had conducted 18 missile tests.
In just four years of reign under his son, the younger Kim has now overseen 27 missile launches with the two most recent tests on Wednesday.