Egypt: Mohamed Morsi supporters call for 'million-man' march against military
As the toll of comrades who died in Saturday’s bloodshed officially rose to 80, Islamist organisers of the pro-Morsi demonstrations urged Egyptians to march on security buildings late on Monday and to hold a “martyrs of the coup” protest of more than a million people on Tuesday.
Baroness Catherine Ashton, the EU foreign policy chief, on Monday held meetings with government and opposition figures to try to unlock the political impasse that has seen the country wracked by outbreaks of violence in which 260 have died since Mr Morsi was deposed.
Lady Ashton met the top figures of the new government including with the defence minister, General Abdulfattah al-Sisi, and the leaders of the pro-Morsi camp. Later, she reportedly went visit Mr Morsi at the unknown facility where he is being detained, according to a senior Egyptian official who spoke to AFP.
Though the EU is the biggest donor of civilian aid to the country, Mrs Ashton’s leverage pales in comparison to that of the United States who provides the army with $1.3 billion in support to the army.
The White House on Monday condemned the military’s violent suppression of Saturday’s protests, with spokesman Josh Earnest saying it had set back the process of democratisation in Egypt.
“Lady Ashton called for all political forces to restrain from committing further violence,” Bader Abdul Ati, a foreign ministry spokesman told The Daily Telegraph. “We have invited [the opposition] to national reconciliation dialogue”.
The Muslim Brotherhood has said it refuses to open negotiations with the interim government until “legitimacy is restored” with the reinstatement of Mr Morsi, currently imprisoned in an unknown location. The new political leaders have said that is impossible.
After meeting Lady Ashton, Ahmed Maher, a founder of the 6th April opposition movement, said national reconciliation must start with bringing to account the “abusers of the nation” - those responsible for the deaths at the Rabaa al-Adawia protests this Saturday.
Pro-Morsi demonstrators accused the government of attacking the protests with live bullets. The government has said the deaths were a result of street battles between two sides, despite the fact that only Morsi supporters were killed.
The National Defence Council, which includes the military-installed president and the army, met yesterday’s calls for further protest with hostility, ordering citizens not to heed them. Army helicopters circled Cairo, dropping leaflets warning that “decisive action would be taken” against any “violations of the law”.
It is a message that opposition activists have read as a thinly veiled threat to use further violence.