Israel Denies a Work Visa to Human Rights Watch Researcher
Calling the charge of pro-Palestinian bias “outrageous,” Ms. Bashi pointed to several recent reports criticizing the leadership of Hamas and the Palestinian Authority.
“If we are engaging in Palestinian propaganda, we are doing a lousy job,” she said. The only other countries that have denied the group such access, she said, are Cuba, North Korea, Sudan, Uzbekistan and Venezuela.
Rights groups have complained that the Israeli government of Mr. Netanyahu has been increasingly hostile, with groups like B’Tselem and Peace Now, which monitor Israeli settlements and the conditions of Palestinians, coming under particular criticism.
Last year, Israel passed a law imposing reporting requirements on groups that receive more than half their funding from foreign governments. Advocacy groups said the legislation amounted to intimidation, while supporters of the move said it was meant to prevent foreign meddling in Israeli affairs.
Also on Friday, the United Nations criticized as too lenient the 18-month prison sentence given on Tuesday to Sgt. Elor Azaria, who was convicted of manslaughter for shooting an immobilized Palestinian attacker in the head in March 2016. The soldier had faced a maximum term of 20 years.
Sergeant Azaria is the only member of the Israeli security forces to have been brought to trial on charges of killing a Palestinian, although more than 200 Palestinians have been killed since a surge of violence began in September 2015, according to the office of the United Nations high commissioner for human rights.
“While the prosecution and conviction are very welcome steps towards accountability, the punishment — which is excessively lenient — is difficult to reconcile with the intentional killing of an unarmed and prone individual,” Ravina Shamdasani, a spokeswoman for the commissioner, said in a statement.
“It also stands in contrast to the sentences handed down by other Israeli courts for other less serious offenses, notably the sentencing of Palestinian children to more than three years’ imprisonment for throwing stones at cars,” she added. “This case risks undermining confidence in the justice system and reinforcing the culture of impunity.”