Kerry presses China over North Korea
Beijing (CNN)U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry pressed China Wednesday to step up pressure on North Korea after its recent nuclear test and tone down its aggressive actions in the South China Sea.
Kerry met with Chinese President Xi Jinping and spent more than four hours with Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi and other senior officials.
North Korea and its intention to develop a thermonuclear weapon topped the agenda, said Kerry at a joint press conference with Wang.
"This is a threat to any nation in the world," he said. "So let me be clear, Kim Jong Un's actions are reckless and dangerous."
Wang said that North Korea had violated sanctions and agreed that the UN Security Council had to pass a new resolution but said any new resolution "must not provoke new tensions."
"With all due respect, more significant and impactful sanctions were put in place against Iran, which did not have a nuclear weapon than against North Korea, which does," he said.
Then challenging China further, Kerry said, "All nations, particularly those who seek a global leadership role, or have a global leadership role, have a responsibility to deal with this threat."
"Our position will not be swayed by events or temporary mood of the moment," he said. "We have delivered on our obligation."
territorial dispute Tensions were visible between the two on the South China Sea, where a territorial dispute pits multiple countries against each other.
President Xi's commitment not to militarize the South China Sea China has embarked on a massive land reclamation program, turning sandbars into islands equipped with airfields, ports and lighthouses, but Wang said China honored President Xi's commitment not to militarize the South China Sea -- made while he visited the White House in September.
A senior official traveling with Kerry said that he would test what China can do to cut off the regime's lifeline, as Pyongyang's largest benefactor and trading partner.
The U.S. has stressed to China that it should be very concerned that North Korea didn't warn China about the test ahead of time, thus illustrating the danger of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un's unpredictability
"The fact that despite China's friendly overtures to the DPRK, Kim Jong Un turned around and did the thing that he knew the Chinese most objected to—a nuclear test—certainly tells me that that message hasn't yet gotten through," the official said.
Before his trip to Beijing, Kerry called North Korea's nuclear activity "one of the most serious issues on time planet today, which is a clearly reckless and dangerous evolving security threat."
In recent weeks U.S. officials made clear the U.S. is considering a new range of unilateral sanctions in response to North Korea's nuclear test, which could anger China.
Earlier this month South Korean President Park Geun-hye said she would consider allowing the U.S. to deploy an advanced missile-defense system—the Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense battery, or Thaad, something Washington has been pressing for and which China has opposed.
Next month Obama will host the 10 leaders of ASEAN in Sunnylands, California.
In addition to strengthening political and economic ties, the U.S. wants ASEAN to show more unity in response to China's growing assertiveness in the South China Sea, as Beijing steps up its building of made islands and airstrips in disputed maritime areas.