Queen in Malta: Melancholy on what is likely to be monarch's last trip to her former island home
Rain swirled through the sky as the Queen arrived in Malta for the Commonwealth summit, but the air was also filled with a distinct note of melancholy on what is likely to be her last trip to the island that was once her home.
The band of 4th Regiment, Armed Forces of Malta set the tone when they chose to play Thanks For The Memory as Her Majesty inspected a guard of honour on her arrival in Valletta on Thursday.
The lyrics of the Bob Hope hit talk of rainy afternoons, of motor trips, of candlelight and wine, sunburn at the shore; the sort of memories, indeed, that the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh will cherish from their carefree life on the island from 1949-51.
But as the tune was played in the courtyard of the presidential palace of San Anton, it was the people of Malta, who so took the young Princess Elizabeth to their hearts, who seemed to be saying goodbye.
The Queen, whose father George VI granted the George Cross to Malta for its heroism during the Second World War, has cut back on her foreign travel and may not have another chance to see the island of her youth.
Arriving at the palace, she and the Duke narrowly avoided a torrential downpour that left a large puddle on the red carpet where VIPs were waiting to shake her hand.
Memories were very much the theme as the Queen exchanged gifts with Malta’s president, Marie-Louise Coleiro Preca.
The president had chosen a watercolour of Villa Guardamangia, the Queen and the Duke’s former home, which is now in such a poor state of repair that visiting it is out of the question.
The picture imagines the villa as it was in the past, with a horse and cart outside the front door. “Oh look," said the Queen, clearly delighted. "Guardamangia!... That's very nice to have.”
Aware of the building’s current state, she added: “It looks rather sad now.”
The Duke said: "It's falling down. There's some dispute about it."
The president said: "We thought it would bring back memories."
The Queen gave the president a gold lace tablecloth from Nottinghamshire - a fitting gift, as the president's daughter is at university in Nottingham - and a Royal Crown Derby fruit bowl.
She gave the president's husband Edgar a hamper from the Windsor farm shop.
"Do you like fudge?" the Duke asked him. "It's rather bad for you."
Meanwhile, the Duchess of Cornwall, who with the Prince of Wales has joined the Queen for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, was given a gift of her own on a visit to a glassware shop.
At the Mdina Glass store in Ta’ Qali, the Duchess used the opportunity to start her Christmas shopping.
“This is what I call retail therapy. I haven’t done any Christmas shopping yet,” she said.
After watching glass being blown by craftsmen on site she browsed the shelves of glassware and bought a pair of green bowls costing 40 Euros each for herself and for her grandchildren chose two miniature glass horse and carriage sets which were blown by a glass maker in front.
“I love these, they are so beautiful,” she remarked.
There was more nostalgia at an evening reception at San Anton palace, where the Queen and the Duke were reunited with some old faces from their past.
Freddie Mizzi, 81, was a clarinetist with the Jimmy Dowling Band when the Queen and the Duke used to go dancing at the Venetian Hotel in Valletta in the early 1950s.
He said: “I reminded her that we used to play their favourite song, ‘People Will Say We’re In Love’, from Oklahoma, and she remembered.
“She and the Duke used to dance a lot. She was always beautiful and always so nice and kind, and she hasn’t changed. She is still beautiful and when you talk to her it’s like talking to a member of your family. I always called her Auntie Lizzie.”
Frank Attard, 87, who spent 55 years working as a photographer for the Times of Malta newspaper, brought along some prints of some of his favourite pictures of the Queen and the Duke taken in the 1950s.
They included pictures of them dancing together, a photo of the couple relaxing at the Villa Guardamangia and a shot of the Duke and his uncle Earl Mountbatten of Burma in military uniform.
He said: “She had her best days on the island. She was so young and so lovely. When I showed her the pictures she started laughing. She said she could remember some of them being taken but not others.”
The Queen also met Robert and Dee Strickland who had earlier presented her with a box of oranges and another of avocados, reviving a tradition started by Robert’s great aunt Mabel Strickland.
Owner of the Times of Malta, Mabel was a good friend of Princess Elizabeth and the Duke. After they left, she sent them oranges and avocados from her garden every year up to her death in 1988 and always received a thank you letter and Christmas cards.
"The Queen was delighted that we have restarted the tradition," said Robert , a sculptor, who lives in her old home. "And she had lots of nice things to say about Mabel."
There, too, was Elizabeth Pule, 72, former nurse whose mother, Jessie Grech, had been housekeeper at the Villa Guardamangia.
"She always stayed in touch with them afterwards and got invited to the Coronation," said Elizabeth, who is named after the Queen. In later years, Jessie was invited to the 25th anniversary of the Coronation and Elizabeth went too.
Many years later when the Queen arrived in Malta on the Royal Yacht Britannia, Elizabeth held up a banner saying "Jessie Was My Mother" as the Queen drove through Valetta. "The next day I got a call and was invited on to the yacht with my husband for an hour," she said. "She never forgot us."
• The Queen in Malta: how to find the British legacy on the island • Queen to greet line-up of despots at meeting of leaders in Malta