EU awarded Nobel Peace Prize
The EU has been nominated many times for the prize in the past but has never won it because the Union is politically controversial, not least in Norway, the home of the Nobel peace prize, a country which rejected membership twice, in two referendums.
"The union and its forerunners have for over six decades contributed to the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights in Europe," said the Nobel prize committee.
In its citation the Nobel committee acknowledged that the EU was today facing turmoil as the economic defects of the euro have laid waste to many Southern European countries and have plunged all Europe into the worst recession for 80 years.
"The EU is currently undergoing grave economic difficulties and considerable social unrest," said the citation.
"The Norwegian Nobel Committee wishes to focus on what it sees as the EU's most important result: the successful struggle for peace and reconciliation and for democracy and human rights. The stabilizing part played by the EU has helped to transform most of Europe from a continent of war to a continent of peace."
Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, hailed the choice, and insisted that efforts to save the euro with the imposition of controversial austerity policies was part of the EU's tradition as a peace project.
"I often say that the euro is more than a currency and we should not forget that in these weeks and months we spend working to strengthen the euro.
"The euro is more than a currency because at the end of the day it is about the original idea of a union of peace and of values," she told reporters.
The award has been welcomed by many European leaders as an encouragement for greater unity as the eurozone crisis threatens to tear the EU apart, and as southern Europe is hit by an economic crash and growing social conflict largely caused by flaws in the European single currency.
Herman Van Rompuy, president of the European Council, and Jose Manuel Barroso, president of the European Commission, described the award as a "tremendous honour".
"This prize is the strongest possible recognition of the deep political motives behind our Union: the unique effort by ever more European states to overcome war and divisions and to jointly shape a continent of peace and prosperity," they said in a joint statement.
"It is a prize not just for the project and the institutions embodying a common interest, but for the 500 million citizens living in our Union."
But behind the celebrations, a typical EU turf war broke out between Mr Barroso, Mr Van Rompuy and Martin Schulz, the president of the European Parliament, over which EU president should collect the prize.
In a bid to settle the squabble, Cecilia Malmstrom, Sweden's European Commisisoner, suggested on Twitter that sending 27 children from each of the EU countries to Oslo would be the solution.
The prize, which is worth a million euros (£800,000) will do little to help the EU's debt and banking crisis which has so far cost over €6 trillion and will only be worth €0.002 for each of the Union's 500 million citizens.
Living standards in Greece have crashed as the economy has contracted 20 per cent in the last three years, with youth unemployment yesterday hitting 54 per cent and the country's social fabric has come under intense strain, including the rise of an explicitly neo-Nazi party.
In Spain, which is expected to ask for an EU bailout in the coming days after its government bonds were given junk status yesterday, the state is on the brink of fracturing under the pressure of the worst recession since the 1930s.
In recent weeks, senior military figures and veteran right-wing politicians have warned that the army might step in after Catalonia threatened to declare independence in a bid to extricate itself from a Spanish economy that has been destroyed by an asset bubble created by the euro's economic imbalances.
The prize comes as opinion polls show that trust in the EU has sunk to all time low of 31 per cent across Europe as many voters blame its bureaucratic targets and austerity measures for record levels of joblessness.
Comments and reaction has varied from delighted responses, especially from former European leaders, to appalled comment from eurosceptics.
Gerhard Schroeder, the former German chancellor, said; "This is an important and right decision by the Nobel Prize Committee and a big encouragement for the people in Europe. It comes at the right time for closer togetherness in Europe and it strengthens those powers that are pushing for closer integration in the European Union."
Valery Giscard d'Estaing, former president of France, said: "It is right that this extraordinary effort that has been accomplished by the Europeans and their leaders to establish a lasting peace on their continent - historically ravaged by war - is rewarded and honoured."
Martin Callanan, leader of the Euro-sceptic Conservatives and Reformists party in the European parliament, said: "The Nobel committee is a little late for an April fools joke. Twenty years ago this prize would have been sycophantic but maybe more justified. Today it is downright out of touch.
"Presumably this prize is for the peace and harmony on the streets of Athens and Madrid. The EU's policies have exacerbated the fallout of the financial crisis and led to social unrest that we haven't seen for a generation.
"The Nobel Peace Prize was devalued when it was given to newly-elected Barack Obama. By giving the prize to the EU the Nobel committee has undermined the excellent work of the other deserving winners of this prize."
Ed Balls, the shadow chancellor, greeted the news with sarcasm. "They'll be cheering in Athens tonight, won't they," he said.
Michael Fabricant, a Conservative backbencher, said the Nobel panel had shown "a total lack of ideas" in the giving the prize to the EU and previously to Mr Obama.
He said: "The Nobel judges have gone mad. They have now finally lost it. The biggest myth about the European Union is that it has prevented war in Europe again. What an insult to modern Germany!"
Douglas Carswell, another MP, said the decision was simply "hilarious".
Kristian Berg Harpviken, of Norway's peace research institute PRIO, said: "It will probably be very controversial. Especially in Norway, it will be seen as a very, very political prize and a contribution to the Norwegian EU debate."
Denmark's Europe minister, Nicolai Wammen said: "We can of course laugh at this, and there are many problems in the EU. It is certainly not a perfect union but it is a strong message that a lot has gone right also since the creation of the EU."