North Korea fires ballistic missile as Trump, Xi prepare to meet
(CNN)Ahead of the first meeting between US President Donald Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping, North Korea fired a ballistic missile off the coast of the Korean Peninsula, US and South Korean officials said.
The missile -- which fell into the Sea of Japan, also known as the East Sea, on Wednesday morning -- is one of several the country has test-fired in recent months.
Even before the missile test, North Korea's nuclear program was expected to be an important talking point between Xi and Trump.
The United States has been pushing China to put pressure on North Korea to stop its nuclear program and missile testing, but Trump said on Sunday the United States would be prepared to act alone to stop North Korea.
In his first five years as North Korean leader, Kim Jong Un has overseen more than double the number of missile tests than his father did during his 17-year rule, according to the Center for Strategic and International Studies
The clock has now run out, A senior White House official on Tuesday said: " The clock has now run out, and all options are on the table," pointing to the failure of successive administrations' efforts to negotiate an end to the country's nuclear program.
said in the statement. "North Korea launched yet another intermediate range ballistic missile. The United States has spoken enough about North Korea. We have no further comment," US Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said in the statement.
North Korea has conducted five nuclear tests -- including two last year -- but experts said the country still hasn't developed nuclear warheads that can be mounted onto missiles.
Michael Hayden "Before the end of President Trump's current term, the North Koreans will probably be able to reach Seattle with an indigenously produced nuclear weapon aboard an indigenously produced intercontinental ballistic missile," Michael Hayden , who served as the director of the CIA between 2006 to 2009, said Tuesday while speaking at Johns Hopkins University.
Both the US military command in Asia Pacific and South Korean officialssaid the projectile was a KN-15 medium-range ballistic missile. However, a senior US defense official later told CNN that the missile was actually an extended-range Scud missile.
The North Koreans use Sinpo shipyard for their submarine activity, and US satellites have observed increased activity there in recent days, another US official said.
Cmdr. Dave Benham, It was believed to have flown a distance of around 60 kilometers (37 miles)and flew as high as 189 kilometers (117 miles), South Korean officials said. Cmdr. Dave Benham, spokesman for US Pacific Command, said it was tracked for nine minutes and did not pose a danger to North America.
Multiple defense officials told CNN that the nine-minute flight time for the missile was accurate, but, separately, an official with the Trump administration said the missile exploded approximately 55 seconds after launch.
The initial launch details also raised questions with some experts. If the tracking time and distance are accurate, North Korea would have fired "the world's slowest missile," according to Melissa Hanham of the East Asia Nonproliferation Program.
"This test compared to the last one (in February) did not go as far or as high," she said. "They may have been trying to test one stage."
The US defense official who identified the missile as a Scud said the projectile used liquid fuel.
North Korea's liquid fuel-powered ballistic missiles typically require a garrison, fuel storage tanks and support vehicles to launch, which can be identified with imagery, experts say.
The use of a mobile launcher is concerning because it's harder to detect and preemptively strike, according to Carl Schuster, a professor at Hawaii Pacific University and former director of operations at the US Pacific Command's Joint Intelligence Center.