British Museum lends Russia controversial Elgin Marble
Britain's sanctions are not cultural, instead targeting Russia's financial, defense and energy sectors, as well as imposing asset bans and travel restrictions on specific individuals. However, MacGregor's statement did touch upon the issue:
"The Trustees have always believed that such loans must continue between museums in spite of political disagreements between governments," MacGregor said. "It is a position energetically shared by our counterparts in Russia."
At the G20 summit in Australia last month, At the G20 summit in Australia last month, British Prime Minister David Cameron warned Russia to change course over Ukraine. Otherwise, Cameron said, "The relationship that Britain has with Russia, that the European Union has with Russia, the relationship that I hope Australia has with Russia, will be very different."
and later presented to the British Museum. Greece has for decades been demanding the return of the sculptures, which were "acquired" by Lord Elgin between 1801 and 1805, bought from him by the British Parliament in 1816, and later presented to the British Museum.
"The Parthenon and its sculptures have been looted. The value of the sculptures is priceless," he said. "We Greeks identify with our history and culture, which cannot be fragmented, loaned or bestowed."
The Elgin Marbles are a series of sculptures in a frieze that once adorned the upper sections of the Parthenon in the Greek capital of Athens. The sculpture being loaned to Russia, of the river god Ilissos, "is one of the finest of those to survive from the Parthenon," the British Museum said.
Describing itself as "the most generous lending museum in the world," the museum said the loan was part of ongoing exchanges with the Hermitage, which had requested it to mark the 250th anniversary of its foundation.
"The British Museum is a museum of the world, for the world and nothing demonstrates this more than the loan of a Parthenon sculpture to the State Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg to celebrate its 250th anniversary," MacGregor said.
Mikhaile Piotrovsky, director of the State Hermitage Museum, said: "I am delighted that this important, beautiful and significant sculpture has been lent in celebration of our two museums' shared values and will be seen alongside the permanent classical sculptures of the Hermitage."
"It was in the 19th century that Lord Elgin removed intact architectural sculptures from the frieze, the metopes and the pediments of the building," the museum says.
The latest Acropolis Museum building was completed in 2007 and is the place "where eventually the Parthenon sculptures will be reunited," the museum says.
he Parthenon frieze was originally 160 meters long It says t he Parthenon frieze was originally 160 meters long . "From the entire frieze that survives today, 50 meters are in the Acropolis Museum, 80 meters in the British Museum, one block in the Louvre," the museum said, adding that "other fragments are scattered" among museums in Sicily, the Vatican, Germany, Austria and Denmark.