Britain upgrades European travel advice due to rise in terror threat
Theresa May reiterates US advice to citizens travelling in Europe, warning of 'high terror threat' in Germany and France
Britain has followed the United States in upgrading its travel advice for Europe and warning of a heightened risk of terrorist attacks.
The foreign office said there was "a high threat of terrorism" in Germany and France, having previously identified a "general threat".
The new advice comes after British security and intelligence sources said last week that a plot to launch "commando-style" attacks on Britain, France, and Germany had been intercepted and foiled by drone attacks on militants based in Pakistan.
The foreign office is warning that "attacks could be indiscriminate, including in places frequented by expatriates and foreign travellers".
The move follows the US, which today issued updated advice for Europe as a whole, warning terrorist targets could include "public transportation systems and other tourist infrastructure".
The state department said: "Current information suggests that al-Qaida and affiliated organisations continue to plan terrorist attacks. European governments have taken action to guard against a terrorist attack and some have spoken publicly about the heightened threat conditions."
The home secretary, Theresa May, described the US advice as "consistent with our assessment". "As we have consistently made clear, we face a real and serious threat from terrorism," she said.
Britain's terror threat rating remains at "severe", the second highest rating, where it has been since rising from "substantial" in January.
On Tuesday, the Eiffel Tower in Paris was evacuated after a bomb threat called in from a telephone booth. It was the second such alert at the tower in two weeks. A search by bomb experts found nothing unusual, and it was reopened within hours. French authorities have received indications from allied intelligence services about the possibility of attacks, but no specific plot, a high-ranking French security official said last week.
On Friday, Sweden said it had raised its threat alert to the highest level ever because of an increased threat of terror attacks.
The US has carried out at least 25 drone strikes so far this month in Pakistan's tribal areas, according to US media – the highest monthly total for six years.
One strike reportedly killed a British man who a Pakistani intelligence official said was part of an al-Qaida-linked plot to carry out "commando-style" attacks in the UK. He said the British man was conspiring with his brother and eight Germans. Western intelligence officials played down the suggestion.