Roberto Azevêdo to be named new World Trade Organisation chief
Roberto Azevêdo, a Brazilian trade diplomat, has been chosen as the next head of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), ending a long selection process that began in December. Azevêdo, who has been Brazil's ambassador to the WTO since 2008, saw off nine rival candidates for the role.
When he takes up his new post on 1 September, he will become the WTO's first Latin American director general, and the second to hail from the global south.
Reuters leaked the news of his selection on Tuesday evening, citing diplomatic sources. The WTO is due to make an official announcement on Wednesday.
A respected figure in Geneva, Azevêdo, 55, was widely seen as the insider's candidate, and was the preferred choice of developing countries and emerging economies.
The US, Japan, South Korea, and all 27 EU member states reportedly backed Azevêdo's Mexican opponent, Herminio Blanco, in the final round of the selection process. Blanco, who holds a PhD in economics from the University of Chicago, served as his country's trade minister from 1994 to 2000. He is widely known as an aggressive and committed free trader, with a strong personality to match.
Those qualities earned Blanco the support of rich countries, but they may have scared off some of the WTO's developing country members, says Simon Evenett, a professor of economics and trade at the University of St Gallen in Switzerland. Ultimately, Azevêdo won the backing of a majority of the WTO's 159 members, despite a lack of support from many rich countries.
"Had Blanco won – with transatlantic support behind him, plus the support of Japan and Korea – it would have looked like another rich-country stitch-up of an international [organisation] job, and that would have been very unhelpful in terms of getting progress at the WTO," says Evenett. "In that sense, the outcome that we have is good for the organisation."
Nine candidates – three women, and six contenders from non-OECD countries – were nominated for the post.
With his intimate knowledge of the ins and outs of the WTO, Azevêdo should have a fairly smooth transition into his new job, taking over from Pascal Lamy of France. Lamy is coming to the end of his second term as director general, having taken up the post in 2005.
The first item on Azevêdo's agenda will be to prepare for the WTO's next ministerial meeting, which will take place in Bali in December. Trade observers say the Bali meeting will need to register some sort of progress in the WTO's Doha round trade talks, which were launched in 2001 but have been at an impasse for years. Azevêdo agrees.
"The WTO started in 1995, so we're talking about almost 20 years with no updating of [global trade] rules," Azevêdo said in an interview conducted while he was campaigning for the post. "I want to find a solution for the Doha round … I will do my best to make the multilateral trading system regain its vigour."
But it is far from certain that things will look any different once the new director general has settled into office. While the leader of the WTO has significant convening power, it is ultimately up to WTO members themselves to bring about any real movement in the negotiations.
The selection of a new director general "is a bit like a fireworks display", says Evenett. "There's a lot of excitement and drumroll on the evening, and then the next day, life goes on. We may be at that sort of moment with the WTO."
He added: "We all wish him well, but what can he do to change negotiating positions in national capitals? The answer is not much."