Briefly Nation
WASHINGTON: The US on Thursday slapped sanctions on Indian Mujahideen by designating it as terrorist outfit and said it had links with Pakistan-based groups like the LeT. "IM's stated goal is to carry out terrorist actions... in furtherance of its objective... an Islamic Caliphate," the US state department said.
HYDERABAD: Anantapur Police on Thursday seized a truck in which cash amounting to Rs 3.90 crore was hidden in four bags. Police claimed that the truck was registered with Obulapuram Mining Corporation owned by former minister G Janardhana Reddy, who is now in CBI custody. The truck which was coming from Bellary did not have any cargo, and was proceeding towards Anantapur when it was seized during a routine check on Andhra-Karnataka border.
BHUBANESWAR: Rains hindered air-dropping of food and relief operations for the second day on Thursday and the toll mounted to 26, even as flood waters receded in most places in the Mahanadi delta region. Among the 26 dead, 10 are from Kendrapara district. At least 12 of the dead were either swept away or drowned, Special Relief Commissioner P K Mohapatra said. Revenue Minister S N Patro said though water receded in most places, people in five gram panchayats remained marooned, for whom food will be air-dropped.
MUMBAI: The death toll in the 13/7 Mumbai triple blasts rose to 27 as another victim succumbed to injuries on Thursday. Prashant Joshi, who was injured in the Zaveri Bazaar blast died at JJ hospital. Joshi had sustained severe head injuries and had shrapnel in his brain which was surgically removed. He had also suffered 10 per cent burns on his hands and lost his eyesight. A businessman, Joshi is survived by his wife and seven-year-old son.
Please read our before posting comments
indianexpress.comindianexpress.com TERMS OF USE: The views expressed in comments published on indianexpress.com are those of the comment writer's alone. They do not represent the views or opinions of The Indian Express Group or its staff. Comments are automatically posted live; however, indianexpress.com reserves the right to take it down at any time. We also reserve the right not to publish comments that are abusive, obscene, inflammatory, derogatory or defamatory.