Some in Europe Resist Reach of Central Banking Plan
“A deep and genuine economic and monetary union can be started under the current treaty but can only be completed with changes in the E.U. treaties,” he said. “I call for a federation of nation states, not a superstate.”
He indicated that proposals for a new treaty could come as soon as 2014.
That will raise concerns among some politicians who remember how plans to draw up a constitution for the bloc took several years to draft and were then rejected by referendums in France and the Netherlands in 2005.
The Lisbon Treaty, which took the place of the constitution, was intended to be the last redrawing of the rules for many years. Any new treaty would require the approval of all member states.
Seeking to paint himself as a moderate with ideas that could stem extremism during a period of economic distress, Mr. Barroso said that “we must not allow the populists and the nationalists to set a negative agenda.”
Mr. Barroso, whose term is set to end in 2014, also said that the next president should have more democratic legitimacy and that political groupings in Europe should each propose one nominee for the job before the next elections. Currently, the commission president is selected through a sort of horse-trading process by national governments, with the choice subject to Parliament’s approval.
Dissent over the proposal for banking supervision was an ominous sign for swift progress on the larger ambitions sketched by Mr. Barroso. Any delay could be painful for countries like Spain that need financial infusions for their banks.
European leaders have said that such infusions from the euro zone’s permanent bailout fund, the European Stability Mechanism, were contingent on the central bank’s having a lead role in banking supervision.
Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, made clear her country’s concern that it was unrealistic to expect the central bank to be able to oversee 6,000 banks effectively, as the plan proposes, because regulators would be spread too thin.
“It is not acceptable if every bank is to be controlled, but not every bank can be controlled,” Ms. Merkel said in a speech before Parliament in Berlin. “It is about quality and not quantity.”
In a separate statement, the German Finance Ministry recommended that the central bank “initially focus on systemically relevant banks, those that pose risks of a systemic nature or are recipients of state aid,” while “banks that are not systemically important should in principle continue to be supervised by national supervisory authorities.”
Some analysts echoed those reservations, warning that trying to do too much would strain the central bank’s resources and risk creating regulatory black holes.
“The division of responsibility between national supervisors and the E.C.B. also creates possibilities for additional problems that may inevitably arise in the gaps between the two, as such a division and the necessary coordination can never be perfect,” said Sony Kapoor, the director of Re-Define, a Brussels-based research organization.
Michel Barnier, the European commissioner for the internal market, said on Wednesday that the system had to cover all banks within the euro area “in order to be credible” and because “small- and medium-size banks can create major problems.”
Dissent, on various grounds, has also come from countries like Hungary, Romania and the Czech Republic that are members of the European Union but do not yet use the euro. They have expressed concerns about a potential run on banks not regulated by the new single supervisor and backstopped by the European bailout fund.
Officials in Britain, which is an important member of the bloc but does not use the euro, fear the effect the centralized banking plan may have on London, Europe’s biggest financial center.
A “banking union for the euro area must also respect the integrity of the single market for the whole of the European Union, and we’ll ensure the agreement on it does that,” said a British diplomat, who spoke on the condition of anonymity in line with standard policy.
Another obstacle to rapid passage of the plan could come from the European Parliament itself.
Parliament now has a say only on part of the package concerning the future role of another agency, the European Banking Authority. But that limited role is not sufficient, said Hannes Swoboda, the leader of the Socialists and Democrats group in Parliament.
“The proposals should be seen as a global package to be negotiated on an equal footing between E.U. governments and the European Parliament,” Mr. Swoboda said.
Sharon Bowles, the chair of Parliament’s economic and monetary affairs committee, also signaled the need for greater parliamentary scrutiny of banking legislation.
But granting Parliament a formal role could draw out the process well into next year and delay the possibility of giving aid directly to banks in countries like Spain, said a European diplomat who spoke on the condition of anonymity because Parliament had not yet made a formal request to be involved.
Investors will probably gauge the ability of Europeans to adopt the banking plan as an indicator of their determination to resolve the euro zone crisis.
“A swift agreement would help to challenge the perception that governments in the euro zone never reach agreement on anything without squabbling about it for months on end,” said Ken Wattret, chief euro zone economist for BNP Paribas in London.