David Cameron criticised for being 'simplistic and trendy' and 'more PC than PM' over empire apology
Historians also said he was being naïve to suggest that many of the world’s ills can be traced back to when they were British colonies.
Seán Lang, a senior lecturer in History at Anglia Ruskin University, where he teaches British Imperial History, accused Mr Cameron of “touting for applause”.
He told The Daily Telegraph: “His comment was simplistic and trendy - more PC than PM. I certainly wouldn't accept such a sweeping generalisation from one of my own students.
“Perhaps the Prime Minister should spend a bit of time over Easter back at Eton, where the very strong history department could quickly put him right.”
The Prime Minister risked controversy when he appeared to blame Britain for the conflict in Kashmir and many other international disputes during a visit to Pakistan.
Asked how Britain could help end the row over Kashmir, he insisted that it was not his place to intervene in the dispute, declaring: “I don’t want to try to insert Britain in some leading role where, as with so many of the world’s problems, we are responsible for the issue in the first place.”
Mr Lang said the Prime Minister’s comments showed why “people in public life need extensive, detailed and accurate historical knowledge, and why the seed of this needs to be sown in the school classroom”.
He said that while Britain’s hasty withdrawal from India in 1947 certainly led to the Kashmir dispute, blaming the British overlooked “notably the heightening of inter-communal tensions between Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims”, he said.
Britain’s empire was a “multi-faceted phenomenon”, he said, which “cannot simply be categorised as ‘good’ or ‘bad’”.
Mr Lang said that “even historians very critical of British imperial rule recognise that it also left considerable benefits.
“In the case of India and Pakistan, British rule left an infrastructure of railways, telegraphs, science, medicine, education, government and law”.
The criticism was backed by other experts. Professor Philip Murphy, director of the Institute of Commonwealth Studies, said: “It is a sign of the minefield this is and what a canny politician David Cameron is.
“It is an elephant trap for any British politician visiting a former colony and it points to the great difficulties Britain has when talking about national values.
“It shows the narrow line Britain has to tread between a mild apology for its imperial past and admitting culpability on a very specific issue that raise issues of compensation. It is pure poison for any politician to try to defend the imperial past.”
Prof Murphy said the comments contrasted with those by Gordon Brown, who said in 2005 Britain “should celebrate much of our past rather than apologise for it”.
But Andrew Rosindell MP, a Tory member of the Commons’ Foreign Affairs committee, said: “There was huge good that the British empire did with the legal system, the rule of law and constitution in many of these countries.
“We certainly should not apologise for the British empire. The Prime Minister is right to point out that we left some of the issues unresolved and we are living with the consequences.”