Pyongyang bans Malaysians from leaving North Korea: KCNA
SEOUL: Pyongyang is banning all Malaysian citizens from leaving North Korea, state media said on Tuesday (Mar 7), potentially holding them hostage amid an increasingly heated diplomatic row over the killing of Kim Jong Nam in Kuala Lumpur.
"All Malaysian nationals in the DPRK will be temporarily prohibited from leaving the country until the incident that happened in Malaysia is properly solved," the official Korea Central News Agency (KCNA) said, citing the foreign ministry.
Malaysia's deputy foreign minister said there are currently 11 Malaysians in North Korea, three of whom are embassy employees.
In response, Malaysia's Deputy Prime Minister Ahmad Zahid Hamidi told reporters in a media briefing that Kuala Lumpur will ban all North Korean embassy staff and diplomats from leaving the country.
Pyongyang and Kuala Lumpur had unusually strong links for years, but have been set at loggerheads by the killing of the half-brother of leader Kim Jong-Un by two women using VX nerve agent.
Seoul has blamed Pyongyang for the assassination, and Kuala Lumpur has sought several North Koreans for questioning, although the only one it arrested was released due to lack of evidence.
The North has yet to confirm the dead man's identity but has denounced the Malaysian investigation as an attempt to smear it.
Malaysia expelled the North's ambassador as diplomatic tensions soared, and Pyongyang retaliated late Monday by formally ordering out his counterpart - who had already been recalled for consultations.
Malaysia's Minister for Youth and Sports Khairy Jamaluddin tweeted, saying the move by Pyongyang to bar Malaysians from leaving the country as "tantamount to taking hostages".
"This is unacceptable. DPRK must allow free passage of Malaysians at once."
According to KCNA, Pyongyang's foreign ministry expressed hope that the Malaysian government would solve the issue in a "fair and timely manner based on goodwill".
Malaysian diplomats and nationals in the North would be allowed to "conduct business and live normally" while the travel ban is in place, it added.
Pyongyang's extraordinary move, which Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak said meant it was "effectively holding our citizens hostage", came as North Korea faced growing international condemnation for a volley of missiles it fired into the Sea of Japan.
Najib condemned the ban and said he was ordering a similar ban on the movement of "all North Korean citizens in Malaysia". Analysts said they could number around 1,000 people.
The home ministry had previously suggested the ban only affected diplomats and embassy officials.
"This abhorrent act, effectively holding our citizens hostage, is in total disregard of all international law and diplomatic norms," Najib said, according to a statement.
"As a peace-loving nation, Malaysia is committed to maintaining friendly relations with all countries. However, protecting our citizens is my first priority, and we will not hesitate to take all measures necessary when they are threatened."