Libya to send migrants to Europe if Islamist government not recognised
Libya has threatened to send 'hundreds of thousands' of migrantsto Europe if the world does not recognise its self-declared Islamist government.
The General National Congress, which seized the capital last year, warned it could charter boats to send African refugees across the Mediterranean.
A spokesman for the GNC also appeared to effectively blackmail the EU by threatening to reverse its policy of stopping migrants through detention centres and repatriations programs.
Jamal Zubia said: 'We are protecting the gates of Europe, yet Europe does not recognise us and does not want to recognise us. So why should we stop the migrants here?' 
Libya's Department for Combating Illegal Immigration, which employs around 8,000 staff, currently detains large numbers of migrants and works with the Organisation for Migration on voluntary repatriation programmes.
Local coastguards also carry out patrols and assist EU operations to retrieve bodies from capsized vessels.
Mr Zubia said the country was currently spending tens of millions of pounds on such measures.
He told The Daily Telegraph: 'If we were not a responsible state, we would hire boats and send the migrants to Europe.
'Every day we catch hundreds of them, even though we do not have the necessary resources.
'It is a strategic threat, yes, but I would not rule out us doing it one day.' 
Europe is already struggling with its worst migration crisis since World War Two, with the number of refugees entering by sea last month roughly the same as for the whole of 2014.
The monthly record of 218,394 also outstripped September's 172,843, the United Nations refugee agency UNHCR said yesterday. 
The vast majority of refugees and migrants to Europe have travelled via Turkey to Greece, a switch from the previously more popular African route via Libya to Italy.
Libya has had two administrations since August 2014 when a militia alliance that includes Islamists overran Tripoli, forcing the internationally recognised government to take refuge in Tobruk. 
Mr Zubia's comments came after the United Nations urged Libya's warring factions to agree on a unity government after they were offered proposals to ease concerns over regional distribution in a U.N.-backed power-sharing deal.
The U.N. said in a statement after consultations with both sides that a proposed presidential council would be expanded from six to nine members, including a prime minister, five deputy premiers and three senior ministers. 
Members of Libya's two rival parliaments were scheduled to meet separately to discuss the UN proposal on Tuesday.
The product of months of negotiations, the U.N. proposal for a national government includes members of both factions and attempts to reflect Libya's traditional regional balance. Hardliners have resisted the deal.
Four years after the fall of Muammar Gaddafi, the North African state is mired in a conflict between two rival governments and loose coalitions of armed factions that back them in a struggle for control.
Libya's recognised government and its elected parliament have operated out of the eastern city of Tobruk since the Libyan Dawn armed faction took over the capital Tripoli last year, set up a government and reinstated the former parliament.
The country has no national army. 
Rebel militias fought together against Gaddafi in 2011, but then turned against one another and are often more loyal to their cities or tribes or Libya's east, west or southern regions than to the state.
Western governments see the U.N. deal as the best option to deal with Libya's crisis, which has allowed Islamic State fighters to gain ground and people smugglers to take advantage of the chaos to ship thousands of migrants to Europe.
The EU says a unity government would bring more financial aid and training support to rebuild a national army, but officials are also mulling sanctions against political leaders who block a deal.