Syria ceasefire: US Secretary of State John Kerry says 'cessation of hostilities' agreed
Ministers holding crisis talks over Syria have agreed to cease hostilities within a week, US Secretary of State John Kerry said.
The 17 countries meeting in Munich agreed "to implement a nationwide cessation of hostilities to begin in a target of one week's time" and immediately expand delivery of humanitarian aid, he said.
"We have agreed to accelerate and expand the delivery of humanitarian aid beginning immediately," Mr Kerry said.
"Sustained delivery will begin this week, first to the areas where it is most urgently needed ... and then to all the people in need throughout the country, particularly in the besieged and hard to reach areas."
Kerry said the cessation of hostilities — an intentionally more tentative phrasing than a full ceasefire — would apply to all groups apart from "the terrorist organisations" of the Islamic State (IS) group and Al-Qaeda affiliate al-Nusra.
Peace talks collapsed earlier this month after troops loyal to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, backed by Russian bombers and Iranian fighters, pressed an offensive on the key rebel stronghold of Aleppo.
The bombardments have forced 50,000 people to flee, left the opposition virtually encircled and killed an estimated 500 people since they began on February 1 — the latest twist in a war that has claimed more than 260,000 lives.
Mr Kerry, speaking after marathon talks that included Russia and more than a dozen other countries, said that all nations involved in the talks agreed that Syrian peace negotiations should resume in Geneva as soon as possible.
"We have also established a taskforce under the auspices of the UN, and co-chaired by Russia and the United States. And over the coming week, this group will work to develop the modalities for a long term, comprehensive and durable cessation of hostilities," he said.
Mr Kerry, flanked by Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and UN envoy Staffan de Mistura, acknowledged that the Munich meeting produced commitments on paper only.
He and Mr Lavrov agreed that the "real test" will be whether all parties to the Syrian conflict honoured those commitments.
Russia and the US remain starkly at odds on several issues, particularly the fate of President al-Assad.
The two traded accusations on Thursday, with the Pentagon claiming Russian air strikes had destroyed hospitals in Aleppo and denying Russian claims that US planes had struck the city.
Syria is a crucial ally and military staging post for Russia and Iran, while observers say Moscow has benefited from the chaos created by the war, particularly the refugee crisis in Europe.
Washington, reluctant to involve itself in another complex war after the quagmires of Afghanistan and Iraq, has also faced criticism for not doing enough to help the rebels.
Instead, it has sought to focus more on combating IS jihadists, which have taken over swathes of Syria and Iraq, than getting involved in the civil war between the regime and opposition forces.
Foundation for Strategic Research director Camille Grand said it appeared the US had "given up the idea of toppling Assad".
"Kerry seems willing to accept pretty much anything to resolve the crisis," Mr Grand said.
The conflict has also strained relations between Turkey and its Western allies.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has slammed Washington's increasingly close alliance with the Kurdish militias in the fight against IS, saying it was turning the region into "a pool of blood".