Iran grants bail to detained US hiker Sarah Shourd
Sarah Shourd will be allowed to leave Iran on $500,000 bail but still faces trial with two other Americans on spy charges
Iran is to release one of the three American hikers detained last year, state media reported today, citing health grounds.
Abbas Jafari Dowlatabadi, a Tehran prosecutor, said the authorities would release Sarah Shourd on $500,000 bail and allow her to leave the country. Shourd's mother had said she had been denied treatment for serious health problems, including a breast lump and precancerous cervical cells.
Shourd was detained with two friends, Shane Bauer and Josh Fattal, along the Iran-Iraq border in July 2009 and accused of spying.
Dowlatabadi gave no details on when she would be released. He said the conditions of her bail did not bar her from leaving the country, although she still faces trial with the other two Americans, who remain in custody.
"Based on reports and the approval of the relevant judge about the sickness of Ms Shourd, her detention was converted to $500,000 bail, and if the bail is deposited, she can be released," the official IRNA news agency quoted Dowlatabadi as saying.
Shourd, who has been held in solitary confinement, was to have been released yesterday as an act of clemency to mark the end of Ramadan, after the intervention of Iran's president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. But the judiciary abruptly halted that planned release, indicating such a decision would first have to go through the courts.
Iran has accused the three Americans of illegally crossing the border and spying. Their families say they were hiking in Iraq's scenic north and that if they crossed the border, they did so unwittingly.
The prosecution's case against the three is nearly complete and a judge has issued indictments for all three on charges of spying, Dowlatabadi said. "The suspects did not confess but we have enough reasons in hand for their spying charges," he said.
It was not immediately clear whether a bail payment to Iranian authorities would violate US trade sanctions or whether a special waiver would be required. The prosecutor rejected any link between the decision to grant Shourd bail and the return to Iran in July of Shahram Amiri, a nuclear scientist. Iran had accused the US of abducting Amiri, while Washington said he was a willing defector who later changed his mind. In the past, Ahmadinejad has suggested the three Americans could be traded for Iranians claimed to be held by the US.
In the last year, Iranian authorities have allowed bail or converted jail sentences to fines for two other high-profile detainees. In May, the French academic Clotilde Reiss was freed after her 10-year sentence on espionage-related charges was commuted to a fine equivalent to $300,000.
The Canadian-Iranian journalist Maziar Bahari was freed on $300,000 bail in October 2009 after nearly four months' detention after the crackdown after the country's disputed presidential election. He was later sentenced in absentia to more than 13 years in prison and 50 lashes.