Bali Nine pair's death row inmate, Filipino mother Mary Jane Veloso could be victim of human trafficking, Darwin barrister says
Filipino authorities maintain Mary Jane Veloso is a victim of human trafficking, not a drug smuggler.
A Northern Territory barrister believes a Filipino mother on death row in Indonesia is a victim of human trafficking, and has made a last-ditch effort to help save her life.
Mary Jane Veloso is set to be executed on the Indonesian prison island of Nusakambangan at the same time as Australian drug smugglers Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran.
Indonesia gave the group 72 hours' notice of their executions, meaning they could be taken to face the firing squad any time after Tuesday night.
Veloso, 30, was sentenced to death in October 2010 for attempting to smuggle heroin into Indonesia from Malaysia.
She was arrested at Java's Adisucipto International Airport in April 2010 with 2.6 kilograms of heroin in her luggage.
Veloso said she was tricked into carrying the luggage containing drugs.
Felicity Gerry QC is a barrister who works in the NT and London.
She said there was credible evidence Veloso was a victim of human trafficking, as defined by Indonesian law.
"The evidence in Mary Jane's case appears to be credible that she was not acting voluntarily, she was acting on behalf of other people who were exploiting her," Ms Gerry said.
"As a victim of human trafficking under Indonesian law, there is mandatory protection. Indonesia actually has very progressive law to protect victims of human trafficking."
Ms Gerry says she has written a legal brief for Veloso's lawyers, called an amicus curiae, to help them appeal against the execution because she is a human trafficking victim.
The barrister said the legal issues had not been addressed properly by the Indonesian courts.
She said in Veloso's case, Indonesian authorities had not reconciled their mandatory protection for human trafficking victims and mandatory drug trafficking laws.
"I think what's happened, in many ways, is the idea of mandatory, strict drug trafficking laws has sort of overwhelmed all of that good work that Indonesia was doing in relation to human trafficking," Ms Gerry said.
"And Mary Jane's case, in many ways, is an opportunity to redress the balance.
"So it's really important that those in the law and politics address this issue before an exploited person is executed."
Veloso is the only woman among nine others, including Australians Chan and Sukumaran, due to face the firing squad for drug offences.
Indonesian president Joko Widodo said he would consult with the attorney-general on legal issues surrounding Veloso's case, the Philippines presidential spokesman said on Monday.
The statement came after Philippine president Benigno Aquino met Mr Widodo at the Association of South East Asian Nations summit in Kuala Lumpur and appealed for "humanitarian consideration" in the case.
Mr Widodo was sympathetic and was consulting with the Indonesian attorney-general on the legal issues, the Philippines presidential spokesman said.
"President Widodo promised to resume the conversation with president Aquino later today," he said.