WikiLeaks: Shell 'knows everything' about the Nigerian government
Shell's leading executive in Nigeria said the company had placed an employee in every relevant government ministry, giving the firm access to all political decisions being made, the cables stated.
Ann Pickard, then Shell's vice-president for sub-Saharan Africa, revealed the extent of Shell's influence at a meeting with Robin Renee, the US ambassador, in October 2009, according to the cables printed by the Guardian.
The ambassador reported in a cable to Washington: "She said the GON [government of Nigeria] had forgotten that Shell had seconded people to all the relevant ministries and that Shell consequently had access to everything that was being done in those ministries."
The oil firm provided US diplomats with intelligence about certain politicians thought to be supporting militants and asked the US to tell them whether the militants had anti-aircraft missiles.
Ms Pickard claimed to be privy to sensitive information in the cables, including bids for oil concessions from China to the Nigerian minister of state for petroleum resources.
Nigerian rights groups seized on the cables as evidence of Shell's dominance over Nigeria's oil wealth.
Nigeria last night denied the claim. Levi Ajuonoma, a spokesman for the state-owned Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation, said: "Shell does not control the government of Nigeria and has never controlled the government of Nigeria. This cable is the mere interpretation of one individual."
A Shell spokesman said: "You are seeking our views on a leaked cable to the Guardian newspaper allegedly containing information about the interpretation by a third party individual of a private conversation involving a Shell representative who has since left Nigeria. We cannot comment on the alleged contents of the cable, including the correctness or incorrectness of any statements it allegedly contains. The Guardian’s assertion that Shell has somehow infiltrated the Government of Nigeria is absolutely untrue, false and misleading."