Kerry to reopen embassy in Cuba but tensions remain
Havana (CNN)Secretary of State John Kerry came to Cuba on Friday and raised the American flag above the U.S. Embassy for the first time in 54 years.
"Thank you for joining us at this truly historic moment as we prepare to raise the flag ... symbolizing the restoration of diplomatic relations after 54 years," Kerry said at the ceremony, addressing the crowd in both English and Spanish.
Kerry's visit marks the symbolic end of one of the last vestiges of the Cold War. But signs of mistrust linger, and beyond the pomp and circumstance lies a long road back from more than half a century of diplomatic animosity.
On Thursday, Cuban state media put out an article in the name of Fidel Castro, writing on the occasion of his 89th birthday, in which he made no reference to the historic resumption of U.S.-Cuba relations but instead waxed on about the damage the American embargo has caused Cuba and the anniversary of the United States dropping an atomic bomb on Japan.
The rhetoric from the leader of the Cuban revolution, and the face of anti-U.S. resistance, is not unexpected. But it underscores the long-standing tensions at play as Washington and Havana work to thaw the decadeslong chill in relations.
But anti-Castro dissidents won't be at the U.S. Embassy ceremony marking the restoration of ties. Instead, Kerry will meet dissidents and human rights activists at another flag-raising, this one closed to press at the residence of the U.S. chief of mission, along with a broad cross section of Cuban entrepreneurs, journalists and artists.
"As a symbol of just how backward this policy shift has turned out to be, no Cuban dissidents have been invited to today's official flag-raising ceremony at the U.S. Embassy in Havana," Rubio said. "Cuba's dissidents have fought for decades for the very Democratic principles President Obama claims to be advancing through these concessions. Their exclusion from this event has ensured it will be little more than a propaganda rally for the Castro regime."
Sen. Bob Menendez, a New Jersey Democrat and also the son of Cuban immigrants, said it was "shameful" that Cuba could bar dissidents from the ceremony and said the U.S. flag should not fly in a country that does not value freedom.
"A flag representing freedom and liberty will rise today in a country ruled by a repressive regime that denies its people democracy and basic human rights. This is the embodiment of a wrongheaded policy that rewards the Castro regime's brutality at the expense of the Cuban people's right to freedom of expression and independence," Menendez said in a statement.
"It's a sad day for me because we did not get anything, no freedom, the dissidents were not invited, not even a change in the regime, they have the economic control. The American flag up but no changes to the Cuban people, it's a sad day for me," Bush said, according to a CNN translation.
"The United States will be able to do much more to protect and serve U.S. citizens in Cuba and encourage a better future for the Cuban people with an American flag flying over our embassy in Havana," he said in a statement.
"Where we go from here has to do with what (happens) in the next 16 months, while the President is in office, if he is able to consolidate what has already been done," said Julia Sweig, a Latin America expert long at the forefront of Washington's Cuba policy debate.
"That happens by using his executive authority to open up new opportunities for travel, trade and investment. And the Cuban government needs to do the same," she said. "This could neutralize remaining opposition in Congress and make it impossible for the next president, if it is a Republican, to reverse it."
Take tourism. While only Congress can officially lift the "ban" on tourism, the Treasury Department has taken a liberal view of what "tourism" means when it provides licenses to travel to the island. The parent company of Carnival, Princess and several other cruise lines plan to launch "people-to-people" visits to the island by ship. Other tour companies are offering vacation packages to Cuba for Americans loosely labeled as "cultural experiences."
Castro granted Chesimard, a convicted murderer wanted by the FBI, political asylum in Cuba, where she has remained ever since escaping from a life sentence in 1979 from a New Jersey prison. Morales, a member of a militant Puerto Rican separatist movement, planted a bomb at a New York military installation and faced 89 years in prison when he escaped from police custody while in a hospital in New York.
In addition, the U.S. wants to increase existing, albeit modest, cooperation between Washington and Havana on areas such as counternarcotics, migration, environment and global health. With American diplomats now free to travel across the island, officials hope they will get a better sense of the needs of the Cuban people and how the United States can help.
Perhaps the most important driver of warming ties between the two countries, however, will be the American and Cuban people. Officials say that the increase in Americans traveling to Cuba has been positive, with Cubans interacting with regular Americans for the first time in more than 50 years.