Leaders gather in Minsk for more talks on Ukraine
Minsk, Belarus (CNN)Four key leaders converged on Belarus' capital Wednesday with one official mission: bringing peace to Ukraine.
Whether they can achieve that is unsure, considering the violence, bitter divisions and failed negotiations. Still, the fact that French President Francois Hollande , German Chancellor Angela Merkel , Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and Russian President Vladimir Putin made the trip to Minsk to talk peace is notable.
The stakes are high. Not only has war raged for months in eastern Ukraine, where pro-Russian rebels angry about political upheaval in Kiev have declared their independence, but it's getting worse, threatening not only the lives of more civilians, but the stability of the region.
Speaking at a Cabinet meeting Wednesday before his arrival in Minsk, Poroshenko called the summit "the most important one so far I have had as a President," Ukraine's state-run Ukrinform news agency reported.
The President said he and Ukraine's lawmakers were ready to introduce martial law across the country if "further irresponsible actions" lead to more escalation of the conflict.
"It will depend on the results of the summit whether we stop the aggressor through diplomatic means or go to a totally different regime," he is quoted as saying.
Will these talks yield a breakthrough? French and German officials sounded a note of caution about the prospects of finding consensus. And even if there is some sort of agreement, it's probably not wise to start celebrating right away -- given that there have been ceasefires before, none of which has lasted.
The main points of negotiations of the so-called Normandy group -- the leaders of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine -- are expected to be the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the creation of a demilitarized zone and the future status of the Donbas area in Ukraine, which comprises Luhansk and Donetsk.
"But I underline it again, nothing has been resolved yet. The taking place of the summit alone is not a guarantee of its success. Therefore I urge and expect Moscow and Kiev to take it seriously and in the face of imminent military conflict really seize this chance."
There's been no let-up in the violence ahead of the peace talks; in fact, both sides appear to have stepped up their efforts to gain territory before the lines of the potential demilitarized zone are drawn.
Ukraine's Foreign Ministry condemned what it said was "another bloody crime" by the separatists and said Russia, which it accuses of sending heavy weapons and troops across the border, should be held responsible.
"The President emphasized the importance of reaching and implementing a negotiated settlement underpinned by the commitments in the (prior) Minsk agreement. However, if Russia continues its aggressive actions in Ukraine, including by sending troops, weapons and financing to support the separatists, the costs for Russia will rise," the White House said.
there isn't any doubt that Russia is behind surging violence Russia has steadfastly denied accusations that it is sending forces and weapons into Ukraine. But top Western and Ukrainian leaders have said there isn't any doubt that Russia is behind surging violence and separatists' efforts to take over territory in eastern Ukraine.