Queen welcomes President of Indonesia to Buckingham Palace on state visit
The Queen continued her busy year of engagements to mark her Diamond Jubilee today with a state visit from the President of Indonesia.
The Duke of Edinburgh and the Prime Minister David Cameron joined the Queen to greet Dr Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, 59, and first lady Ani Bambang Yudhoyono at Horse Guards Parade for the start of their three-day trip to the UK.
The Queen wore a tweed cream coat dress embellished with black feathers and a matching hat and wrapped up against the cold with white gloves. She carried a black handbag which complemented her black court shoes and accessorised with pearl earrings and necklace.
Home Secretary Theresa May and Foreign Secretary William Hague also greeted Dr and Mrs Yudhoyono before they joined the Queen and Duke for a state carriage procession along the Mall to Buckingham Palace, where they will stay during their visit.
The president will meet Prime Minister David Cameron and later receive calls at the palace from Labour leader Ed Miliband and Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg.
During a private lunch, the Queen presented the president with a pair of photographs in silver frames and a leather-bound first edition copy of Winston Churchill's The World Crisis 1911-1918, given in a presentation box made by the royal bindery at Windsor Castle.
The first lady was presented with a pair of china candlesticks and a porcelain flower.
In return, the president presented the Queen with a painting entitled Mother Of Beauty by an artist called Ida Bagus Indra.
The president has been granted an honorary knighthood, which is traditionally awarded to foreign heads of state on state visits.
This evening, a lavish state banquet will be hosted by the Queen in honour of her guests.
During his stay, the president will visit Westminster Abbey to lay a wreath at the Grave of the Unknown Warrior and meet International Development Secretary Justine Greening.
He and the first lady will also visit the Prince of Wales and the Duchess of Cornwall at their London home, Clarence House, to take tea and discuss Charles' charities before rounding off his visit with a speech at the Indonesia-UK Business Forum on Friday.
Watch video of the President's arrival below...