EU, UK reach deal to head off possible British exit from European Union
British Prime Minister David Cameron won unanimous support Friday from the European Union over reforms he sought from the bloc ahead of a referendum on the nation's continued membership in the 28-nation alliance.
After two days of intense negotiations, EU President Donald Tusk announced the deal on Twitter late Friday in Brussels.
Cameron said he "negotiated a deal to give the U.K. special status in the EU" that would mean it could opt out of "ever-closer union," that it would "never join the euro" currency and that "tough new restrictions" on foreigners using its welfare state would be put in place.
He said he would ask his cabinet to approve the deal on Saturday. No date for the referendum has been set, but it may come as early as June. Polls show the British public is closely divided on the issue.
"In my view, (this) is a time to stick together," Cameron said. "I think the British people would be safer (in the union) than out."
"We should be suspicious of those who claim that leaving Europe is some automatic fast track to a land of milk and honey. We all need to step back and consider carefully what is best for Britain, what is best for our future. Whatever the British people decide, I will make work to the best of my abilities. But let me tell you what I believe: I do not love Brussels. I love Britain," he said.
Cameron sought EU reforms in four key areas: economic competitiveness, members' sovereignty rights, welfare policies and the free movement of labor.
During the talks, Eastern European members of the EU had objected to proposals made by Britain that would restrict access to some social welfare benefits by EU workers living in the United Kingdom. France was concerned that Britain's financial industry, with which it competes for business, would be more lightly regulated than its own.
EU Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker nevertheless said in a tweet that the deal was "fair for UK, fair for 27 EU states."
German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who leads the EU's wealthiest nation, said that compromises were made because "we wanted Britain to stay in."
A study by Capital Economics, a consultancy, said the benefits of Britain leaving the EU versus staying in were finely balanced. It said Britain's financial services industry had more to lose in the immediate aftermath of a so-called Brexit — a British EU exit —  than most other sectors of the economy, but it would not spell disaster.
“The (industry’s) competitive advantage is founded on more than just unfettered access to the single market,” the report said. “A European Union exit would enable the United Kingdom to broker trade deals with emerging markets that could pay dividends for the financial services sector in the long run.”
But while Cameron secured the deal in Brussels, he now embarks on a campaign to convince the British public.
"This is a milestone on a journey, not the end point," he said.
The region's migrant crisis was also a focus of the summit in Brussels.
The EU said it would hold a migrants summit with Turkey in early March. “(The EU-Turkey) joint action plan with Turkey remains a priority and we must do all we can to succeed,” EU chief Tusk said.
The EU has promised Turkey billions of dollars as well as concessions over its ambitions to join the group in return for more help clamping down on the number of people try to reach Europe. More than 2 million Syrian refugees are in Turkey.