Twiplomacy Report 2014, Minister Hoxhaj ranked as 15th most active personality on Twitter in the world
Prishtina, 25 June 2014 - Kosovo's Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj rose higher in the world ranking of the most active leaders in the large social network, Twitter. In a study published on Wednesday for Twiplomacy Study 2014, Minister Hoxhaj ranked in15th place from the list of 50 leaders, in which beside world personalities, institutions are included as well.
Hoxhaj (@Enver_Hoxhaj) climbed for 16 positions in ranking, compared to 31st place from last year, this way making him one of the most active politicians in Kosovo, region and Europe on Twitter. According to dozens of pages study, Minister Hoxhaj is the third most active of the world's foreign ministers, after the French Minister, Laurent Fabius and Swedish Minister Carld Bildt and among the only region's foreign ministers who entered the Top 50 of the world's most active and engaged leaders. The report states that Kosovo’s and Minister Hoxhaj profile is one of the most active by posting on average three times a day and mostly in English. "Kosovo's Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj opened his personal account on Twitter on 4th April 2013. He is very active by posting on average three times a day and mostly in English. @Enver_Hoxhaj uses twitter to establish bilateral contacts with his counterparts from the world. He follows 125 world leaders while with 42 of them is mutually connected. In every third tweet he mentions other users. His most popular post is the one with Foreign Minister of United Arab Emirates, Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan after the meeting in March 2014 in Prishtina. The hashtag #Kosovo is used the most by Minister Hoxhaj", it is stated in the study regarding the minister's activity on Twitter. Successes of digital diplomacy of Foreign Ministry which for a short time are known and assessed by this study are also shown for other profile of Foreign Ministry of Kosovo on Twitter @MFAKOSOVO which is listed as 31st in Top 50, again the first of Western Balkan countries which do not appear at all. On this link you can find full study: http://twiplomacy.com/blog/twiplomacy-study-2014/  On this link you can find profile for Kosovo: http://twiplomacy.com/info/europe/kosovo/