WikiLeaks cables: You ask, we search
We asked last week what we should look for among the leaked US embassy cables. Here is a further instalment of user-suggested research: on the in Vancouver; the response to the ; and on developments in the
• An email from Vancouver asked about this year's Winter Olympics
Canadian officials preparing for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver were "sensitive" to issues of sovereignty and "repeatedly reminded" US diplomats that Canada was responsible for security at the games, according to a US diplomatic cable.
With the Olympics being held within 30 miles of the US border, there were numerous areas, such as airspace, where security was a shared responsibility, noted the cable, sent by the US consulate in Vancouver in January 2009.
While it reported that the Canadians were doing "an excellent job" in developing their security strategy, it added:
Despite the perceived sensitivities of the Canadians, US diplomats couldn't resist remarking on the apparent awe in which the newly-elected US president, Barack Obama, was held by their northern neighbours.
"It should be noted that in every meeting we have with Olympics officials the first question is 'Who is heading your opening ceremonies delegation?'" it said.
"Although the official invitation comes from the NOC [National Olympic Committees], in this case the US Olympic committee, to the VIP, most Canadians involved are hoping that President Obama and his family will attend the Games. "The president is immensely popular in Canada and given the Games' proximity to the US there are high expectations that the president and his family will make an appearance."
In the event, President Obama chose not to grace the Vancouver games with his presence, prompting suggestions in the wider media he had snubbed Canada by instead sending the vice-president, Joseph Biden, to the opening ceremony. Ben Quinn
• We've had several email requests about Haiti
Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, ordered all US ambassadors to pressurise media outlets in their host countries not to be critical of the US aid programme in Haiti, a leaked US state department letter reveals.
Nine days after the January 2010 earthquake, Clinton told all US embassies: "I direct you as Chief of Mission to personally contact media organisations at the highest possible level - owners, publishers, or others, as appropriate - to push back and insist on informed and responsible coverage of our actions and intentions, and to underscore the US partnership with the government of Haiti, the United Nations, and the world community." She added: "It is imperative to get the narrative right over the long term."
At the time, the US-led relief effort was roundly criticised. Guido Bertolaso, head of Italy's civil protection department, called the US operation "pathetic" and "inefficient". French co-operation minister Alain Joyandet called for a UN investigation into the US actions in Haiti, claiming the aid effort should be about "helping Haiti, not about occupying Haiti".
A week later, Clinton told state department officials at an event marking her first year in office: "I deeply resent those who attack our country, the generosity of our people and the leadership of our president in trying to respond to historically disastrous conditions after the earthquake." Patrick Kingsley
• One reader emailed to ask about Turks and Caicos
Britain's governor in the Turks and Caicos told a US diplomat that the UK would not repeat past mistakes of being "too soft" after it took over the governance of the overseas territory, according to a US diplomatic cable.
Under the heading: "They agree: No Kid Gloves this time ...", it said that Governor Gordon Wetherell made the comments to the US chargé de affairs in the islands in June last year, two months before the UK resumed day-to-day control amid allegations of corruption.
The islands' premier, Michael Misick, had resigned in March 2009 but, along with other officials, continued to deny accusations of corruption. The cable stated that Misick was apparently settling in the Dominican Republic, but that the UK was working to identify his bank accounts. The cable said Wetherell was expecting UK control to remain in effect for two years, when the next assembly elections were scheduled.
A later cable from US diplomats in the Bahamas, said sources in the Turks and Caicos had reported a "a high level of public anxiety" since the UK took control. "Government salaries are late and overall job security is a major preoccupation of the people. Massive layoffs are rumoured as the UK government has reportedly ordered a halt to many projects that were tainted by the corruption investigation."
It said that calls for the islands to be united with the Bahamas in a federation - as they were from 1965 to 1973 - were likely to increase if economic conditions worsened. Ben Quinn