Syria Denies Burning Bodies of Political Prisoners
In addition to thousands that have been killed outright, tens of thousands more may have died as vast numbers of detainees lived through conditions of neglect and abuse in packed, dirty cells, conditions so severe that a United Nations commission found that they amounted to the crime against humanity of “extermination.”
The New York Times has confirmed that such conditions are widespread through dozens of interviews with survivors and their relatives, and with former officials.
Beginning in 2013, The Times heard multiple accounts from residents in and around Damascus who said they detected the scent of something like burning hair. That led some to suspect that bodies were being burned in nearby security facilities like the Mezze airport, where former detainees have reported seeing bodies burned.
Other witnesses have told of government soldiers and militiamen burning the bodies of those killed in the field. Some cases, like the massacre of civilians in Baniyas and Bayda in 2013, have been documented in multiple videos.
Mr. de Mistura opened the latest round of talks in Geneva by meeting with Syria’s ambassador to the United Nations, Bashar al-Jaafari, on Tuesday morning, before having lunch with Russia’s deputy foreign minister, Gennady Gatilov, and heading into a series of meetings with Syrian parties, starting with the head of the Syrian opposition delegation, Nasr al-Hariri, and members of the opposition High Negotiations Committee.
To make the most of the few days set aside for this round of discussions, United Nations officials said Mr. Jaafari was likely to return for a second session with the special envoy in the evening.
United Nations officials said on Monday that they had reason to believe the current Geneva talks would be more substantive than previous ones. Mr. de Mistura said that more countries would participate this time — he said all the signatories to the Security Council resolution would attend, which would include Iran as well as Russia — and that the intention was “to go a little bit more deeply and actually be more businesslike.”