Nobel Winner’s Absence May Delay Awarding of Prize
“Awarding the Nobel Peace Prize to Liu Xiaobo once again reflects the strong attempts of Western countries to intervene in the political process in China,” said a commentary that ran this month in the official newspaper People’s Daily. “It is a well-planned event, premeditated and long organized by Western countries, and is part of a series of actions by the U.S. and its allies and companies to undermine China.”
So far, it appears that Beijing’s diplomatic campaign has been only marginally successful. A handful of countries, among them Russia, Iraq, Cuba and Kazakhstan, have acceded to China’s plea for a boycott. But 36 other countries have said they will send ambassadors to a rump prize ceremony. “The ceremony will definitely take place,” Geir Lundestad, the secretary of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, said in a telephone interview from Oslo.
China’s response has been puzzling to some analysts, who say the country has generally sought to avoid a big feud over rights issues. Each new editorial in the state-run press and efforts to muzzle critics supportive of Mr. Liu only feed foreign news reports about the government’s strong-arm tactics.
“No amount of huffing and puffing from Beijing will do away with the fact that holding a Nobel laureate in prison for the next decade is disastrous in terms of soft power, a necessary attribute for a genuine global power,” said Nicholas Bequelin, a senior researcher at Human Rights Watch.
In fact, many experts say Beijing is simply reinforcing a growing perception in diplomatic circles that it is willing to throw its weight around in ways that undermine its professed desire to be viewed as a new kind of peaceful, harmonious rising power.
“Beijing’s excessive reaction fits into the story line of a more assertive China, and this gathering image is inimical to Beijing’s basically successful foreign policy strategy of the last three decades,” said David M. Lampton, director of China studies and a professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.
Other analysts who follow the country’s political system say that the anti-Nobel juggernaut is largely designed for a domestic audience, much of which knew nothing about Mr. Liu until last month. Through its vitriolic commentary in the state-run press and the strict censorship of news accounts sympathetic to Mr. Liu, the government has created a different narrative about the prize at home.
Andrew J. Nathan, a political scientist at Columbia University who has been studying China for four decades, said he was struck by how many Chinese friends and associates, even those living the United States, had accepted the government’s contention that Mr. Liu was seeking to push China into chaos through writings that called for free elections and an end to single-party rule. “The Chinese people I speak to have quite readily absorbed the government’s point of view that this guy is a criminal nurtured by the West,” he said.
Still, despite its best efforts, the coming weeks are likely to be difficult for Beijing. Even without a family member of Mr. Liu’s in attendance, Mr. Lundestad of the Nobel committee said the century-old pageant would take place as usual. It will include a speech by the chairman of the peace committee and text messages from the winner read out by the Norwegian actor and director Liv Ullmann. There will also be musical interludes, including one, requested by Mr. Liu, by a children’s choir.
There was no immediate reaction from Mr. Liu’s family. One of his brothers, Liu Xiaoxuan, did not answer his cellphone. He and another brother had voiced a willingness to represent their brother in Oslo, but on Thursday evening, he sent a brief text message in response to a reporter’s unanswered calls, writing, “Right now I am being monitored, cannot take interviews, can only keep silent.”
According to the Nobel Web site, the last time no one was present to accept the peace medal was in 1936, when the German journalist and pacifist Carl von Ossietzky was not allowed to leave Nazi Germany.
Mr. Ossietzky had been held in Nazi concentration camps in the 1930s and, although the German Propaganda Ministry publicly declared that he was free to go to Norway, “secret police documents indicate that Ossietzky was refused a passport,” according to the Nobel Web site. Ill with tuberculosis, he was later sent to a hospital in Berlin, where he was kept under constant surveillance until his death in May 1938.