Obama removes more trade restrictions with Cuba
MIAMI — A Home Depot in Havana? It could happen under a sweeping set of new rules by the Obama administration.
The departments of Commerce and Treasury announced Friday they will remove a series of restrictions on Americans traveling to and doing business with Cuba.
The new rules, set to go into effect Monday, cover a wide range of issues from investment to banking to hiring Cubans to develop Cuba-specific software. The U.S. economic embargo on the island nation, however, will remain in place — only an act of Congress can change that.
The announcement comes as Pope Francis, who helped broker the historic agreement between the two countries to re-establish diplomatic relations, prepares for a four-day tour of the island beginning Saturday. President Obama and Cuban President Raúl Castro discussed the fast-changing relationship, and the pope's upcoming trips to both countries, during a phone call on Friday.
The new measures represent the latest steps toward normalizing relations with the communist nation, following the raising of the U.S. flag over the recently reopened U.S. Embassy in the capital of Havana and a Cuban flag-raising in Washington, D.C.
"A stronger, more open U.S.-Cuba relationship has the potential to create economic opportunities for both Americans and Cubans alike," Treasury Secretary Jack Lew said in a statement. "By further easing these sanctions, the United States is helping to support the Cuban people in their effort to achieve the political and economic freedom necessary to build a democratic, prosperous and stable Cuba."
One of the biggest changes announced would allow American businesses to establish a "physical presence" in Cuba, meaning they could operate offices, retail outlets and warehouses. The U.S. firms will be able to hire Cubans to work in their offices and create joint ventures with some Cuban companies in order to maximize their operations.
There won't be a McDonald's or Starbucks in Cuba just yet, however. The rules limit the new openings to American companies selling agricultural products and building materials for privately-owned homes. That limitation is important because it follows rules passed by Congress that allow for the sale of such "humanitarian" goods to the island.
The new rules will also allow transportation and delivery companies to set up shop in Cuba, which could include companies like FedEx and UPS. Internet and telecommunications companies will also be given new authority to work on the island, and educational institutions will be able to expand study programs for their students and researchers.
Obama will also eliminate long-established limits on the amount of money Cuban-Americans can send back to their relatives. Shortly after taking office, Obama allowed relatives to send up to $2,000 each quarter in remittances back to Cuba. That limit will now be lifted, allowing people in the U.S. to help private entrepreneurs in Cuba build and expand their burgeoning businesses.
John Kavulich, president of the New York-based U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council, said the changes could be a "legacy builder" for Obama as even more trade and travel heads to Cuba. But he warned the pressure is now squarely on the Cuban government to catch up with and institute their own changes to allow for the increased flow of goods.
"United States companies will continue to be used as bait, but now the Republic of Cuba will need to reciprocate or risk a lessening of interest by the United States business community," he said.
• American vessels no longer need trip-by-trip approval from the Department of Treasury for visits to the island. That means companies considering new air and sea routes to Cuba to carry passengers or cargo have more freedom to go to Cuba, so long as their trips fall into the categories allowed by the U.S. government.
• Americans operating in Cuba will be allowed to establish bank accounts in Cuba to facilitate their work. Americans can already visit Cuba through 12 categories, including trips for humanitarian, educational and religious purposes. Now those visitors, who sometimes spend long periods in Cuba or make repeated trips, can use Cuban banks so they're not carrying around large amounts of cash.
• Some Americans traveling to Cuba will now be able to bring their "close relatives" with them. Americans traveling on educational, research, religious, humanitarian, government and journalistic visas will be able to bring their spouses and children.
• American companies will be able to hire Cubans to create software and mobile phone applications that utilize Americans technology but are designed specifically for the Cuban market.
Many of the changes are aimed directly at Cuba's burgeoning private sector. The island's economy has long been run entirely by the state, but Cuban President Raúl Castro has opened a limited number of jobs to Cubans to work on their own. There are now about 500,000 Cubans working on their own, paying taxes and hiring their own employees.
Those opposed to the new relationship with the communist nation, however, feel the Cuban government has no interest in creating a true private sector. Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, R-Fla., a Cuban-American, said Cuba's regime retains too much control over those businesses, so any attempts by the U.S. to help them will only end up helping the Cuban government.
"The sad reality is that the Castro regime is taking full advantage of the Obama administration's willingness to concede on loosening the regulations while expecting nothing in return from the communist dictatorship," she said. "Our regulations do not have to change, it is Cuba that needs to change and the Castro brothers will not let that happen."
By opening the door to so many new business ventures, Obama has effectively removed one of the biggest excuses Cuba's leaders have long used to justify their economic struggles, said Pedro Freyre, a Miami-based attorney who chairs the international practice at the Akerman law firm. The American funding, equipment and technological expertise that can now come to the island will finally allow Cubans to build up successful, lasting businesses that can give them economic independence from the Cuban government, he said.
"Consider this American flip flops on the ground," Freyre said. "If you empower these Cubans to do this high-power, high-tech work, you can build an industry in Cuba. And you have given Cubans a source of income that isn't sugar, that isn't selling trinkets to tourists."