CIA Spy Sent to U.S. in Swap Identified as Mole in Cuban Interior Ministry
“I know from defectors, multiple defectors,” said Simmons, who worked several of cases that Sarraff’s intelligence had helped develop. Simmons, who runs Cuba Confidential, a website on Cuban intelligence, said that the only reason Sarraff did not face the death penalty was that his family had ties to the Cuban intelligence service.
Sarraff, whose identity was first reported by Newsweek, was believed to be part of a swap in which he and imprisoned American Alan Gross were traded for three Cuban agents held in U.S. jails. The exchange was part of a surprise deal announced Wednesday by President Barack Obama to normalize diplomatic and economic ties between the former Cold War foes.
Neither the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) nor the CIA would confirm Sarraff was the spy involved in the exchange, but the New York Times quoted an unidentified “senior American official” as saying it was Sarraff.
Rand Paul Breaks with Rubio and Bush Over Cuba
In announcing the moves, Obama described the spy on Wednesday as "one of the most important intelligence agents that the United States has ever had in Cuba."
In a subsequent press release, the DNI stated, "He provided the information that led to the identification and conviction of Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) senior analyst Ana Belen Montes; former Department of State official Walter Kendall Myers and his spouse Gwendolyn Myers; and members of the Red Avispa network, or "Wasp Network," in Florida, which included members of the so-called "Cuban Five."
Referring to the three remaining members of that ring who were freed as part of the deal for the spy and Gross, the release added, "In light of his sacrifice on behalf of the United States, securing his release from prison after 20 years -- in a swap for three of the Cuban spies he helped put behind bars -- is fitting closure to this Cold World chapter of U.S.-Cuban relations."
A blog, reportedly set up by family who remains in Cuba, states they have not seen him nor talked to him recently despite regular communications. The blog, in Spanish, also includes images of him as a 32-year-old in 1995 and last year.