ABC Radio National (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Fran Kelly: Now, you were Australia's most famous whistleblower, probably until Julian Assange came along. What's your position on the WikiLeaks cables?
Andrew Wilkie: Look, Fran, so long as WikiLeaks is not putting anyone at risk personally, I have no great concern with what WikiLeaks is doing. I think it is in the public interest that some of this information is aired. Other information, I suppose, is just entertainment. But, again, as long as it's not doing anyone any harm - and I'm yet to see any information that is genuinely putting anyone at risk and even the US Defence Secretary is virtually saying as much by trying to hose it down.
Fran Kelly: So, when the Attorney-General, Robert McClelland, says the publication of this kind of information is incredibly irresponsible and reprehensible, you don't agree with that? It's not irresponsible to leak Government documents like this?
Andrew Wilkie: Look, I think the Attorney-General, and the Prime Minister for that matter, were too quick to come to the aid of the United States on this matter. The fact is, WikiLeaks on the face of it has not broken any Australian law. Arguably WikiLeaks has not broken any US law. So there's no basis for some of these claims that are being made against him. I mean it should be worrying to governments that their confidential information is being aired, but I think the first thing they should be doing is looking to the security of their own information, the processes they've got in place, their systems and so on, and tightening those things up. You know, it's not Assange's fault that this information is leaking out of the Administration. It's the Administration's fault.
Fran Kelly: So, as a former intelligence officer, and a former military person, you're relaxed about the advice from our diplomats being there for all to read?
Andrew Wilkie: Well, you know, I do draw a line in the sand. So long as people are not being put at risk, and so long as genuinely secret information and in particular technical capabilities, intelligence sources and so on, they obviously must be protected. When I left ONA seven and a half years ago, I could have walked out with a number of documents, emails and so on which would have made it much easier to prosecute my case against the Government. But I drew the line and said, no, some information is genuinely secret and should be safeguarded. But, yet, I think that's quite a different situation to what we're seeing with WikiLeaks at the moment, where, you know, much of the information is entertaining, some is in the public interest but I haven't seen anything that has put any capability or any national interest genuinely at risk.
Fran Kelly: And do you think that's WikiLeaks drawing the line? I mean do you think WikiLeaks is, in a sense, a whistleblower or something else from that? It's a site that just believes in transparency and abolishing official gate keeping of information?
Andrew Wilkie: Yeah, that's my impression of the site. You know, it seems happy to publish most information that comes its way. But I do sense that even WikiLeaks might be drawing the line here. Because, I make the point again, there's no information that has been aired publicly, as far as I'm aware, has endangered any person or endangered national security. The US Defence Secretary has said as much. Even Paul Kelly, in the Australian on Saturday, said as much. So maybe WikiLeaks is showing some responsibility here as well.
Fran Kelly: Our guest this morning is Andrew Wilkie, former whistleblower but these days Independent MP in the House of Representatives. What about in the interest of national security? Because the WikiLeaks cables now directly involve Australia and our diplomatic relations, with the release yesterday of that discussion between then Prime Minister Kevin Rudd and Hillary Clinton. Should this information have been kept confidential, in your view?
Andrew Wilkie: Oh, look, I don't' have any great concern about that conversation. I mean I think it's fascinating for the public now to have a better understanding of the inherent tension in Australia's relationship with China. That there is, well, there's a tension, not so much with our relationship with China, but there's a tension between the way we have to balance our relationship with China, which is our long term strategic economically, with our long term strategic and security ally, the United States. So, you know, this is letting the sun shine on a very, very important issue and I think it's in the public interest to have some awareness of that.
Fran Kelly: Is it in the public interest for China to be aware that our then Prime Minister was suggesting that the US should be prepared to deploy force if everything goes wrong?
Andrew Wilkie: Well, I'm wondering, you know, the degree to which Kevin Rudd was fair dinkum about that. You know, the prospect of using force against China or supporting US using force against China, just because it might be sitting slightly outside the international community from time to time, I think that is just an inconceivable notion. I suspect there was some posturing on Kevin Rudd's place at that time.
Fran Kelly: So posturing rather than his real thoughts? I mean, is it good for us, the citizens, to know our politicians and our ambassadors real thoughts?
Andrew Wilkie: Look Fran, we need to be careful here. Personally, I wouldn't be releasing those cables publically. I can see all sorts of reasons why it's in the Government's interest, in the Government's political self interest, for that information not to be aired. And I wouldn't do it personally. You know, I've never leaked any information publically and I wouldn't leak that type of information. But, the fact is, someone in the US Administration has aired that information and the question is, you know, is it a bad thing? Has anyone broken the law? Should we be so quick to back the US in criticising WikiLeaks? Sure there are things about WikiLeaks which are unpalatable. There are things about WikiLeaks which are embarrassing for governments. There's things there that I and you maybe wouldn't do. But the fact is, it's not breaking, it hasn't broken any US law. Bill Gates himself is, you know, is hosing this down to some degree? I think one of the things that's remarkable about what's happening in recent days, is some of this information is in the public interest and it's fascinating to watch. Some is just mightily entertaining. But I think what's a bit more alarming for me is the way the Australian Government has been so quick to come to the support of the United States at the expense of an Australian citizen who's not doing anything illegal.
Fran Kelly: So, would you be alarmed at this talk of criminal charges against Julian Assange? And I wonder whether your whistle blowing laws would protect him?
Andrew Wilkie: Well, perhaps they would. But, you know, I'm not aware of any moves to press criminal charges against him in Australia. I'm not aware of any law that might be brought into play. The shield laws which I've helped get through or driven through the House of Representatives, that does protect a journalist in some circumstances. And if he was being prosecuted in Australia, it may or may not give WikiLeaks some protection.
Fran Kelly: I know you have a plane to catch, but can I just as you one final question because you are now a recently appointed member of the Parliamentary Committee, which gives oversight to our intelligence agencies. In that role, do you think those agencies might expect you to take a bit more responsibility for their confidentiality, protecting the work they do.
Andrew Wilkie: Now, Fran, certainly I've been talking, we've been talking about WikiLeaks. I've made the point clearly and I'll make it again: when I left ONA, I didn't walk out with a single document and I've been very careful to protect the genuinely sensitive information I had in my head. And I'm not about to leak any documents myself. You know, I've said this before, I'll say it again: there are legitimate reasons for some information to be safeguarded and we should never put people at risk, we should never compromise capabilities. I'm not about to cause any problems for the Government as a member of the Security Intelligence Committee. But that's quite a different story to what we're talking about now, about American information, which has been leaked by someone. Now, that someone may or may not have committed a criminal offence. But WikiLeaks is simply publicising information that's come into their hands.
Fran Kelly: Andrew Wilkie, thank you very much for joining us.