Nepal frees former child soldiers from camp
First of 3,000 former Maoist rebels leave camp where they have been confined since 2006
Hundreds of former child soldiers bid their comrades farewell today at a camp in southern Nepal where they have lived since communist rebels joined a peace process.
They are the first of nearly 3,000 former child soldiers to be freed from seven camps where they have been confined since a peace agreement in 2006.
At the camp in Dudhauli, about 125 miles (200km) south-west of Katmandu, more than 200 former child soldiers had their last lunch in the facility with friends and talked about revolution and their future in the outside world.
"I plan to work for the party from outside the camp for the good of the country. I may have been removed from the camp but my work for the party will not stop," said Pitambar Dahal, who was leaving the camp today.
Most were angry at the government despite its offer of free education and vocational training through UN agencies.
"We have spit on the government offer. Unless they provide some monetary benefits we will not take anything from them," Dahal said, eating lunch of rice, chicken and bean curry.
Jit Bahadur Tamang, who was also set to leave, said he would try to get a job or continue his studies in his village and live with his family.
Nearly 20,000 former rebel fighters have lived in the camps since 2006, when the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) gave up its 10-year armed rebellion. UN monitors found that 2,975 of the fighters were under 18.
As part of the peace process, the rebels were supposed to be integrated into Nepal's military. The army chief's refusal to do so led to a political crisis in which the Maoists – who joined mainstream politics and won the most seats in elections last year – resigned from the government.
The process of releasing the child soldiers – who never were to be enrolled in the national army – is proceeding, however, starting with those at the Dudhauli camp.
They have been issued identification cards that will allow them to go to school, take up vocational training or start businesses with the help of the government and UN agencies.
Robert Piper, a UN official in Nepal, said the freed minors would be taken to six locations and then would be free to go anywhere.
Each will receive 10,000 Nepalese rupees (£85) as a transfer allowance and a set of civilian clothes.