Japanese lawmakers OK greater overseas role for military
Tokyo (CNN)Japan's upper chamber of Parliament early Saturday approved controversial bills allowing the country's military to engage in overseas combat in limited circumstances -- a major shift after seven decades of pacifism.
The 148-90 vote was the final hurdle for the measures, which will go into effect within roughly the next six months. The lower parliamentary chamber passed the bills in July.
The legislation reinterprets Article 9 of the Japan's pacifist post-World War II constitution, which outlaws war as a means of settling international disputes. The reinterpretation will now allow the Japanese military, known as the Self-Defense Forces, to defend its allies in a limited role in conflicts abroad.
Article 9 of Japan's constitution says, in part, "Aspiring sincerely to an international peace based on justice and order, the Japanese people forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as means of settling international disputes."
Supporters of the legislation, including top U.S. officials, say Japan needs to expand the role of the SDF to counter potential threats from nations such as China and North Korea. Both continue to develop their military and nuclear weapons programs.
ready to use nuclear weapons "at any time" On Tuesday, North Korea warned the United States and its allies that it is ready to use nuclear weapons "at any time" and is expected to launch a new satellite using a long-range rocket sometime in the coming weeks.
defend the interests of its key allies, including the United States. Tokyo has faced growing international pressure to expand the role of its military, including deployment, to defend the interests of its key allies, including the United States. America is bound by treaty to defend Japan, an agreement that has been in place since 1960.
"Japan is moving out of the house of the U.S. that was essentially built after World War II," Henry said. "But there are risks involved in protecting one's national self interests."
Those potential risks have triggered outrage on the streets of Tokyo. Opponents of the legislation say seven decades of Japanese postwar pacifism are simply being tossed away without proper public debate or discourse. They worry about the consequences of potentially sending troops into battle without actual combat experience.
Tens of thousands of anti-war demonstrators have been gathering in recent weeks outside the Japanese Parliament building -- the largest demonstrations of their kind in Japan in more than 50 years. They are students and teachers, workers and retirees, grandchildren and grandparents.
Some wear work attire or school uniforms. Others have T-shirts, bandanas, or posters with spirited slogans like "No war! No Abe!" -- a message to the Prime Minister, who has grown increasingly unpopular in recent months for doggedly pushing the controversial security bills through parliament.
"Japan is a country which pledged not to fight a war again," he said. "We have killed no one in the (past) 70 years. This bill is unforgivable."
While the security legislation may strengthen Japan's ties with its allies, Koichi Nakano, a professor at Sophia University, warns it also gives "very sweeping powers to the government," which could allow logistic support and assistance to allied countries during wartime.
There is also concern about the potential impact of the legislation on Japan's defense budget, at a time when the nation is struggling with a crippling national deficit and chronic economic stagnation.
5.09 trillion yen ($41.7 billion) request A stronger U.S. alliance and the expansion of SDF missions could force increases in defense spending. Japan's Ministry of Defense submitted a 5.09 trillion yen ($41.7 billion) request for budget allocations for the coming fiscal year, a 2.2% increase from 2015.
The increased spending could continue to bolster the Japanese defense industry, which received a boost after Abe did away with a self-imposed ban on exports of weapons and military hardware dating back to the 1960s.
The changes allow Japanese defense companies to sell to new markets. Analysts say they also allow Japan to become more proactive in its own defense, a move welcomed by the United States but widely criticized by Abe's political opponents and sections of the general public.