Perth protesters demonstrate in the city centre
Dozens of riot police are on standby as hundreds of people protest in Perth's city centre.
The protesters have made their way from Forrest Place to the corner of Hay and Williams Streets.
They are now sitting in the middle of the road, chanting about a range of issues including human rights, climate change, war in Afghanistan and uranium mining.
Just down the road, police have blocked off an exclusion zone in place for the Commonwealth Heath of Government Meeting.
One protester, Maryanne McKay, tried to break through the secure zone on the corner, claiming it was Aboriginal sovereign land.
She was warned by officers to leave the area and has gone back to Forrest Place where the protest started.
She says she will take the matter to the International Court of Justice.
Earlier, Seamus Doherty, one of 18 people banned from the CHOGM exclusion zones, confronted police who told him he would be arrested if he breached the blockades.
One protester, Kamala Emmanuel, says they are determined to get their messages across to Commonwealth leaders.
"Justice and climate action, not racism and war," she said.
Another, Declan Taylor wants Australian armed forces out of Afghanistan.
"I have a brother in the army and I don't want him blown to pieces by an IED in Afghanistan," he said.
"That's the reason; like Vietnam, we're not going to change it any time soon. I think we should cut our losses and get out of there right now."
The local groups at the protest include the CHOGM Action Network, the WA Nuclear Free Alliance, the Deaths in Custody Watch Committee, and Reclaim the Night.
There are also people gathering to voice their opposition to international issues such as a group protesting against killings in the Congo, demonstrators calling for an end to the persecution of Tamils in Sri Lanka and a Malaysian democracy advocate.
Police have warned they will intervene if protesters are disorderly or try to camp overnight which breaches city bylaws.
Many of the protesters are carrying tents and say they will defy that order.
Protester James told the ABC he intends to camp in the city despite the warning.
"We're going to camp out tonight because the problems facing the mass of humanity are really huge and that's why we're going to follow the 950 other cities to have that discussion," he said.