Britain to upgrade status of Palestinian delegation to 'mission' -  Haaretz - Israel News
The Palestinian General Delegation in Britain is to be upgraded to the level of a mission, British Foreign Secretary William Hague said Monday.
"[PA] President Abbas is visiting the U.K. this week. I will discuss these issues with him tomorrow, when I will also confirm that given the extent of our aid to the Palestinian Authority and our work with them, we will join many other countries in upgrading the status of the Palestinian Delegation to London to the level of a Mission," Hague said at a press conference.
"It remains more vital than ever that we press for a just and lasting resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, " Hague said, adding that "we want to see an urgent return to negotiations, based on clear parameters including 1967 borders. We will work with all the parties to press for a decisive breakthrough this year."
The Palestinian General Delegation in London, which refers to itself as an embassy, is headed by Ambassador Manuel Sarkis Hassassian.
 Abbas is also due to have talks with Prime Minister David Cameron.
In January, the Irish government announced the decision to upgrade the Palestinian diplomatic status in the country to the status of an official embassy, joining a growing list of European countries that have made the same diplomatic move, including France and Spain.
In December 2010 the Foreign Ministry ordered every Israeli envoy abroad to begin "urgent" diplomatic activity after reports reached Jerusalem that the Palestinian Authority was trying to persuade about a dozen European Union member states to upgrade the PA's diplomatic status.
The Israeli assessment last month was that Britain, Sweden, Belgium, Finland, Germany, Denmark, Malta, Luxembourg, Austria and perhaps other states would follow with a similar move.
In response to the announcement, the Foreign Ministry issued a statement saying that Israel expressed regret over Ireland's decision, adding that "we are not surprised by this move in light of the Ireland's longstanding slanted policy with regards to the Israel-Palestinian conflict."