William Hague on spying scandal: what he said … and what he didn't say
William Hague's statement to the House of Commons offered a straightforward and robust defence of GCHQ, the legal framework in which it operates, and the challenges the intelligence agencies face in their efforts to stop terrorist attacks.
But the foreign secretary did nothing to address the long-standing concerns of campaigners and academics over the regulatory system in which those agencies work; neither did he try to draw a distinction between the different types of data being gathered, or why the laws in this area are now deemed to be verging on irrelevant.
Refusing to be drawn on specifics, he also declined to comment on the leaked documents that showed GCHQ has had long-standing access to the Prism programme, set up by America's National Security Agency to garner information about "foreigners", including Britons.
Hague began with reference to the parliamentary intelligence and security committee, which will receive a preliminary report on GCHQ and the Prism programme on Tuesday. By coincidence, the ISC, which is chaired by Sir Malcolm Rifkind, is in Washington this week and will see officials from the NSA on Wednesday.
Below are extracts from Hague's statement to the Commons, followed by analyses of what they may mean and the issues they fail to address.
"The ISC's work is one part of the strong framework of democratic accountability and oversight that governs the use of secret intelligence in the UK. At its heart are the Intelligence Services Act of 1994 and the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act [RIPA] of 2000.The acts require GCHQ and the other agencies to seek authorisation for their operations from a secretary of state."
The ISC has been criticised in the past for being toothless, and now has some beefed-up powers. But for a body that has only one general investigator, a former police officer, its task of overseeing MI5, MI6 and GCHQ is huge.
Critics say it has to know what it is looking for to make scrutiny effective. Professor Peter Sommer, a cyber-security expert, said: "I am not sure that ministers or the ISC would know what questions to ask."
Angela Patrick, the director of human rights policy at Justice, said relying on RIPA to keep the agencies accountable was extraordinary because it was so outdated. She also questioned why politicians were left to take such important decisions.
"Of around 3 million surveillance decisions made by public bodies since the RIPA came into force, less than 0.5% have ever been considered by a judge. Accountability for how the agencies handle our private information, even when gathered in the UK, lies predominantly with government."
"To intercept the content of any individual's communications in the UK requires a warrant signed personally by me, the home secretary, or by another secretary of state. This is no casual process. Every decision is based on extensive legal and policy advice. Warrants are legally required to be necessary, proportionate and carefully targeted, and we judge them on that basis."
The key word here is "content". MI5 and the police secured 2,300 warrants last year for information contained in the messages and emails of Britons. Those kind of interceptions require ministerial approval. But other kinds of simple data – the phone numbers, times and locations of phone calls – do not meet that ministerial threshold, and can be garnered with the approval of a more junior official. Last year law enforcement agencies requested information from telecoms companies on 500,000 occasions. That is a massive amount of raw data being held without extensive legal advice.
"All the authorisations the home secretary and I give are subject to independent review by an intelligence services commissioner and an interception of communications commissioner, both of whom report directly to the prime minister."
Like the ISC, the commissioners have limited members of staff, and a daunting task. The interception commissioner is understood to have just five analysts, though that could be doubled to 10. Even then, it is a very small complement for a body attempting to review half a million telecoms request as part of its remit. With so much to scrutinise, the commissioner has to rely on samples of documents and, like the ISC, he has to know what he is looking for.
The commissioner is also supposed to assess whether the requests from the agencies are made out of "necessity and proportionality". But the commissioner's report has not found any single violation in nine years. Which suggests, critics say, that the commissioner isn't looking very hard, or the agencies are completely spotless.
"This combination of needing a warrant from one of the most senior members of the government, with such decisions reviewed by independent commissioners and implemented by agencies with strong legal and ethical frameworks, with the addition of parliamentary scrutiny by the ISC, provides one of the strongest systems of checks and balances and democratic accountability for secret intelligence anywhere in the world."
Critics would argue that the current system relies on trusting politicians rather than judges to make the right calls, an under-resourced parliamentary committee, and commissioners who don't have enough staff. And the laws themselves have failed to keep up with technological innovations.
Privacy International said: "Let's not forget: without the release of these classified documents, Mr Hague would not have had to make his statements before the Commons today, and it remains unlikely the news of this programme and the UK's involvement with Prism would have come to light. It should not take a whistleblower releasing classified information for the government to be forthright with its citizens about what data they collect and in what manner.
"If the government secretly interprets the law, and if the manner in which it is executed is secret, then the law is effectively secret. There are many questions that remain unanswered."
"It has been suggested GCHQ uses our partnership with the United States to get around UK law, obtaining information that they cannot legally obtain in the UK. I wish to be absolutely clear that this accusation is baseless. Any data obtained by us from the US involving UK nationals is subject to proper UK statutory controls and safeguards."
This is the nub of the issue and the foreign secretary's statement seems to mask a much more complex picture. If a UK agency wanted to tap the phone of a Briton living in the UK, it would have to get ministerial approval through RIPA. But not all telecoms and internet companies are based in the UK – most of the giants have their headquarters in the US. This is where the UK's relationship with the NSA is critical. If the firm storing the required information is outside RIPA's authority, GCHQ could ask the NSA for help.
And if the NSA had any relevant intelligence, via Prism or any other programme, it could give it to GCHQ. Strictly speaking, GCHQ would still have needed a RIPA authorisation if it was requesting this material. But if the NSA was offering, the same principles don't appear to apply.
Matthew Ryder QC said: "It is not the breaking of laws that is most troubling in this area, but the absence of them. Foreigners storing their personal data on US servers have neither the protection that their own domestic laws would give them from their own governments, nor the protection that US citizens have from the US government. It is foreigners, potentially UK citizens in the UK, who are the targets of programmes like Prism.
"Once such data is in the hands of the US authorities, there is no clear legal framework that prevents it from being shared with UK authorities. The Security Service Act 1989 and the Intelligence Services Act 1994 place MI5, MI6 and GCHQ on a statutory basis, and permit those bodies to receive any information from foreign agencies in the 'proper discharge' of their statutory functions.
"Under that broad principle, UK agencies may receive and examine data from the US about UK citizens without having to comply with any of the legal requirements they would have to meet if the same agencies had tried to gather that information themselves."