Turkish PM: Turkey, Russia should both work against ISIS
(CNN)As scary as the shooting down of a Russian warplane was -- especially by Turkey, a NATO member -- signs emerged Friday that some leaders involved are working to ease tensions between the two countries.
Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, often characterized as the friendly face of his government, published a conciliatory essay in the Times of London.
Davutoglu said the shooting down by Turkey this week "was not -- and is not -- an act against a specific country."
"While the measures to defend our territory will remain in place, Turkey will work with Russia and our allies to calm tensions," Davutoglu wrote.
"This is the time to stand firm against Daesh," Davotoglu said. "Collective action that harnesses the varying strengths of the US, the EU, Russia, Turkey and others can, and will, turn the tide."
And beyond that, the Kremlin said that Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan had requested a meeting with Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin on Monday on the sidelines of the climate change conference in Paris.
"I think if there is a party that needs to apologize, it is not us," Erdogan said. "Those who violated our airspace are the ones who need to apologize. Our pilots and our armed forces, they simply fulfilled their duties, which consisted of responding to ... violations of the rules of engagement. I think this is the essence."
"Turkey did not shoot down Russian plane on purpose. This was only an automatic reaction to a border breach. This is an exercise of the rules of engagement. The nationality of these planes who are flying towards our border were unknown despite the warnings," Erdogan said. "It is impossible to know this at that time."
Russia has contested the claim, and rescued co-pilot Capt. Konstantin Murakhtin told state media that "there were no warnings -- not via the radio, not visually." Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov has said the downing of the Russian jet appeared to be "a planned provocation."
The ministry asserted that the Russian Su24 warplane would have been in sight of Turkish radar for a total of 34 minutes before it was shot down. But, the ministry said, the time needed for a Turkish F-16 to fly from its base at Diyarbakir to the point at which it fired the missile would be 46 minutes.
The online statement drew attention to the video footage that emerged of the incident and asserted that whoever filmed it must have known in advance the right time and place to record the incident.
He said that 17 times this year, Russia sent Turkey information about Russian citizens suspected of involvement with terrorism. All 17 appeals received no response, he said.
Russia's Agriculture Ministry announced that it was strengthening controls over food and agriculture imports from Turkey. A gas pipeline and the Akkuyu nuclear power plant, in which Russia and Turkey have jointly invested, could also be targeted, Economic Development Minister Alexey Ulyukaev said in a tweet.
In addition, Russia's state-run consumer protection body said it had concerns about the quality and safety of children's clothing, furniture and cleaning products originating from Turkey.