George Brandis briefed by ASIO on claims China stole classified blueprints of Canberra headquarters
The Federal Opposition appears to have confirmed a Four Corners report revealing that ASIO was successfully targeted by Chinese hackers.
On Monday night the ABC reported that classified blueprints of the new ASIO headquarters in Canberra were stolen in a cyber hit orchestrated from a Chinese server.
The program also found the departments of Defence, Prime Minister and Cabinet, and Foreign Affairs and Trade had all been breached in sustained hacking operations.
Shadow attorney-general George Brandis was briefed on the incident by ASIO director-general David Irvine last night.
"These events did take place some time ago," he told Sky TV this morning.
"They were dealt with by ASIO. I am reassured by the Director-General about the way in which they were dealt with by ASIO."
Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus has refused to comment on the report, and Prime Minister Julia Gillard rejected it yesterday in Question Timeas "inaccurate".
Ms Gillard told Parliament the Four Corners program contained "a number of unsubstantiated allegations".
"As the Attorney-General has stated, neither he nor the director-general of ASIO intend to comment further on these inaccurate reports, in accordance with the longstanding practice of both sides of politics not to comment on very specific intelligence matters," she said.
However, Senator Brandis this morning repeatedly said her claim was wrong.
"She dismissed the allegations on the Four Corners program the previous night as being incorrect and inaccurate, and that statement is wrong," he said.
"It was not denied by the Attorney-General. He simply said 'I'm not going to comment on it'.
"The Prime Minister in Question Time yesterday just dismissed the report entirely as being inaccurate. And that claim by the Prime Minister is false."
But when asked if that meant he had been told that Chinese hackers were behind the cyber hit, he would not elaborate.
"I'm not going to go into any specifics, I'm not at liberty to," Senator Brandis said.
"I have a high level of confidence in ASIO, I have a high level of confidence in the director general, David Irvine, particularly, and [Opposition Foreign Affairs spokeswoman] Julie Bishop and I were reassured last night that the matter has been dealt with."