Europe migrant crisis: EU parliament backs refugee relocation plan; Croatia says stretched to capacity
The European Parliament has backed plans to relocate 120,000 asylum seekers around the EU as Croatia said it could not take in any more amid chaotic scenes of riot police trying to control thousands of asylum seekers.
At its border with Serbia, Croatian riot police struggled to keep crowds of men, women and children back from rail tracks after long queues formed in baking heat for buses bound for reception centres elsewhere in Croatia.
Meanwhile, Croatian riot police took positions on Thursday around a hotel in a suburb of the capital Zagreb housing hundreds of asylum seekers, some of them on balconies shouting "Freedom! Freedom!", television pictures showed.
The pictures showed migrants throwing rolls of toilet paper from balconies and windows.
"Croatia will not be able to receive more people," interior minister Ranko Ostojic told reporters in the town of Tovarnik on Croatia's eastern border with Serbia.
The latest move by Croatia comes only 24 hours after its prime minister promised asylum seekers free passage amid clashes at the Serbian border with Hungary.
In an emergency vote called after EU interior ministers failed to back the scheme on Monday, politicians approved the plans by the European Commission — the EU's executive — by 372 votes to 124 with 54 abstentions.
The move to help the frontline states of Greece, Hungary and Italy, has hiked pressure on ministers to adopt the proposals next week.
The ministers meet again next Tuesday to discuss the plans with a possible summit of EU leaders also on the cards.
Parliament had to approve the plans but would normally have done so after EU states had backed the plan.
"We are very grateful to the European Parliament for understanding the urgency of this matter," European Commission vice president Frans Timmermans said before the vote in Brussels.
Mr Timmermans said the vote meant that both the Commission and parliament "can say to the Council that the moment to act is now."
He was referring to the European Council, the 28-nation bloc's minister-level body.
Croatia said it was considering new measures to cope with its inflow of asylum seekers as more than 20,000 migrants were expected over the next two weeks.
"We expect a peak within the next two weeks... [of] over 20,000 migrants," health minister Sinisa Varga said, quoted by the state-run HINA news agency.
Mr Ostojic said on Thursday that 6,200 migrants had arrived in the Balkan country from Serbia in a little more than 24 hours.
"Croatia will not be able to receive more people," he said.
"When we said corridors are prepared, we meant a corridor from Tovarnik to Zagreb," he added, suggesting Croatia would not be allowing migrants simply to proceed north-wards to Slovenia.
The asylum seekers, eager to reach northern Europe, are now crossing into Croatia after Hungary blocked them at its frontier with Serbia.
The migrants were being registered with police in Tovarnik, near the border with Serbia.
From there they were transported by bus and train to reception centres and other facilities, of which there are currently five, including one in the capital Zagreb.
Croatia said earlier it would allow free passage to refugees, with prime minister Zoran Milanovic strongly criticising Hungary's border controls.
But Mr Milanovic warned that his small country of 4.2 million inhabitants had limited capacity for accepting and registering thousands of migrants.
"We will be very constructive and cooperative [regarding migrants] but emphasise that there are limits to our capacities," Mr Milanovic told a cabinet session.
Hungary's crackdown on migrants has been decried by the United Nations and human right groups.
Hundreds of asylum seekers, mainly young men, clashed with Hungarian riot police on Wednesday over a razor fence that Hungary has built along the length of the frontier.
Hungarian government spokesman Zoltan Kovacs continued to staunchly defend Hungary's actions as being one of the only EU countries acting in accordance with European law.
"We haven't seen anybody condemn the attack [by the mob armed with sticks and stones] which has come against Hungary," he told the ABC's The World program, adding that "the police's [actions] were measured".
When asked what danger he believes the asylum seekers posed, Mr Kovacs maintained that Hungary's defensiveness stems from the fact that "we don't know who these people are ... the sheer number is frightening and there's no way to identify them for weeks and months".
Mr Kovacs proceeded to criticise other countries — like Croatia, Serbia, and Slovenia — who welcomed the asylum seekers, as institutionalising illegal migration.
Slovenia, which unlike Croatia, is a member of Europe's Schengen zone of border-free travel, has ruled out creating a "corridor" for migrants, stating that asylum seekers will be accommodated, while others are turned back.
Meanwhile, the head of Germany's Office for Migration and Refugees, which has been criticised for being slow in processing applications from a record number of asylum seekers, has resigned, the interior ministry said on Thursday.
Manfred Schmidt's resignation, which was for personal reasons, came as the number of refugees entering Germany more than doubled in 24 hours.
"The interior minister regrets the loss of the head of an authority who performed an excellent job," a statement said.
Police said the number of refugees arriving in Germany on Wednesday had risen sharply with 9,100 irregular entries, up by about 6,000 from the previous day.
"Most of them were picked up when crossing the German-Austrian border", federal police spokeswoman Judith Toelle said.
About 2,000 arrived on trains and the rest by road or on foot just three days after Germany introduced passport checks on borders.
In the Austrian city of Salzburg, police said between 200 and 300 refugees had arrived overnight by train from Vienna.
Some of them set off on foot towards the German border a few kilometres away. At the border, police said around 200 people were already waiting to be let into Germany.
A police spokesman said they planned to put the refugees on trains so they could be sent to other parts of Germany.
Meanwhile, rail services between Austria and Hungary are resuming in both directions, Austrian rail company OeBB said on Thursday.
The link was cut for a week because of what it called a "massive overburdening" of the network by migrants heading west.
The Danish government said it had voluntarily agreed to accept 1,000 migrants out of the 120,000 the EU plans to relocate to ease the burden on frontline states.
But the anti-immigrant Danish People's Party (DPP), on which the right-wing coalition normally depends to pass legislation, said it would not back the move.
The issue will be discussed next week.