Central African Republic: United Nations to send 12,000 peacekeepers amid fears of genocide
The United Nations Security Council has agreed to send 12,000 peacekeepers to the Central African Republic, as violence reaches terrifying levels, according to local reports.
The Security Council unanimously approved the mission to support French and African Union forces that have been overwhelmed.
The US has warned the Central African Republic is in danger of becoming the next Rwanda as violence increases between Christian and Muslim militias.
The country's foreign minister spoke after the UN vote, saying the peacekeeping mission will create the framework to find a lasting solution.
Despite the rising concerns, the mission will not deploy until September and it is not clear which countries will contribute.
The mainly Muslim Seleka seized power a year ago, perpetrating abuses on the majority Christian population that triggered waves of revenge attacks, leading to thousands of deaths and displacing hundreds of thousands of civilians.
Killings have continued in the impoverished country of 4.6 million people despite the presence of 2,000 French troops and African Union forces.
An 800-strong European Union force is due to start deploying in May.
Top UN officials have warned the violence could become genocide.
At least 13 people were killed this week when Christian militia forces, known as the Anti-balaka, attacked a rural town held by Seleka rebels, residents said.
During a brief visit to the capital Bangui last week, UN secretary-general Ban Ki-moon said French and African soldiers serving in the Central African Republic were "overwhelmed" by the "state of anarchy" in the country.
US ambassador to the United Nations Samantha Power, who visited Bangui on Wednesday for the second time, said the violence had brought the country "to the edge of disaster".
"Untold horrors continue in small villages throughout the countryside and more than 19,000 Muslims are trapped in the capital, too afraid of Anti-balaka forces to leave their hiding places," Ms Power said.