Argentina takes Falklands Islands protest to UN
Argentina's foreign minister is due to arrive at the United Nations to officially protest about Britain's "militarisation" of the seas around the disputed Falkland Islands.
Hector Timerman is expected to make a formal complaint to the presidents of the security council and general assembly at the UN's headquarters in New York on Friday.
It comes after the Argentinian president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, hit out at the UK's decision to send the Duke of Cambridge and one of its most modern navy warships to the South Atlantic.
In a speech on Wednesday to an audience including Falklands war veterans, Fernández said the move posed a risk to international security, before announcing an official complaint would be made.
Addressing politicians on Thursday, Fernández said: "In a few hours our chancellor leaves for New York to make a presentation to the United Nations about the militarisation and the introduction of nuclear arms in the zone."
A statement from Argentina's foreign ministry added: "In accordance with the instructions received from the president of the Argentinian Republic, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, the chancellor (foreign minister) Hector Timerman will meet with Ambassador Kodjo Menan, president of the United Nations security council, to present the Argentinian complaint against the militarisation that the United Kingdom is carrying out from the Falkland Islands in the South Atlantic.
"Furthermore the chancellor will personally inform the president of the general assembly of the United Nations, Ambassador Nassir Abdulaziz al-Nasser, and the body's secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, of the violation by the United Kingdom of around 40 United Nations resolutions which call for dialogue between the said country and Argentina to peacefully resolve the conflict initiated in 1833 with the military invasion of the Falkland Islands."
Timerman will also meet with the president of the UN decolonisation committee, the ministry said.
The Argentinian complaint comes amid growing tensions between London and Buenos Aires in the runup to the 30th anniversary of the Falklands war, in which Argentinian forces invaded the archipelago in a row over its sovereignty.
In December, the British prime minister, David Cameron, accused Buenos Aires of "colonialism" after the Mercosur grouping of countries, which includes Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil and Paraguay, announced it would ban ships sailing under the Falkland Islands flag from docking at their ports.
Last week, Prince William began a six-week posting in the Falklands region in his role as an RAF search-and-rescue pilot, while the government has also revealed it is to send one of its newest destroyers, HMS Dauntless, to the South Atlantic.
The Type 45 destroyer is due to set sail for the region on her maiden mission in the coming months to replace the frigate HMS Montrose.
Fernández said it was difficult to see how "the sending of an immense and modern destroyer accompanied by the royal heir who we would have liked to see in civilian clothes and not in military uniform" was not a show of military strength by the UK.
It has also been reported the Royal Navy is sending a nuclear submarine to the region to protect the islands from possible Argentinian military action. This has not been confirmed by the Ministry of Defence.
Britain has held the Falkland Islands, known as Las Malvinas in Argentina, since 1833.