Austria stops processing asylum requests in EU quota row
Austria has stopped processing asylum requests in a bid to pressure other European Union member states to do more to help absorb refugees entering the continent, the country's interior minister said.
Application processing was suspended on Friday in a move designed to make the country less attractive to refugees in comparison with other EU countries and to “stop the Austria asylum express”, said Johanna Mikl-Leitner.
The announcement comes ahead of a planned meeting of interior ministers from EU member states on Tuesday.
Mikl-Leitner has renewed her demand for other countries to adopt fixed quotas for taking in asylum seekers, telling Die Presse newspaper: “So far there have been only isolated declarations of intent that do not bring us further.”
New applications will still be registered but they will temporarily not be processed, and officials are instead expected to focus on deportations and repatriations.
The interior minister said Austria has become „target country number 1” because it is among the fastest EU member states in handling asylum requests, taking decisions on applications within an average of four months. In comparison, nearly half of requests in the EU took at least six months, with Sweden taking ten months and France two years, said Mikl-Leitner.
The new rule on processing applications was designed to redress this imbalance, she said, adding: “This is a warning signal to the others to finally show solidarity and agree to a fair EU quota.”
Mikl-Leitner defended her decision in the face of mounting criticism from Austrian opposition parties and refugee groups, saying she had not ordered officials to stop processing applications but rather had told them to prioritise “Dublin cases”.
The Dublin Regulation states that asylum seekers should lodge their asylum applications in the member state through which they first entered the EU, and allows applicants to be returned to those countries.
But the current high volume of applications Austrian is dealing with would in practice mean that new applications are put on hold.
Asylum requests for Austria rose nearly 160 percent in the first four months of 2015 to 14,225, according to government figures.
Last month the European Commission proposed a scheme to redistribute 40,000 Syrian and Eritrean asylum-seekers throughout the EU to ease pressure on Italy and Greece, which is struggling to cope with the thousands of immigrants crossing the Mediterranean.
Britain, which has an exemption in EU matters on immigration, has said it will not participate in the scheme.