 Agglutinative languages Malayic languages Languages of Indonesia Languages of East Timor Indonesian language Subject–verb–object languages Standard languages Volcanic eruption types Jakarta Capital districts and territories Provinces of Indonesia Capitals in Asia Metropolitan areas of Indonesia Populated coastal places in Indonesia Reuters Companies established in 1851 Media companies based in London Multilingual news services News agencies based in the United Kingdom Financial news agencies 1851 establishments in the United Kingdom Webby Award winners Tourism Leisure Service industries Seasonal traditions Articles containing video clips Bali Islands of Indonesia Lesser Sunda Islands Provinces of Indonesia Tourism in Bali Volcanoes Geological hazards Geological processes Plate tectonics Volcanic landforms Volcanic rocks Volcanology Articles containing video clips Garuda Indonesia Airlines established in 1949 Airlines of Indonesia Association of Asia Pacific Airlines IATA members Government-owned airlines SkyTeam Government-owned companies of Indonesia Indonesian brands Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Stratovolcanoes of Indonesia Volcanoes of Java Mountains of Java Volcanic calderas of Indonesia Landforms of East Java Active volcanoes of Indonesia Provinces of Indonesia Indonesia Java States and territories established in 1947 East Java Australia Member states of the United Nations G20 nations English-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies 1974 births Living people English footballers Association football forwards Everton F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Runcorn F.C. Halton players Northwich Victoria F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players Chester City F.C. players Boston United F.C. players Southport F.C. players Barrow A.F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Wallsend Boys Club players