 Jordan Arabic-speaking countries and territories Eastern Mediterranean Former British colonies Levant Member states of the Arab League Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member states of the United Nations Middle Eastern countries Near Eastern countries States and territories established in 1946 Western Asia Western Asian countries Muslim-majority countries Southern Levant Palestinians Palestinian people Arab citizens of Israel Semitic peoples Arab people Saudi Arabia Arabian Peninsula Arabic-speaking countries and territories G20 nations Muslim-majority countries Islamic states Member states of OPEC Member states of the Arab League Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Middle Eastern countries Saudi Arabia articles needing attention Western Asian countries States and territories established in 1932 Western Asia Member states of the United Nations Kingdoms Multinational companies Publicly funded broadcasters Radio stations in Palestine Media in Palestine Arab media Media in Ramallah State media 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Southampton English footballers Association football defenders A.F.C. Bournemouth players Salisbury City F.C. players Bashley F.C. players Brockenhurst F.C. players Weymouth F.C. players Paulton Rovers F.C. players Bath City F.C. players Stockport County F.C. players Eastleigh F.C. players Hereford United F.C. players Hayes & Yeading United F.C. players A.F.C. Telford United players Alfreton Town F.C. players Tamworth F.C. players Whitehawk F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Black English sportspeople Civil defense Emergency management United States Department of Defense 1947 establishments in the United States Government agencies established in 1947 Military-industrial complex Nuclear weapons infrastructure of the United States United States federal executive departments Broadcast engineering Radio Heavy equipment Construction equipment Engineering vehicles Geotechnical engineering Comic book publishing companies of the United States Transformers (franchise) West Bank Geography of the West Bank Geography of the Palestinian territories Geography of the Middle East Israeli-occupied territories Hajj Arabic words and phrases Articles containing video clips Islam Islamic pilgrimages Mecca Petra Archaeological sites in Jordan Cliff dwellings Former populated places in Jordan Nabataea Nabataean sites in Jordan Populated places along the Silk Road Protected areas established in 1985 Rock cut architecture Rock-cut tombs Roman towns and cities in Jordan Sandstone buildings Subterranea (geography) Tourism in Jordan World Heritage Sites in Jordan Helicopters Aircraft configurations Italian inventions Articles containing video clips Amman Populated places in the Amman Governorate Capitals in Asia Tourism in Jordan Red Sea Egypt–Sudan border Eritrea–Sudan border Great Rift Valley Marine ecoregions Saudi Arabia–Yemen border Suez Canal Underwater diving sites World Digital Library related Marginal seas of the Indian Ocean Gulfs of the Indian Ocean Geography of East Africa Geography of North Africa Geography of the Middle East Bodies of water of Africa Bodies of water of Asia Bodies of water of Egypt Bodies of water of Eritrea Bodies of water of Israel Bodies of water of Jordan Bodies of water of Saudi Arabia Bodies of water of Sudan Bodies of water of Yemen Articles containing video clips Aqaba Ports and harbours of the Red Sea