 Office administration Office buildings Rooms Business Entrepreneurship Streets in Dublin (city) Shopping districts and streets in Ireland CBS network affiliates Antenna TV affiliates Justice Network affiliates Media General Television channels and stations established in 1988 Television stations in Raleigh-Durham The WB network affiliates 1927 establishments in New York American television networks CBS Corporation subsidiaries CBS Television Network Companies established in 1927 Former Viacom subsidiaries Fuji News Network New York Yankees owners Peabody Award winners North Carolina Former British colonies Spanish colonization of the Americas State of Franklin States and territories established in 1789 States of the Confederate States of America States of the United States Southern United States States of the East Coast of the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 1972 establishments in the United States ATF agents Government agencies established in 1972 Organizations based in Washington, D.C. 1938 births 1998 deaths Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers England under-23 international footballers Association football defenders Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Bury F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players The Football League players English football managers Port Vale F.C. managers Chester City F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. managers Halifax Town A.F.C. managers The Football League managers The Football League representative players Firefighting equipment Active fire protection Safety equipment Hydraulics Plumbing Piping Fire suppression Wood Art materials Biodegradable materials Building materials Energy crops Forestry Natural materials Trees Woodworking Woodworking materials Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP Fire protection Fire prevention Thermodynamics 1963 births American businesspeople Living people File sharing Virtual communities Urban studies and planning terminology Housing Cranes (machines) Construction equipment Heavy equipment Lifting equipment Vertical transport devices Ancient Greek technology Articles containing video clips Fire service vehicles Firefighting equipment Articles containing video clips Emergency medical responders Medical credentials Medical emergencies Traumatology Injuries Towns in Chowan County, North Carolina County seats in North Carolina Populated places established in 1722 Historic Albemarle Tour Cities in Pike County, Arkansas Cities in Montgomery County, Arkansas Populated places established in 1909 Wi-Fi 1999 introductions IEEE 802.11 Networking standards Wireless networking Australian inventions Coffee Arab culture Caffeinated beverages Christmas food Crops Herbal and fungal stimulants IARC Group 2B carcinogens Thanksgiving food Turkish words and phrases Concepts in metaphysics Information Information, knowledge, and uncertainty Information science