New Year Honours 2013: we have to work harder for recognition, says Paralympian David Weir
While Weir, who won four gold medals in London last summer, is appointed a CBE he was not among the five sporting knights and dames created in the honours list.
As revealed by Telegraph Sport two weeks ago, Bradley Wiggins and Ben Ainslie are both knighted, as is David Brailsford, the architect of cycling’s phenomenal success as performance director of British Cycling and Team Sky.
Paralympic cyclist Sarah Storey becomes a Dame after winning four gold medals in London, taking her Para­lympic total to 11, which equals the British record held by Dame Tanni Grey-Thompson.
Storey’s is a higher honour than the CBE awarded to Weir despite his winning the same number of medals in 2012 and being at a similar stage of his career.
Weir stressed that he was delighted to have been recognised, but suggested that he and his fellow Paralym­pians were not recognised as readily as their non-disabled counterparts.
“I am absolutely honoured and delighted to receive this award,” he told Telegraph Sport. “I would have been disappointed if Sarah Storey had not been made a Dame because she deserves it with 11 gold medals.
“It is a weird one how they choose it. Sometimes it seems that Paralympians have to win lots and lots of medals to get a damehood or a knighthood. Kelly Holmes was made a Dame when she won two gold medals, but it seems we have to get into double figures to get it.
“Sarah Storey should have been awarded this years ago, and I just feel that sometimes we are left out perhaps because we are not in the public eye. It is a bit strange, but I am just honoured to get anything from the Queen for doing a sport I love.”
Weir is among 28 Paralympians recognised in an unprecedented sporting honours list.
Storey is the only Paralympian among the knights and dames, a list that also includes British rowing performance director David Tanner, and Weir is the only disability athlete among five CBEs. There are only two Paralympians among the six OBEs created in the list published on Saturday.
A spokesman for the Cabinet Office said that each nomination was considered on merit by the sporting honours committee, chaired by Lord Coe.
Asked why Weir had not received a knighthood, the spokesman said that a number of factors might have been considered, including whether an athlete was at the end of their career or would continue to compete.
Despite Weir’s concerns the unprecedented sporting honours list represents emphatic royal assent for the most remarkable year in British sporting history.
In a record 78 awards for athletes and coaches, Weir is one of five CBEs. Heptathlon gold medallist Jessica Ennis, double long-distance track champion Mo Farah and cyclist Victoria Pendleton, who won a gold and a silver in the velodrome, are all appointed CBEs.
Katherine Grainger, already an MBE, is made a CBE for finally adding a gold medal to her three silver medals on the rowing lake.
There are six OBEs, including one for Andy Murray, who won Olympic gold at Wimbledon as well as breaking Britain’s 78-year grand slam duck with his victory in the US Open.
Also receiving the honour are double Olympic champions Charlotte Dujardin (dressage), Jason Kenny (track cycling), Laura Trott (track cycling) and triple Paralympic gold winner Sophie Christiansen. Ellie Simmonds, who won two golds, a silver and a bronze at the Paralympics, also receives an OBE, and at 17 becomes one of the youngest recipients of the award.
In total every gold medallist from the London Olympic and Paralympic Games who had not already been honoured for previous achievements has received an award.
There are also honours for Lord Coe, who receives a Companion of Honour to add to his peerage, and 2012 organising committee chief executive Paul Deighton, who also becomes a Lord in the New Year thanks to his role as a Treasury minister.
Wiggins said the knighthood was “the ultimate accolade”, though he would not be insisting on people calling him “Sir Bradley”.
“It’s quite something. I never ever imagined that I would ever become a knight so it’s an incredible honour but there’s a slight element of disbelief.
"It’s not something I’ll use on a daily basis but it’s nice to have in the trophy cabinet. There was never any doubt whether I’d accept it or not, it was more a case that I never saw myself as a Sir, and I probably never will.”
Ainslie, who won his fourth consecutive gold medal in London, said: “When I set out Olympic sailing 20 years ago, I never would have dreamt this would happen.”
Brailsford said his knighthood was a tribute to a remarkable generation of British cyclists. “I am just the conductor of this amazingly talented orchestra and you can only ever be as good as those individuals you have around you.”
Tanner said his knighthood justified his decision in 1996 to leave his job as headmaster of a large London comprehensive school and lead the British rowing effort on a full-time basis.
He said: “What made the difference was that I could see the prospects of big Lottery funding about to begin. GB’s only gold medal from Atlanta [in 1996] being in rowing gave me a head start.
"What am I most proud of? Building on the spirit there is in rowing, bringing in young rowers and building a stage around them on which they can perform. And the ‘Start’ programme to recruit athletes who hadn’t rowed. It was a bit of a leap in the dark but has had an impact.
"We couldn’t just rely on people popping up from rowing clubs and universities, however good they’ve been to us.”