AFL grand final: Richmond's Dustin Martin wins Norm Smith Medal to complete record-breaking season
Has anyone ever played a better season than Dustin Martin did in 2017?
The numbers make it a hard case to argue against — no player has polled more Brownlow votes in a year than Martin this year, and no player in the game's history has won the Brownlow and the Norm Smith in the same year.
It's an unbelievable record that, during grand final week, many confidently predicted would be set, such has been Martin's dominance throughout the season and especially in September, and on Saturday afternoon he came good on his promise.
It was a tight race for the Norm Smith, with the telling influence of Bachar Houli rewarded with only three fewer votes than Martin, but few could complain when his name was read out by James Hird.
Martin has played better games this season, but only his own high standards could mar what was a dominant midfield and forward display.
He won just about every one-on-one he was in, he kicked goals, he broke tackle after tackle and he stood up in a way many star players have failed to on grand final day.
But what might be most impressive about Martin as a footballer is the finesse that lives underneath the brutish exterior — his sly inside kicks, his deft handballs, his subtle changes of directions.
It's that mix of power and precision that has made Martin the AFL's marquee man, and it was on display in all four quarters on grand final day.
And then there was the contract stand-off, the "will he, won't he" that dominated the off-field matters of the 2017 season.
In hindsight, it's hard to imagine Dusty would have entertained any other offers. Any doubts he might have once had about his future have now been washed away — Richmond has been able to give him everything he could possibly have wanted and more.
We've learnt a lot about Dusty this week, and he has always seemed uncomfortable with the attention that comes with being the best player in the game.
He kept his speech short on the MCG dais, but the three words he signed off with were enough to make it the most popular of the day.
Like every Richmond fan in the world, the cry was clear — "Yellow and black!".