ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Swimming Australia (SA) will replace Leigh Nugent as head coach after he offered his resignation in the wake of two damning reviews into team culture and leadership.
Nugent approached SA about stepping down from his position last week and SA has announced his resignation is "still a matter of negotiation".
He wants to remain working with SA but not as head coach.
In the meantime SA will appoint an interim head coach in time for the national championships beginning in Adelaide next month.
"We talked to Leigh and I spoke to him again this morning but he was convinced he needed to move on," SA president Barclay Nettlefold told the media on Wednesday.
"He's tired and exhausted from the process."
Nettlefold says Nugent was not pressured into resigning either by SA or the public outcry surrounding the controversial Australian campaign at the London Olympics.
"I don't think it's about public perception," he said.
"It was his decision, he came to us and we commend him for his decision."
Nugent's resignation followed two reviews into Australia's poor performance in the pool at the London Olympics that pointed to a lack of leadership and a poor team culture.
The Australian men's 4x100 metres relay team was also forced to admit to a night of poor behaviour while using Stilnox during a pre-Olympic camp in Manchester.
Nugent was criticised for his handling of the relay team's misbehaviour during their bonding session in Manchester.
The six-member relay team took Stilnox and knocked on doors of swimming team-mates at their Manchester hotel ahead of the London Games.
Nugent was reportedly informed of the door knocking the following morning but not the taking of Stilnox.
Nettlefold says Nugent accepted the blame for Australia's poor showing in London.
"Leigh accepted responsibility for the team's performance," he said.
"He's never shied away from that and I think he felt fairly remorseful. But Leigh's tired and he just feels he needs to move on with his life, and allow swimming to move on as well."
Nettlefold says SA is yet to decide on what role Nugent will now undertake.
"It's going to be a mentoring role with younger coaches and it will certainly be in development," he said.
Nugent was appointed head coach in March 2010, having assumed the role on an interim basis late in 2009 when Alan Thompson took leave amid allegations of inappropriate behaviour of which he was later cleared.
He was a popular choice, largely because of his role in leading Australia to a haul of seven gold medals at the Athens Olympics in 2004 while filling the position on a temporary basis.
The London Olympics proved disastrous for Australia, who returned with just one gold, six silver and three bronze medals, its worst showing at a Games since 1992.
It was also the first Olympics since 1976 Australia had not won an individual gold medal.
Nugent's contract was to run until the end of the year with an option of a further three years to include the 2016 Rio Olympics.
Speculation about Nugent's future also follows the Australian Sports Commission's (ASC) directive to swimming and several other Olympic sports to adhere to mandatory reforms or have their funding cut by as much as 20 per cent.
The ASC says it is demanding higher standards and greater accountability and its reforms focus on three areas of governance - the structural model, composition of the boards and financial transparency.
Meanwhile, SA is expected to announce its new chief executive and high performance director in the coming weeks.
Nettlefold says Hockey Australia's Mark Anderson is the preferred candidate as chief executive and his appointment is set to be confirmed next week.
"We haven't made a decision on that yet," he said.
"We will finalise our position with Mark Anderson to take on the role of CEO of the sport.
"He's a great administrator of sport and we look forward to him coming back from his Harvard course that he's doing at the moment.
"We'll sit down with them and set up a new high performance committee and they will determine who the right person is."