London wins bid to host 2017 World Athletics Championships
London has beaten Doha to the 2017 world athletics championships, leading Lord Coe and the bid team to claim their victory would have far-reaching benefits for the sport and the Olympics legacy.
Following a vote of the 26 members of the International Association of Athletics Federations Council, London beat the Qatari capital to the prize by a majority of 16-10. But it was a late promise to match Doha's pledge to cover the entire $7.2m (£4.5m) prize fund, so that the IAAF could invest the money in development projects elsewhere, that helped seal the deal among a handful of key wavering Council members.
Coe, the London 2012 chairman who was also a key figure in the 2017 bid and is an IAAF vice president, said that they got the campaign "just right".
He added: "We have the Games in 2012, we have the world athletics championships in 2017 and we have world championships at virtually every level in every sport over the next decade. It's an extraordinary clean sweep for British sport."
London's campaign had focused on the fact that its bid had the overwhelming support of athletes, could guarantee full stadia for every session and offered a better commercial return to sponsors and broadcasters.
There was also a plea to Lamine Diack, the IAAF president, to "close the circle" after he voted for London to host the 2012 Olympics on the basis that it would leave an athletics legacy for the capital and play a key role in the campaign to keep the track at the stadium.
Diack, who has an International Olympic Committee investigation into bribery allegations hanging over him, made clear that delivering on the stadium was a big factor. "Now, we are all agreed that it will be a stadium of athletics and we don't talk about a stadium of 25,000, it's a stadium of 60,000 now. I am happy. We deliver now and we have to work together."
Doha had earlier unveiled a package of "additional incentives" that took its total promised investment in the championships and associated IAAF sponsorship and TV deals to $239.2m.
The teenage sprinter Jodie Williams had earlier joined the London mayor Boris Johnson, Coe and the sports minister, Hugh Robertson, to drive those points home in a half-hour presentation. More than 100 athletes past and present had supported the London bid.
The decision will be regarded as personal vindication for Coe, closely associated with the promise in Singapore that there would be a legacy for his sport from the Games, who fought hard to retain the track in the stadium.
"London has delivered, you can rest assured that London will deliver again," Coe told his 25 fellow Council members. "I sit here today because I will forever be in mountainous debt to a sport I owe everything. It's who I am, it's what I do, it's the way I do it."
The successful bid could also boost his hopes of succeeding Diack as the next president of the IAAF in 2015.
The decision will also come as a relief to ministers and Olympic Park Legacy Company (OPLC) officials, who are dealing with renewed questions over the future of the stadium in Stratford following the collapse of a deal with West Ham and Newham amid a slew of legal challenges.
They will now proceed with plans to re-tender for the stadium early next month, secure in the knowledge that their promise to keep the track for the next 99 years is bolstered by the fact that the world championships will fill it in 2017.
"This is a huge fillip for our programme for bringing other uses into the stadium alongside athletics. This is a massive, massive fillip," said the OPLC chair Baroness Ford. "I hope it puts an end to the idea that the stadium would not be viable."
For Robertson, Johnson and Coe – all of whom were involved in the 2018 World Cup bid humiliation – the decision to bring the third largest sporting event in the world to London in 2017 will bring a degree of catharsis.
For UK Athletics, it will boost hopes that next year's Olympics can be the start of a golden period for the sport with increased commercial appeal and profile.
Three previous failed bids for the world championships, most damagingly in 2001 when the 2005 event had to be handed back after a stadium deal at Picketts Lock collapsed, did not ultimately count against London's bid.
It will cost $84m to stage the championships, though most of that will be recovered in ticket and sponsorship revenues. Any shortfall has been underwritten by the government, but Robertson and Johnson claimed there would be huge spin-off benefits for tourism and business.