Birdie on Third Playoff Hole Gives Father-to-Be His First Victory
Keegan Bradley, who closed with a 68, was kicking himself after the round. One of the tour’s longest hitters, Bradley missed the playoff by a stroke and gave a stroke back at No. 10. He described Riviera as his favorite course on the tour. He loves it; it’s perfect; but he would change the 10th, and not because his bogey there cost him dearly.
“I just think that hole has gotten a little out of control,” said Bradley, who finished in a four-way tie for fourth with García, Jordan Spieth (70) and Hideki Matsuyama (67). “It’s not very fair for a course that’s so fair and so hard, especially today. It was almost impossible to get one close.”
Hahn, 33, a Korean-born American, had no qualms about the hole. He escaped it with three pars and two birdies, with one of the threes coming in the playoff. After pitching to 10 feet from the rough, Hahn drained the putt. That eliminated Casey, who had missed his birdie attempt, and turned up the pressure on Johnson, who had landed his pitch from the rough inside four feet. Johnson made the putt to extend the playoff, but not for long.
“The pitch shots those guys hit into 10 to make birdie — absolutely brilliant,” Casey said, adding, “I didn’t honestly think I would have the longest birdie putt of the three, seeing where those guys were after their tee shots, but those guys played phenomenal recoveries.”
Hahn described the 10th as “a fun hole” and explained his reasoning: “You could walk away with an easy three or an easy six.” He added, “Two birdies out of five tries on the hole, I think that’s pretty good for me.”
When he arrived at the media tent for his postround interview, a cold diet soda was waiting for him. He asked if he could have a beer instead, and when someone produced a cold one he twisted open the cap and took a sip.
His first child, a daughter, is due three weeks before the Masters, which Hahn qualified for with the victory. Will he be able to make it to Augusta National?
The victory delivered a Masters berth and may have given Hahn and his wife something else they were missing: a name for the baby. “I’m going to have to talk to my wife about Riviera,” Hahn said with a smile.