Commonwealth Games 2010: English swimmers hit by stomach bug
English and Australian swimmers struck down with virus 'If there is something unsafe, you cannot swim in that water'
English officials have asked for reassurances about the water quality in the Commonwealth Games aquatics centre after reports that up to 15 swimmers on the England and Australian teams have a stomach virus potentially caused by water in Delhi's pools.
About 20% of England's swimmers – up to 10 competitors – have an upset stomach, according to team doctors. Australia has reported at least six sick swimmers, including Andrew Lauterstein, who pulled out of the 50m butterfly on Wednesday.
The Commonwealth Games Federation president, Mike Fennell, said officials would investigate the matter urgently and conduct tests on both the main pool and the warmup pool at the Dr SP Makherjee aquatic complex.
Fennell would not say if the swimming events, which have three more days to run, might be cancelled or moved if tests showed the pools were unsafe.
"I would not like to speculate about this immediately," Fennell said. "If there is something unsafe, you cannot swim in that water. It is a matter we have to deal with a great deal of urgency."
The Australian swimming team spokesman Lachlan Searle said "about a half-dozen" swimmers had been affected by stomach problems. He said Lauterstein could not take part in training on Thursday morning and that Hayden Stoeckel, who won a silver medal in the men's 50m backstroke on Tuesday, also could not train. "Our doctors are looking into it," he said.
England's team spokesman Caroline Searle said between seven and 10% of England's 541-strong delegation had been affected by a "mild 24-hour stomach condition".
"That's lower than we anticipated," she said. "Separately we have asked for reassurances as to the water quality at the aquatics venue. We're not complacent and continue to reinforce the need to be vigilant in areas like hand hygiene."
Concerning the swimmers, Searle said: "We will look at that, but it's really a matter for the organising committee."
Dave Richards, a spokesman for the England swimming team, said reports of the sickness had been wildly exaggerated and that the team's seven to 10% with stomach complaints also held true for the 45 members of the swim team.
"No swimmer has missed a competition at all," he said.
The Commonwealth Games bring together more than 6,000 athletes and officials from 71 countries and territories. But construction delays, corruption allegations, concerns about security and heavy monsoons put preparations for the games way behind schedule, with complaints about unfinished and filthy accommodation in the athletes' village embarrassing the hosts.
Three Ugandan team officials were injured in a car accident at the entry to the athletes' village and spent 24 hours in hospital under observation before being released on Wednesday. Uganda won its first gold medal of the games in the men's 5,000m later that day on an athletics track that was still being repaired just hours before the first events started.
On the positive side, the organising committee chief, Suresh Kalmadi, said 125,000 tickets had been sold for future events. Next week's rugby sevens tournament is sold out, as is the remainder of the swimming, 80% of the tennis and 90% of the boxing semi-finals and finals.