Sebastian Vettel of Red Bull coasts to European Grand Prix triumph
It was 2pm local time when the European Grand Prix got under way, which is a popular time for a siesta in these parts. It was the high decibel count that prevented the eyelids from drooping; it certainly was not the entertainment.
"Maybe from the outside it looked like a boring race but I enjoyed it so much," Sebastian Vettel said, after the fast cortege had passed for the last time. He had good reason to be enthralled, for this was his sixth victory in the season's eight races so far and his ninth win in 12, going back to the final races of last year.
This has been a terrific season in Formula One but those who recall Ferrari's unrelenting hegemony in the early years of the century will feel uncomfortable about Red Bull's nonchalant dominance now. Vettel always wanted to be Michael Schumacher and now he is, at least in the manner of his unchallenged superiority. This was his 16th grand prix victory, putting him one ahead of Lewis Hamilton, and the gleam in his eye was redolent of Buzz Lightyear when the space ranger talks about going "to infinity and beyond".
He is 77 points ahead of his team-mate, Mark Webber, and McLaren's Jenson Button, who are tied in second place. Red Bull's total of constructors' points, 295, dwarfs the tallies of McLaren (206) and Ferrari (129).
Arithmetically, the season may be over after a few more races. In essence it already is, because from now on, Vettel's driving can be of the sort that was once associated with Sunday afternoon, even though the notion of "going for a spin" might have a worryingly different meaning for the young German.
This is the first time a driver has finished first or second in the first eight races of the season; Vettel has dropped only 14 points, with his two second places. From qualifying to pole position to chequered flag, Vettel bestrode the weekend in Valencia, which might fondly imagine itself to be Monaco on weekends such as this, as the yachts, in warm, aquamarine waters, nestle up against the circuit.
In reality, this dockside location is far removed from the sybaritic opulence of Monte Carlo. But in their predictability, the two races can be a bit samey. This was the fourth European Grand Prix held here and they have all been duds. Lovely city, shame about the race.
Red Bull were denied a one-two finish by Fernando Alonso of Ferrari, who was second, ahead of Webber. But Alonso never got close to the swaggering Vettel. It was an even more frustrating afternoon for the McLaren team, Hamilton finishing 46 seconds off the pace in fourth place and Button finishing two more places behind that, with Felipe Massa's Ferrari getting between the Woking team-mates.
Whereas Button suffered a breakdown in his Kinetic energy recovery systems, or Kers, which he was unable to use for half the race, Hamilton made an awful start, in which he was passed by both Ferraris. He then struggled with his tyre management. "That Lewis Hamilton is too cautious by half," said a wag, as the McLaren driver slow-coached away from the grid. He and Button would struggle for pace all afternoon.
Nico Rosberg of Mercedes was seventh, after a tussle with the eye-catching Toro Rosso of Jaime Alguersuari, who made the most of a two-stop strategy to finish in eighth place. But there was disappointment for Rosberg's team-mate, Schumacher, who was 17th. That ended a sequence of performances from the former world champion that had been less dire than they were last season and at the start of this.
Schumacher challenged for a podium place in the previous race, in Canada, and had ambitions here too until he came into contact with Vitaly Petrov of Renault and had to come in for a new front wing.
Despite the considerable heat, there were no retirements. This was only the fourth time in history that all cars made it home, but on the other three occasions, in 1961 and 2005 (twice), there were not as many as 24 drivers involved.
Essentially, though, there was only one driver involved. "Of course I had some pressure from Fernando and Mark behind me," Vettel said.
"Again, I was pushing hard, judging the tyres, trying to imagine what the end of the stint would be like. For some reason I enjoy this track. Last year I had a smooth race and again this year, I had a good race. This track is not made for us, with no real fast corners, but we still managed to put everything together."
For everyone else on the grid, the season is falling apart.
1 Sebastian Vettel (Ger) Red Bull 1hr 39min 36.169sec, 2 Fernando Alonso (Sp) Ferrari 1:39:47.060, 3 Mark Webber (Aus) Red Bull 1:40:03.424, 4 Lewis Hamilton (GB) McLaren 1:40:22.359, 5 Felipe Massa (Br) Ferrari 1:40:27.874, 6 Jenson Button (GB) McLaren 1:40:36.234, 7 Nico Rosberg (Ger) Mercedes GP 1:41:14.259, 8 Jaime Alguersuari (Sp) Scuderia Toro Rosso at 1 Lap, 9 Adrian Sutil (Ger) Force India at 1 Lap, 10 Nick Heidfeld (Ger) Renault at 1 Lap, 11 Sergio Perez (Mex) Sauber-Ferrari at 1 Lap, 12 Rubens Barrichello (Br) Williams at 1 Lap, 13 Sebastien Buemi (Swi) Scuderia Toro Rosso at 1 Lap, 14 Paul di Resta (GB) Force India at 1 Lap, 15 Vitaly Petrov (Rus) Renault at 1 Lap, 16 Kamui Kobayashi (Jpn) Sauber-Ferrari at 1 Lap, 17 Michael Schumacher (Ger) Mercedes GP at 1 Lap, 18 Pastor Maldonado (Ven) Williams at 1 Lap, 19 Heikki Kovalainen (Fin) Lotus F1 at 2 Laps, 20 Jarno Trulli (It) Lotus F1 at 2 Laps, 21 Timo Glock (Ger) Virgin Racing at 2 Laps, 22 Jerome d'Ambrosio (Bel) Virgin Racing at 2 Laps, 23 Vitantonio Liuzzi (It) HRT-F1 at 3 Laps, 24 Narain Karthikeyan (Ind) HRT-F1 at 3 Laps