Gebre Gebremariam Wins New York in Marathon Debut
Gebrselassie then dropped out of the race, and later, abruptly retired from the sport. Gebremariam, meanwhile, secured his own spot in history, catching the leaders at Mile 17. He ran effortlessly alone in the final two miles in Central Park, capturing the New York City Marathon in 2 hours 8 minutes 14 seconds.
“I can’t believe it,” Gebremariam said, beaming. “I am just so happy. It’s my first marathon, and I am No. 1 here.”
Gebremariam became the first man to win New York in his marathon debut since Alberto Salazar in 1980 and became the first runner to win a debut in New York since Tegla Loroupe won the women’s race in 1994.
Gebremariam’s only competition late in the race, Emmanuel Mutai of Kenya, dropped back in the 25th mile in Central Park with cramps in his leg. It was then that Gebremariam looked back twice and stormed ahead with a still-fluid stride.
When he raised his arms to break the tape, Gebremariam was $170,000 richer and had fulfilled a promise to his wife, Werknesh Kidane. Also an elite long-distance runner, she was supposed to make her marathon debut in New York but pulled out with a calf injury last week. She stayed at home in Ethiopia with their two small sons and told her husband to win for the both of them.
“Maybe next year,” Gebremariam said, “she’ll come in and she’ll win, too.”
He became the first Ethiopian man to win in New York since Tesfaye Jifar in 2001, but he did not beat Jifar’s course record, 2:07:43. He still won by more than one minute over Mutai, who finished in 2:09:18. Moses Kigen Kipkosgei of Kenya was third in 2:10:39.
Meb Keflezighi, the defending champion, finished sixth in 2:11:38, picking off flagging runners one by one but running out of time and course. Dathan Ritzenhein of the United States finished eighth in 2:12:33.
It was a bittersweet day for Ethiopian running, the extreme emotions of this sport visible in Gebrselassie’s heavy tears and Gebremariam’s dancing eyes beneath the laurel wreath he wore hours after his victory. But even he was sad, recognizing his career achievement would forever be entwined in Gebrselassie’s career-ending announcement.
“In Ethiopia, everybody waits for Haile for winning, but he can’t, so nobody’s going to be excited about that,” Gebremariam said.
From start to early finish, Gebrselassie shaped this race. On Saturday night, news that Gebrselassie was hurting buzzed about the athletes’ hotel. He had a magnetic resonance imaging test, which showed severe tendinitis and fluid in the knee.
Organizers were not even sure he would start, but he was on the early-morning bus to Staten Island. There, Gebrselassie sat next to Gebremariam and quietly confessed to him. “He told me, ‘Gebre, if I finish this race, I’m special,’ ” Gebremariam said.
Gebremariam believed in him, and still did, even after the race. “Haile is very king,” he said.
But it was clear early that this was not the same Gebrselassie who owns the world record, 2:03:59, which he set on a flat course in Berlin in 2008. He came off the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge into a 13-mile-per-hour headwind tucked into the lead pack, having run a languid opening mile in 5:56. The leaders ran 65:19 through the halfway mark.
The pace was too slow for everyone, and several runners tried to surge without success. “I don’t know if we are, all of us, were afraid for Haile,” Kipkosgei said. “But after Haile dropped out, these guys set the pace fine.”
When Gebrselassie dropped out on the Manhattan side of the Queensboro Bridge before the 16-mile mark, Gebremariam moved within a step of the leaders. When the 10 lead runners curled off the bridge onto the delirious downhill stretch of First Avenue, Gebremariam sensed his chance.
Ever a student of the sport, he had asked Keflezighi for advice before the start. Keflezighi, 35, running New York for the sixth time, told him to be patient on First Avenue.
But Gebremariam did not listen. He stormed into the lead with three others, but not before shouting, “Come on!” to Keflezighi, who could not keep pace.
Heading north into Upper Manhattan near Mile 19, Gebremariam ran with Mutai, James Kwambai of Kenya and Morocco’s Abderrahime Bouramdane, feeling so strong that he knew he was going to win. By Mile 23, the leaders were down to two: Gebremariam and Mutai.
The rolling hills of Central Park were no problem for him, having trained in the mountains around Addis Ababa, Ethiopia’s capital. And then Gebremariam recalled how he crossed the same finish line to win the Healthy Kidney 10K race this past May. He smiled all the way to the finish.
Over the past two years, Gebremariam has steadily found success at every distance and type of course. He won the 2009 world cross-country championship and the Ethiopian national championship in the 10,000 meters that year. This year, he has won five of the six road races he has entered in the United States.
But he knows that these are small notches in the books, compared with Gebrselassie’s 27 world records.
“No,” Gebremariam said, shaking his head. “I cannot reach him. I can just do what I can.”
Perhaps one day, schoolchildren in Ethiopia will be reading about him.