Beach Soccer Worldwide
Paraguay brought a huge surprise today in the FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup 2013 ? CONMEBOL Qualifier Merlo-San Luis. Not because they had not level enough to get into the World Cup, which they absolutely have, but because who they had in front in the fight for what it became their first ever ticket to the global showpiece: no less than Brazil, undisputed kings of the five editions held to date. 
The Guaraní managed against Brazil to be ahead in the score for most of the time, and finally confirmed their achievement at the penalty shoot-out. Brazil only have now one chance left to avoid what would become a historical upset, and they need to beat Ecuador in the match for the third place if they don?t want to be sidelined from a FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup for the first time ever.  
Yet from the very early stages of the game, the Paraguayan side let the Verdeamarela know that this was not to be an easy afternoon. Indeed, Ayala opened the score in the beginning of the first period, and, despite Buru and Benjamin got the Tetracampeão the lead, that advantage would not last. 
Villalba?s side quickly counteracted, and would become the ones leading the way in the match. Brazil could not see beyond leveling the score once and again, and saw things turn really dark with the Guaraní 4-6. One huge last effort by Negão?s side would send the game to the extra time. 
The score remained untouched during the additional three minutes, and sentence was to be passed from the 9 meter distance. From there the Paraguayans completed their heroic mission, as Lopez?s aim, combined with Bruno xavier finding nothing else than the post in his attempt, meant the historic go-through for the Guaraní side that see the dream of sealing the passport to the World Cup come true. 
Argentina will not miss the upcoming FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup, as they confirmed today with a solid victory over Ecuador in front of a devoted, boisterous crowd that pushed them to success. With the ticket already in their hands, the hosts will now tacke the final of this CONMEBOL Qualifier with the idea of claiming the contienental thrown lef vacant by Brazil, whereas the Ecuadorians will precisely take on the Verdeamarela in the fight for the last qualifying slot at stake. 
Under such an amazing atmosphere, the Albiceleste wanted to lead the game the sooner the better, but Ecuador, who reached the semifinals stage in 2009, had the opposite thought. It was not easy for the hosts to get hold of the game, as La Tri managed to counteract every step forward made by their opponent during the first half. 
The second period meant the definitive take-off for Petrasso?s lads, as a 3-0 run left things fairly unbalanced to their interest.  Alava?s last effort after E. Hilaire?s 5-2 was far too short menace to make the Argentinean dominion wobble at that point. The final whistle certifies Argentina will be in their sixth FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup, on one hand, and the chance to fight for  the South American crown, in the other. 
The Chilean dominion was stated rather early, opening the score 2-0, but the spirited Charrúa managed to neutralize any difference La Roja would achieve. After a brutal last effort sending the game to the extra time from a 4-6, luck turned the back on the Celeste side, and smiled Chile from the nine-meters distance. 
The Colombian National team run past Venezuela to keep alive in the fight for the 7th place in this FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup 2013 ? CONMEBOL Qualifier Merlo-San Luis. The victory, founded on a blunt advantage built during the first period and Moshamer?s star-performance with a hat-trick, pushes the Vinotinto to the last place in this continental showcase. After today?s win, the Cafeteros will need a victory over Peru in tomorrow?s game to claim seventh position. 