ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
England was crowned Six Nations champion for the first time in eight years but was denied a grand slam when Ireland outplayed it comprehensively to secure a thumping 24-8 win.
Ireland took its stranglehold on the English to seven wins in eight as it put a poor tournament behind it to play some of its best rugby in years, taking control early on thanks to a first-half Tommy Bowe try and the steady boot of Jonathan Sexton.
Captain Brian O'Driscoll also broke the championship try-scoring record and a shellshocked England - who only managed a second half try from replacement hooker Steve Thompson - had to settle for the not inconsiderable consolation of their first title since 2003.
England, which won its last grand slam in Dublin with a resounding 42-6 victory eight years ago, looked more like the team that had performed poorly in successive championships since, but in truth, a rampant Irish team gave them no chance.
"Today we played a smart game and an intense game and they couldn't live with us," O'Driscoll said.
"We said at half-time we wanted to put them to the sword and to score 24 points against this team is impressive and we're very happy to finish the Six Nations the way we have."
On his individual landmark, the centre said: "It's great, I'm very honoured. Seventy eight years is a long time to hold the record but hopefully there's a bit more rugby in me yet."
England's Six Nations victory was confirmed when France bounced back from its embarrassing defeat in Italy to beat Wales 28-9 at the Stade de France.
Former captain Lionel Nallet scored one try each side of the interval to move France into second place on six points while Wales, which needed a massive win to steal the championship from England, finished fourth behind Ireland on points difference after both teams won three games.
In the other match, Scotland finally scored a Murrayfield try and won its first match of the Six Nations championship with a 21-8 triumph over Italy to condemn its opponents to last place in the standings.
After starting so well against Wales and Italy, England lost momentum against France, struggled past Scotland and was blown away by the Irish.
"We had a horrible, horrible first half where we did everything you talk about not doing when you're away from home," England manager Martin Johnson said.
"We compounded errors, we knocked balls on. Pressure's the name of the game. We got a lot of guys doing this for the first time - not a grand slam decider but playing a full championship.
"They're a savvy team, they are full of pride and have a lot of experience. We got it very wrong today. They outplayed us and they deserved to win."
Speaking later after France's victory over Wales guaranteed England the title, stand-in captain Nick Easter said: "We missed out on the big one today but we've got some sort of reward for the strides we've made this season.
"Today was another learning curve and you are going to need that in a big year with a big tournament at the end of it."