Latest Updates on Louisville's Kevin Ware's Gruesome Leg Injury and Recovery
In one of the more gruesome injuries you will see on a basketball court, Louisville guard Kevin Ware severely fractured his leg in Sunday's Elite Eight game against Duke.
Matt Norlander of CBS Sports reports that Ware will likely miss another 2 weeks:
As for Ware, it's going to probably be two weeks before he's good to go and play in an actual game. "He's still limping a little bit," Pitino said at the team's postgame press conference. "And it's noticeable, and when he gets over that he's going to play. He's probably only about two weeks away from playing, but I notice in practice a little bit he's limping. That means, psychologically, he's favoring it a little bit. He doesn't notice it at all. But I don't want to put him in this type of game. The Pikeville (exhibition) situation was just, 'Get out there, get loose.' But he is playing full-blown in practice, but I still notice a limp so I don't want to play him until he's over that. It'll be pretty soon."
Rick Pitino told reporters (via Adam Zagoria of SNY) that Kevin Ware will be in uniform for Louisville's season opener, but is unsure if he will see any playing time.
UPDATE: Wednesday, Oct. 30, at 10:15 a.m. ET
From Steve Jones of The Courier-Journal:
Jeff Goodman of ESPN.com talked to Kevin Ware about his injury, rehab and his road back to the Louisville lineup:
"I'm ready for contact," Ware told ESPN.com. "I just want to get my feet wet and see where I'm at." Ware is nearly seven months removed from the unsettling and emotional injury he suffered in the first half of Louisville's Elite Eight game against the Blue Devils. He said he was fortunate that it was a broken leg instead of a torn ACL, which requires a lengthier rehabilitation process. "I don't have any pain," Ware said. "My knees are sore sometimes, but I don't have any pain -- and I'm blessed for that." Ware was optimistic heading into Friday's practice that he'd be cleared to participate in 2-on-2 contact drills, but trainer Fred Hina -- who worked Ware out prior to the practice -- did not give him the go-ahead. "He's doing really well," Hina said. "But he still has strength and confidence to gain. The bone is continuing to heal, and it will for some time."
The Louisville Courier-Journal has good news about Ware's status heading into the season:
Andy Katz of ESPN has an update from Louisville head coach Rick Pitino on Kevin Ware's rehab as he recovers from his leg injury:
TheCardinalConnect.com shared a video of Louisville guard Kevin Ware dunking as he tries to return from the injury that ended his season: 
UPDATE: July 15, at 1:07 p.m. ET by Brandon Galvin
Kevin Ware provides fans with an update on his recovery:
UPDATE: Tuesday, June 4, at 5:02 a.m. ET by Tom Kinslow
Kevin Ware is making great progress on the road to recovery from the gruesome injury that ended his season during the NCAA tournament.
According to Eric Crawford of WDRB.com, Ware has been shooting jump shots at Louisville's facilities:
Ware, who captured the attention of the nation when his right leg broke during the Cardinals' Elite Eight victory over Duke, was spied putting up jumpers at the U of L Yum! Center practice court Monday afternoon. Ware can't yet do much running or cutting. But trainer Fred Hina has challenged Ware to push his healing broken leg as much as he can in rehab. Ware said a month ago that he planned to hold nothing back in terms of pushing it to heal. "I'm not going to do anything to jeopardize it," he said. "But I'm not going to take it easy, either." U of L coach Rick Pitino said Ware is making good progress. "Kevin's doing great," Pitino said. "It's pretty amazing."
A few days ago, Ware let everyone know that he was able to stand up without any assistance via his Twitter account, so this latest step is even more encouraging.
UPDATE: Wednesday, Apr. 3, at 11:55 a.m. ET by Brandon Galvin
Exciting news, as Kevin Ware will travel with his Louisville teammates to be in Atlanta for the Final Four, according to an ESPN staff report:
UPDATE: Tuesday, April 2, at 3:15 p.m. ET by Timothy Rapp
Kevin Ware was reunited with his teammates on Tuesday, and Louisville's Chane Behanan posted the following photos of the encounter on Instagram (via The Cardinal Connect):
UPDATE: Tuesday, April 2, at 1:13 p.m. ET by Rob Goldberg
Great news for Kevin Ware and Louisville fans, as it appears the guard is on his way out of the hospital and is ready to join his team in Atlanta. He tweeted this picture on Tuesday:
UPDATE: Tuesday, April 2, at 12:20 p.m. ET by Timothy Rapp
Kevin Ware wants his mother to know that he's just fine. How do I know? Oh, it's just on this week's cover of Sports Illustrated:
UPDATE: Monday, Apr. 1, at 3:59 p.m. ET by Brandon Galvin
Kevin Ware wants the world to know he'll be fine. ESPN's Dana O'Neil has the latest from Ware:
Hopefully I'll be back in time to watch practice. It hurts but I'll be fine. I'll be fine. ... I jumped and my leg felt kind of funny. When Coach P tried to help me up, he gave me a funny kind of look. I'm looking at him and then I look down and I see my bone sticking out. It wasn't a hurt feeling. I just went into shock. In the moment, you don't know what's wrong with you. You're just looking, thinking, "How did this happen?" I never watched the replay. I never want to. ... Seeing Chane [Behanan] cry as hard as he ever cried, and Russ [Smith], coach, all of them, I just looked at Coach P and said, "You gotta pull yourself together. Tell the guys to come over here." They came over and they were still emotional but I meant it. I told them, "Don't worry about me. I'll be fine." I just had to block the pain out and put my situation on hold. I never back down for a challenge and to me, that's what this is. Just another challenge. I'll get through it. I wanted them to know that.
UPDATE: Monday, Apr. 1, at 11:44 a.m. ET by Brandon Galvin
Kevin Ware is already out of bed and using crutches to get around his hospital room. Kenny Klein, Louisville Senior Associate Athletic Director for Media Relations, tweeted a photo of Ware this morning. He also posted a photo of Ware with Rick and Richard Pitino.
UPDATE: Monday, Apr. 1, at 9:02 a.m. ET by Brandon Galvin
Kevin Ware's teammates celebrated the team's advancement to the Final Four with him at the hospital. Chris Douglas posted a photo on Twitter and Peyton Siva put one up on Instagram.
UPDATE: Sunday, March 31, at 11:00 p.m. ET by Dan Talintyre
The Courier Journal'sC.L. Brown reports that the surgery on Ware's leg has been successfully completed and the player will remain in Indianapolis until at least Tuesday, though the release date will obviously depend on how well his recovery goes.  
UPDATE: Sunday, March 31, at 8:30 p.m. ET by Tim Keeney
According to The Courier-Journal's Kyle Tucker, head coach Rick Pitino will stick around so he can be with Ware after surgery:
UPDATE: Sunday, March 31, at 7:38 p.m. ET by Rob Goldberg
The latest update comes from Rick Pitino. In a post-game interview, he explained that the injury will keep him out for a year (via Stewart Mandel of Sports Illustrated):
The squad then had a very emotional momentum after the game while holding up Ware's uniform (via Bleacher Report):
UPDATE: Sunday, March 31, at 6:38 p.m. ET by Rob Goldberg
According to Tracy Wolfson of CBS (via Bleacher Report), Ware had some motivational words for the Cardinals before leaving:
UPDATE: Sunday, March 31, at 6:34 p.m. ET by Rob Goldberg
Pat Forde of Yahoo! Sports reports that Ware will have surgery on the leg on Sunday night:
With just over six minutes remaining in the first half, Ware attempted to defend a three-point shot from Tyler Thornton. He landed awkwardly and his leg appeared to bend the wrong way on the court.
You can view a video of the injury here. (Warning: Please note that the image is disturbing.)
According to Pete Thamel of Sports Illustrated,Ware has officially broken his leg and was taken to the hospital:
What makes this even more unfortunate is the reaction from the teammates. After viewing the injury, the Louisville players struggled to keep their composure. 
Pat Forde of Yahoo! Sports described the initial sequence:
Pete Thamel of Sports Illustrated also discussed the reaction from the team:
However, that was just the beginning. Zach Schonbrun of the New York Times saw things get even worse on the bench:
You could see the agony on his teammates' faces while Ware was being carted off the court:
While the full extent of the injury is unknown,Luke Winn of Sports Illustratedhad some details:
Ware averaged 4.6 points and 1.8 rebounds in 17 minutes per game this season, and was a solid contributor on both sides of the court. He was also coming off his best game of the year with 11 points in Louisville's Sweet 16 win over Oregon. 
Louisville will now look to move past not only the physical loss of Ware, but also the emotional toll that seeing the injury up close took on the players. Hopefully, the Cardinals can play their best basketball to honor their injured teammate.