N.F.L. Players Ratify Labor Deal, Which Includes H.G.H. Testing
N.F.L. players ratified the new 10-year collective bargaining agreement Thursday, which includes blood testing for human growth hormone, making the N.F.L. the first major American sports league to start such testing with the consent of its players union. According to the league, the goal is to begin testing by the first week of the regular season, which starts Sept. 8, and players will be tested annually and randomly.
But many details must still be settled. The union and the league will discuss in the coming weeks the specific arrangements for the testing procedures, including whether testing for human growth hormone will be conducted in season and out of season; what type of test will be used; and the appeals process if a player tests positive. Because the tests for H.G.H. will be new, the appeals process could be slightly different from the one that will apply to the rest of the drug policy, the union said.
There is significant incentive for players to agree to an H.G.H. testing program in time for the start of the season. According to a person briefed on the agreement, if players do not agree to terms for the testing by Week 1, the league will operate under the 2010 drug policy — which means drug suspension appeals will be heard by the commissioner’s office, not by the independent arbitrator that the players wanted, and got, as part of the new deal — until the players do agree.
“We just want to get it right,” the union spokesman George Atallah said Thursday night.
The N.F.L. had wanted H.G.H. testing to be added to its drug policy, making it one of its top priorities as it negotiated with the union to wrap up the agreement over the past six days. DeMaurice Smith, executive director of the players union, had indicated his openness to blood testing for months. But in a conference call Wednesday night, player representatives raised concerns with union leaders about the reliability of the blood testing required to detect H.G.H. and how the blood testing would be implemented.
In a statement posted on ProPlayerInsiders.com, a Web site associated with the union, the former player Sean Morey, a member of the union’s executive committee, explained some of the players’ concerns.