Well done Cadel Evans, winner of the 2011 Tour de France
IT'S official - Cadel Evans is the first Australian to win the Tour de France.
As a purely sporting achievement, it is immense. But the impact of Evans's win goes further than today's podium moment. (For a full breakdown from a sports fan's point of view, see Fox Sports' Tour de France special site.)
His achievements on the Tour de France are now set to ensure his status as a barrier-breaking legend of Australian sport. "A few people always believed in me, I believed in me and here we are today," he said after crossing the finish line.
"We did it. I'll have to reflect on it a bit. Day by day, month by month, year by year - it's been a long process. It's been an amazing and a real pelasure this whole three weeks to do just about every aspect of it."
Prime Minister Julia Gillard has congratulated Cadel Evans on his expected Tour de France win, but has ruled out a public holiday in the cyclist's honour. Ms Gillard said she had called Evans to congratulate him after his time trial win.
"I do want to say a very big congratulations to Cadel Evans," she told reporters in Hobart today.
"We did share a joke about his impact on the economy of our nation. I suggested that he wasn't doing much good for national productivity because everyone was coming to work bleary-eyed," she said.
"He suggested that it'd all be all right in the end because people would feel so full of morale that they'd be cantering into work and working harder.
"So I'm not in a position to announce a public holiday for tomorrow, but I am in a position to share Cadel's view that ultimately we'll be more enthused about our daily tasks because we're celebrating his victory."
The last time an Australian prime minister spoke of a public holiday in honour of a sporting achievement was when Australia II won the America's Cup back in 1983. John Bertrand and his crew had to break a 132-year winning streak to get Bob Hawke excited enough to talk free sickies for all.
That's a good measure of how big Evans' effort is.
"If it doesn't hurt the economy, that's fine by me," said self-effacing Evans when the suggestion was put to him after his time trial heroics in Gronble on Saturday.
"Thanks Julia. I won't enter into any more political discussions there because it's been a nice day so far."
The Victorian rode down the Champs Elysees overnight with a glass of champagne in his hand, the yellow jersey on his back, knowing he had reached the summit of cycling's Mt Everest.
Australian cycling - and what it means to get on a bike - has changed forever.
Fox Sports: Sporting History - Cadel wins Tour de France Herald Sun: Cadel, the lionheart in yellow The Tour de France: Official website of the Tour Seatle Times: Australia's first Tour victory ..............................................................................................................