Wimbledon 2012: Heather Watson upsets Iveta Benesova
British number four Heather Watson claimed the highest-profile win of her career with a 6-2 6-1 victory over Iveta Benesova at Wimbledon.
The 20-year-old marked her Centre Court debut with an aggressive display to beat the world number 55 in a match that finished shortly before 21:00 BST.
It was the first win on Centre by a British woman since Jo Durie in 1985.
British debutant Oliver Golding, an 18-year-old wildcard, fought hard before losing in four sets to Igor Andreev.
Golding, ranked 398 places below the Russian, finally folded 1-6 7-6 (7-4) 7-6 (9-7) 7-5 in more than three hours.
But his valiant effort was outshone by Watson, the world number 103, who overwhelmed Benesova with winners off either wing and consistent, accurate serving to record her first win at the All England Club.
"I'm so pleased to have got through that - it was tough not knowing when we were on and waiting the whole day, but it worked out pretty well for me," she told BBC Sport.
"This is my first singles win at Wimbledon, including juniors, so I'm so pleased.
"I was lost in the moment, the crowd was amazing and I had the adrenaline going. I was having fun."
Watson was left in tears 12 months ago when, hindered by a right elbow injury, she lost to Mathilde Johansson in her opening match.
Her reaction was as different as the scoreline on this occasion as she skipped around Centre Court in the failing light.
Watson converted only four of the 20 break opportunities she created, but insists that she will continue to go for winners on the big points.
"Everybody is doing everything they can to get better, so you're going to have to take risks," she added.
"The biggest risk is not taking any. That's one of my favourite quotes."
Watson will play Jamie Lee Hampton in the next round after the American overcame Slovakian 27th seed Daniela Hantuchova in her opening match.
Golding, who turned professional after winning the 2011 US Open boys' title, has yet to win a match at ATP Tour level and faced a stern challenge from Andreev, a top-20 player in 2008.
Golding lost his serve in the opening game of the set, but falling behind seemed to purge him of any nerves.
He matched Andreev from the back of the court and showed a delicate touch when venturing to the net, hitting back with three breaks of his own to take the opener.
Golding's serve rarely looked in danger in the second and third sets, but he could not build enough pressure on Andreev, and he paid the price as he was outmuscled by his more experienced opponent in both tie-breaks.
Double faults began to infect his game in the decider and, having not done so since the very first game, Golding dropped serve to allow the match to slip away.
"I left everything out on the court. I couldn't have given anything more than what I did. It just wasn't to be today," he said.
Elsewhere fellow Briton Josh Goodall succumbed 6-4 3-6 7-6 (7-3) 6-4 in a first-round loss to Grega Zemlja.
Goodall, ranked fourth in the domestic game, has not won a singles match in five appearances in the main draw at Wimbledon.
A double fault in the third set tie-break proved costly and he was easily broken in the deciding fourth set.
Goodall, ranked 215th in the world, admits competing on the tour is a struggle financially and said he would reassess his future should his ranking not improve.
"I could probably hang around being 200 in the world for the rest of my career, but is that what I really want? I don't think it is," said Goodall, who has won three tournaments on the Futures Circuit this season.
"If I was getting thrashed every time I could say 'well, I'm not good enough' but I don't feel like that's the case.
"I'm not financially in the best state. Obviously playing Wimbledon helps a lot, but I've got rent to pay and stuff like that. I can't really afford things."
British number six Naomi Broady was eliminated from the women's draw as she fell victim to Spain's Lourdes Dominguez Lino 6-4 7-6 (7-4).
Compatriot Johanna Konta will resume her match with American Christina McHale at 7-7 in the final set on Tuesday after their contest was suspended as darkness fell.