Cleveland Cavaliers win the NBA draft lottery, get the first and fourth selections next month
SECAUCUS, N.J. -- What's not to like, indeed?
The Cavaliers won the NBA lottery for the second time in their history on Tuesday night and also collected the No. 4 pick as well.
After the disappointment of LeBron James' decision to bolt for South Beach last summer, this summer is starting off on a much higher note.
"It has been a rough, difficult road," said beaming owner Dan Gilbert, who was accompanied by sons Nick, 14, and Grant, 13, as well as minority owner Jeff Cohen and Browns legend Bernie Kosar and current players -- and Cavs fans -- Josh Cribbs and Joe Haden. "This is a new beginning Cleveland. We're coming back."
The lottery rewarded the pick originally belonging to the Los Angeles Clippers. The Cavs obtained that pick, along with Baron Davis, by sending Mo Williams and Jamario Moon to the Clippers at the trading deadline.
The Clippers finished with the eighth-worst record in the league and had just a 2.8 percent chance of winning the top spot, or 28 combinations out of the 1,001 that were divided among the 12 teams in the lottery. (Two teams, Cleveland and Utah, each had two picks.) But when the 14-13-7-8 combination came up first when the official lottery drawing was conducted in private about 90 minutes before the televised lottery program, it belonged to Cleveland.
Minnesota, which finished a league-worst 17-65 and had a 25 percent chance at winning the lottery, finished second, while Utah finished third with a pick that originally belonged to New Jersey. The Cavs' own selection, which had the second-highest number of lottery combinations, eventually took the fourth spot.
Nick Gilbert, who represented his father on stage, pounded his fist on the desk at that news, but when the Cavs got the No. 1 pick a few minutes later, he raised his right hand in triumph -- although it's not his biggest victory. The youngster suffers from neurofibromatosis (NF), a nerve disorder causes tumors to grow anywhere in the body at any time. He has suffered through brain surgery, the loss of vision in one eye, four rounds of chemotherapy and countless hours in doctors' offices and hospitals.
His father has called him his personal hero. When ESPN's Heather Cox asked Nick his reaction to that during last night's broadcast, he said, "What's not to like?"
That reaction caused his dad to laugh.
"You never know what's going to come out of the kid's mouth," Dan Gilbert said. "He really is quite lucky."
After the trauma of last summer, the devastating home loss to Miami on Dec. 2, all the injuries and the league-record 26-game losing streak, thanks to Nick, things are looking up for the organization.
"The people, the fans, the support in Cleveland has been overwhelming," Gilbert said. "It's what keeps us going. To be able to give this back to them...it gives them hope.
"This is a lot of hope for one night."
"What a great night," he said to reporters at The Q. "I can't be happier for our fans, for our organization, or Northeast Ohio. I was with our vice president of basketball operations David Griffith and Byron Scott, and we didn't hear anything anyone said after [the announcement] because we were hugging each other the whole time. It was an exciting time for us, too."
Naturally, Grant would not reveal the Cavs' plans, although most observers expect Duke point guard Kyrie Irving to be the first pick.
"I don't think we can assume anything at this point," said Grant, adding that the Cavs have much more research to do on the top players in the draft. "With the trade exception and the picks, the players we already have under contract, we have a lot of flexibility. I'm looking forward to the next few weeks to see what comes of that."
Irving, who lives about 20 minutes away from Secaucas, attended the lottery. He said he'd been to Cleveland to attend James' camps, and he realizes whoever goes No. 1 to Cleveland will be in an interesting position.
"Whoever Cleveland gets that's definitely a unique situation," he said before the lottery. "They need a new piece in there to round up the guys again. The fan support in Cleveland is already great, no matter what the team does."
For more Cinesport video on cleveland.com, go here.