Yankees Win in Grand Style on a Long and Wet Day
A six-run lead does not seem so formidable, however, when a team gets 17 at-bats with the bases loaded, as the Yankees did.
“For us to come back and do what we did shows the capability of this team,” Nick Swisher said.
Robinson Cano hit a grand slam in the fifth inning off Oakland starter Rich Harden, and Russell Martin hit one in the sixth inning off Fautino De Los Santos. It was the fourth time the Yankees had hit two grand slams in a game, but the first since Bernie Williams and Paul O’Neill connected at Toronto on Sept. 14, 1999. Granderson’s 36th home run of the season vaulted these Yankees into an elite category.
“It’s one of those things you’re not going to see again,” Derek Jeter said. “Can’t explain it. It’s just one of those things.”
Not that Granderson, or many of his teammates, were aware of what had been done until the achievement was displayed on a Yankee Stadium scoreboard after the game.
“You have to be pretty fortunate to be able to do that, because you have to get the bases loaded a lot,” Yankees Manager Joe Girardi said.
The Yankees started their comeback in earnest in the fifth inning. Jeter singled up the middle, and Harden walked Granderson before striking out Mark Teixeira. Rodriguez followed with a single to left field. That loaded the bases for Cano, who swung and missed at Harden’s first pitch. The second did not get by him. Cano drilled the ball into the right-field grandstands for his second grand slam this season.
Martin, who homered in the fourth inning to trim the Yankees’ deficit to 7-2, wiped out Oakland’s 7-6 lead by driving a pitch from De Los Santos into the first row in right field in the sixth.
Cano came up with the bases loaded in the seventh inning, driving in a run with a sacrifice fly to center. Martin came to the plate later that inning with the bases loaded, and hit a single to right to drive in his sixth run, a career high.
Martin hit a double off the base of the center-field wall in the eighth for his fifth hit, another career high. Brett Gardner then got a chance with the bases loaded and drove in a run with a single. Jeter struck out, but Granderson hit a pitch from Brian Fuentes for the record grand slam.
“I was surprised it hadn’t been done before,” he said.
Hughes said it would have been nice to have gotten more than eight outs in a shaky 78-pitch performance, but he was fortunate to leave the stadium with a no decision. After three sturdy starts, he gave up six runs and seven hits. Yankees fans seemed happy to see him go.
After Hughes exited, Cliff Pennington pounded Cory Wade’s first pitch into the second deck in right field for his seventh home run of the season, and a 7-1 lead for the Athletics. The crowd voiced its disapproval but the game was a long way from over.
“Makes it a little easier when you score 22 runs,” Hughes said of his no decision. He forced a smile before adding: “It was disappointing. A bump in the road.”
The sun came out in the fourth inning, cheering up the crowd of 46,439, who dropped their umbrellas and shed their ponchos. Soon enough, the Yankees would overcome the Athletics, building a fat lead and smashing records along the way.
There was only one minor detail left. Even before Granderson smacked his home run, Posada had told Girardi that he wanted to play second base for the first time as a major leaguer.
“It was just hard to say no,” Girardi said.
So out he went for the ninth. Recker hit a grounder to Posada, who fielded it cleanly, then paused before throwing to Swisher at first. Swisher had to twist to snag Posada’s hard throw on one bounce, but a memorable game was over, at long last.
“I threw it too hard,” Posada said. “I got super-excited.”
The Yankees had never hit two grand slams at home before. ... Alex Rodriguez had two hits after missing the previous two games with a sprained thumb.