Phone hacking: Rebekah Brooks charged with perverting course of justice
• Rebekah Brooks charged with three counts of conspiracy to pervert the course of justice • Her husband Charlie, PA Cheryl Carter, driver and two security officals also charged • Mr and Mrs Brooks denounce CPS decision as "weak and unjust" • All six to appear at Westminster Magistrates Court on June 13
Mrs Brooks learned this morning that she was to be taken to court over accusations of perverting the course of justice in relation to the phone hacking scandal. She will face three charges.
The former editor of the News of the World and the Sun attended Lewisham Police station in South London where she was charged.
She was charged with five others, including her husband Charlie Brooks, who attended Hammersmith Police station in West London.
The four others are Mrs Brooks's former PA Cheryl Carter, the company's head of security Mark Hanna, News International chauffeur Paul Edwards and security consultant Daryl Jorsling.
The charges include conspiring to conceal material from Scotland Yard detectives, conspiring to remove seven boxes of material from the archive of News International and conspiring to conceal documents, computers and other electronic equipment from detectives.
All six will appear before Westminster Magistrates Court on June 13.
Alison Levitt QC, principal legal adviser to the Director of Public Prosecutions, announced the decision at 10am, days after Mrs Brooks appeared at the Leveson inquiry into press ethics.
Rebekah Brooks arrives at Lewisham police station where she was charged with perverting the course of justice this morning
Mr and Mrs Brooks said: "We deplore this weak and unjust decision. After the further unprecedented posturing of the CPS we will respond later today after our return from the police station."
The three charges of perverting the course of justice were made against:
• Rebekah Brooks between July 6 and July 19, 2011. • Rebekah Brooks and Charyl Carter, between July 6 and July 9, 2011. • Rebekah Brooks and Charles Brooks, Mark Hanna, Paul Edwards and Daryl Jorsling, between July 15 and July 19, 2011.
Miss Levitt said: "Applying the two-stage test in the Code for Crown Prosecutors I have concluded that in relation to all suspects except the seventh, there is sufficient evidence for there to be a realistic prospect of conviction.
"I then considered the second stage of the test, and I have concluded that a prosecution is required in the public interest in relation to each of the other six.
"All seven suspects have this morning been informed of my decisions.
"They are all due to answer their bail at police stations later today."
She added the six would appear at Westminster Magistrates' Court.
Following the announcement, Miss Carter's solicitor issued a statement on her behalf, denying the charges.
Charlie Brooks, husband of former News International chief executive Rebekah Brooks, leaves Hammersmith police station in west London today.
The statement read: "Cheryl Carter understands that she is to be charged today with attempting to pervert the course of justice. She vigorously denies the commission of that or any offence.
"She would like to thank her family and friends for their continued support during this most unhappy period of her life. Neither she, nor I, will be making any further comment at this stage."
Mr Hanna also issued a statement denying the charges. He said: "I will be totally exonerated. As the CPS said in that statement, I am entitled to a fair trial.
"I am also innocent of the charges against me and I have no doubt that ultimately justice will prevail and I will be totally exonerated."
Responding to Mrs Brooks's statement, Keir Starmer, the Director of Public Prosecutions said it was "quite normal" for the CPS to make public announcements in high profile cases.
Speaking at the Police Federation Conference in Bournemouth, he said it was the "hallmark of an open and transparent prosecution service".
The former chief executive of News International, who resigned in July, was arrested in March along with her husband Charlie Brooks and five others.
They were questioned as part of part of Operation Sacha, an investigation into alleged attempts to destroy material relating to Scotland Yard’s inquiries into phone-hacking, computer hacking and corrupt payments to public officials.
Last month, officers from the Metropolitan Police passed a file to the Crown Prosecution Service on the seven people arrested.
All but the seventh were to be charged.
The group was questioned after it was claimed News International implemented an "email deletion policy" in response to legal action launched by phone hacking victims against News Group Newspapers, which published the News of the World.
David Cameron and Rebekah Brooks exchanged text messages warning they should not be seen together (Daffydd Jones)
Last year, police examined a computer, paperwork and a mobile phone allegedly found in a bag in a bin near the Brooks’ London home the day after Mrs Brooks had been arrested on suspicion of conspiring to intercept communications and of corrupting police officers.
Mrs Brooks’s spokesman said at the time that the bag and its contents belonged to Charlie Brooks, a columnist for The Daily Telegraph, and were nothing to do with Mrs Brooks or the phone-hacking case.
The discovery of the bag in a bin was put down by Mr Brooks to a mix-up over where the bag should be dropped off after he lent it to a friend. Mr Brooks said he had contacted police in an attempt to reclaim the bag after a cleaner found it and gave it to a security guard, who passed it to police.
Mr and Mrs Brooks and the five others were told of the CPS’s decision moments before it was publicly announced.
Anyone charged with the offence can only be tried in a crown court, where the maximum sentence for those found guilty of perverting the course of justice is life imprisonment.
So far, no-one has been charged since Scotland Yard launched a fresh investigation into phone-hacking in January last year.
More than 40 people remain on bail after being questioned by detectives.
Mrs Brooks, 43, appeared at the Leveson inquiry on Friday but she could not be questioned about the allegations of phone hacking at the News of the World because of the criminal inquiry.