PC Yvonne Fletcher murder: UK police to fly to Libya
A Metropolitan Police team is to fly to Libya to continue the investigation into the murder of PC Yvonne Fletcher, Prime Minister David Cameron has said.
PC Fletcher, 25, was shot while policing a protest against the Gaddafi regime at the Libyan embassy in London in 1984 and later died.
He said the visit was a "really positive step forward" in the inquiry.
"I'm delighted that we're working closely together on issues of mutual interest including having a Metropolitan Police team going to Libya to continue the investigation into the murder of PC Yvonne Fletcher," he said.
"I think that is a really positive step forward and I know it will be welcomed by everyone in Britain."
Scotland Yard has never charged anyone with PC Fletcher's murder, even though the shots that killed her were fired from inside the Libyan embassy.
Staff there claimed diplomatic immunity and were deported.
Mr El-Keib, who was in exile during Col Muammar Gaddafi's regime, promised Libya would "work very closely together" with the UK to help with any questions during the investigation.
Diplomatic ties between Libya and the UK were severed following the murder of PC Fletcher.
Her shooting sparked an 11-day siege of the Libyan embassy in St James's Square in London.
Mr El-Keib told Mr Cameron: "The Fletcher case is a case that is close to my heart personally.
"I had friends who were demonstrating that day next to the embassy."
He said it was a sad story and expressed regret that it had anything to do with the Libyan people.
"I am here to tell you that we will work very closely together to resolve anything related to that issue."
Fresh hope that PC Fletcher's killer might be eventually found was raised in 2011, after Col Gaddafi was toppled in the Libyan revolution.
But plans to send UK police to the country have so far been delayed after officers failed to get permission from Libyan authorities.
The Met said it welcomed any developments which could assist in furthering the investigation.
"The investigation has always remained open and the inquiry team within the Counter Terrorism Command remains committed to identifying those people responsible", said a spokesperson.
"We look forward to travelling to Libya to discuss taking the inquiry further forward with the Libyan authorities."
Commander Richard Walton, head of the Counter Terrorism Command, added: "We have never lost our resolve to solve this murder and achieve justice for Yvonne's family. We see today's announcement as significant."
Meanwhile, Scotland's most senior law officer, Lord Advocate Frank Mulholland, has met Mr El-Keib in London to discuss further inquires into the Lockerbie bombing.
Mr El-Keib reaffirmed his commitment to co-operate with Scottish authorities but asked for clarification about any proposed investigation.
The meeting also involved the chief constable of Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary.