Julian Assange 'The World Tomorrow' — Ep. 7
Julian Assange and the Occupy movement have much in common. They both criticize governments and are often condemned by the mainstream media. In the latest episode of Assange's talk show, "The World Tomorrow", they discuss the spread of the Occupy protests in the U.S.A. Normally Assange's interviews are held in his own home where he is under house-arrest, but this week, due to the size of the crowd, it was held in the old Deutche Bank of London, which is controlled by friends of Occupy. Since its start in September 2011, the Occupy movement has united hundred and thousands of people worldwide in a fight against social and economic inequality. Assange interviews prominent Occupy activists who state that their collective efforts target global institutions. The financial crisis is virtually worldwide. This caused the Occupy activists, who call themselves the 99%, to protest. Social media has played a large role in the Occupy movement. The whole movement evolved as activists worldwide cooperated online. While cooperating online is good for facilitating events, people prefer to meet face-to-face, hence the movement grew. While the Occupy movement came into being in the U.S., the movement was largely inspired by the 15m Indignados in Spain. Many 15m members were in New York and attended the general assemblies in Zucotti Park. The Occupy movement learned a lot from these indignados, as well as Egyptian activists who were also in attendance. “There has been a sort of global movement that started in Tunisia and swept across the Mediterranean: Greece, Spain. So it’s really the same movement that hit America,” Graeber declared. David Graeber from Occupy New York explained that the “the revolt is always in the name of democracy.” “There is the first really effective planetary bureaucracy which is created in the name of the sort of 'free-market' ideology, which is supposed to stand against it, bureaucracy, but in fact exactly the opposite,” he says. Aaron Peters from Occupy London states that social movements are “always born out of grievance” and what is happening now would be impossible without the global financial crisis. The Occupy activists feel that the movement has happened at just the right moment, when there is an immediate need to unite and to stand for the economic and social rights of the majority. Graeber says, “There’s a feeling out there that the enemy is becoming increasingly globalized, and the only way it can be challenged is by global movements.” Alexa O'Brien of Occupy New York and the U.S. Day of Rage says that the movement is not just about the global financial crisis but is also about a global political crisis, because “institutions are no longer functional.” Peters agreed with her, saying that political failure is a global phenomenon. “We now recognize that public policy outcomes aren't happening at the national level, and that policy makers aren't actually the ones who are in national parliaments. They are elsewhere, and the ones that are dictating policy aren't any way accountable, or, you know, they are not democratic representatives.” When asked about how to deal with people who misbehave or infiltrate Occupy meetings, it was mentioned as an example that the police dumped recently released prisoners in Zucotti Park telling them "Hey, there's free food here". Graeber concluded by quoting William F. Buckley who said, "I'd rather be governed by the first 300 people in the phone book than the people currently in government." The World Tomorrow " is broadcast live every Tuesday on RT at 11:30 GMT and published on Digital Journal as soon as the video is available.