George Osborne: alleged Tory deal with Murdoch is 'complete nonsense'
George Osborne has dismissed the notion that the Conservatives cut a deal with Rupert Murdoch to hand him ownership of BSkyB in exchange for support from the Sun as "complete nonsense".
The chancellor told the Leveson inquiry on Monday afternoon that "you would have to be a real fantastist to believe" what he described as a "vast conspiracy theory" in which the Conservatives had also somehow fixed it that "Vince Cable, a Liberal Democrat" was put in charge of the BSkyB bid and then "secretly recorded" saying he had declared war on Murdoch.
Getting in a dig at Gordon Brown, who testified to the Leveson inquiry earlier in the day, Osborne said this theory was "what the previous person at this inquiry alleged this morning. It is complete nonsense and the facts simply don't bear it out".
He said for the theory to work, the Tories would also have had to have fixed it for the Daily Telegraph to hold back Cable's Murdoch remarks from publication.
"That information [Cable's remarks] then emerges in the middle of the afternoon and we then, all part of this cunning plan, put Mr [Jeremy] Hunt in charge. It doesn't stack up. We were following procedures," Osborne added.
He said he kept a legally required distance from the discussions on the BSkyB bid and after Cable's remarks became public on 21 December 2010, he attended a meeting at Number 10 to discuss the escalating crisis that ensued.
Osborne added that he told the meeting, which was at 4pm on 21 December, that he personally did not think Cable should have resigned. The Downing Street permanent secretary, Jeremy Heywood, suggested he should go and the job be given to Hunt, the culture secretary, according to Osborne.
He confirmed he sent a text to Hunt after the meeting at 4.58pm saying "I hope you like the solution". But Osborne said he had not read a text sent by Hunt to him at 4.08pm in which he warned that Cable was going to "screw this thing up".
Osborne also told the inquiry he saw News Corp's bid for BSkyB as a "political inconvenience" but said he did not have strong views about the aborted £8bn deal.
The Conservative chancellor said he thought the proposed News Corp/BSkyB tie-up "was just going to cause us trouble one way or the other. Indeed so it has proved to be".
"I didn't have a strong view about its merits," he said. "I regarded the whole thing as a political inconvenience ... the best way to deal with it was to stick by the process," Osborne said.
"I just thought it was either going to offend a group of newspapers and, indeed, broadcasters who we wanted to have good relations with ... if it was accepted, and if it was rejected, it was going to offend another bunch of people who we want to have good relationships with."
Osborne described himself as an "external observer of the process" of approving the bid in 2010 and 2011, adding that his own personal view was that "this is all politically inconvenient for us. And I think that judgement has been borne out by events".
Pressed by Robert Jay QC, counsel to the inquiry, as to his own take of the proposed takeover, Osborne replied: "As far as I could see, it was about increasing the shareholding in a company that most people would think they ran anyway."
Jay said the perspective – that News Corp ran BSkyB anyway – chimed with the position being taken by Rupert Murdoch's media company, both publicly and privately.
"As I say, I didn't have a view," replied Osborne. "I mean, the European Commission had made a ruling on the competition aspects. Ofcom and the secretary of state were going to make judgments on the plurality aspects."
Osborne said he had discussed the BSkyB bid with James Murdoch in a meeting on 29 November 2010 as part of a "broader conversation about the political situation".
"At some point in the conversation he raised his frustration with how long, as he saw it, the process was taking. I made it very clear that that was not a process that I was involved in in any way," he added.
Asked about a dinner conversation with Rebekah Brooks on 13 December 2010 which, she said, included a discussion about the BSkyB bid in which the chancellor "expressed bafflement" at Ofcom's issues letter over the takeover, Osborne said he could not remember the details of the exchange but did not deny it took place.
"Well, I certainly remember the dinner," said Osborne. "I don't have any recollection of the conversation, but I don't question that it took place. I'm not doubting what Mrs Brooks says.
"I noticed in her evidence to this inquiry she said it was perhaps a three-minute conversation and that I'd looked slightly perplexed.
"I have read the Ofcom issues letter in preparation for appearing before you today and I think that is the first time I've ever read that letter.
"So I'm perfectly prepared to accept that there was a conversation, I just have no memory of it and perhaps the reason I was perplexed or baffled was because I hadn't actually read the Ofcom issues letter."
Osborne said he had never discussed the BBC licence fee with Rupert Murdoch, but it was raised in a conversation with James Murdoch on 20 October 2010.
Osborne, who said he could not be sure whether it was a phone conversation or face to face, said Murdoch was "quite angry" about the, just finalised, licence fee settlement.
"I have a pretty clear memory of him being quite angry about the decision we had taken, and I explained to him why I thought it was the right decision and why ... we had always made it clear that we were not setting out to dismantle the BBC or radically cut the licence fee or distribute the licence fee in a different way, but he was clearly disappointed with that decision," he added.
Asked about Murdoch's MacTaggart lecture in Edinburgh in 2009, in which Murdoch launched a fierce attack on the BBC, Osborne said: "I thought it was – I don't mean this in a pejorative sense – it was typical. It was what he thought and what he was telling anyone who wanted to listen to him at the time.
"I disagreed with him, basically, and certainly David Cameron also disagreed with him ... he had been agitating for some dramatic change in the funding of the BBC or the structure of the BBC and he was not going to get that from the Conservatives.
"I never discussed with him Ofcom and I don't remember personally being involved in any great internal discussion within the Conservative party about the future of Ofcom. There was a general concern that Ofcom had become, like many quangoes, rather bloated, but that was not a complaint about the function of Ofcom – just, like many parts of government, that there had not been a proper regard for cost."
• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for publication".
• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian onTwitterandFacebook.