Gordon Brown: I never declared war on Rupert Murdoch
The former Prime Minister admitted he spoke to Mr Murdoch on the phone in early November 2010 to complain about The Sun's coverage of the war in Afghanistan.
But he denied earlier evidence by Mr Murdoch that there was an angry call between the two men, in which Mr Brown threatened to 'declare war' on the newspaper owner's media empire.
"There is no evidence of this call happening at the time he said this call happened," Mr Brown said. "The call did not happen the threat was not made."
Mr Brown said he found it "offensive" that the newspaper tried to "ruin party conference" by withdrawing its support, but he claims he never contacted Mr Murdoch about it.
He was more concerned about The Sun's suggestions that he had disrespected troops by failing to bow at a cenotaph and sent a letter to the mother of a dead soldier littered with mistakes.
The former Prime Minister said he did try to get Mr Murdoch to stop these "personal" attacks.
"I still fee huge damage was done to the war effort by the suggestion we didn't care about our troops," he said.
The Leveson inquiry also heard Gordon Brown got an apology from a Scottish hospital over the leaking of his son's medical condition to The Sun.
The former Prime Minister said he did not believe the newspaper learned that his son has cystic fibrosis from the father of a fellow sufferer.
Fife NHS Trust said it does not believe medical records were accessed, but it does think a member of its staff spoke about Mr Brown's son's condition.
He said The Sun had not been "honest" in it's claims that Mr Brown and his wife gave it permission to run the story. He said his wife was presented with The Sun's story as a "fait accompli".
However, he admitted his wife continued to be friendly with Rebekah Brooks, the former editor of The Sun and News International boss, sending her a number of personal messages.
Mr Brown also said journalists had tried illegally to get every type of personal record about him, from legal information to bank details.