Scarborough shooting kills two, injures 19
A reckless exchange of bullets at a crowded outdoor party in Toronto killed two young people late Monday night in what the city’s police chief described as an unprecedented episode of gun violence.
At least 19 others, including an infant, were injured after bullets from more than one gun were sprayed into the crowd of more than 200 people at a outdoor barbecue in the city’s east end.
Toronto police now have a “person of interest” in custody.
Homicide investigators have been working “relentlessly through the night” and interviewing scores of witnesses after the shooting, which killed a 14-year-old girl and a 23-year-old man, Police Chief Bill Blair said.
Their names have not been released.
“I’ve been a cop for 35 years and this is the worst incident of gun violence, in my memory, anywhere in North America,” said chief Blair. “It’s very shocking. A lot of innocent people were injured tonight.”
The infant, who is under three years old, is in stable condition.
In addition to those wounded, others received injuries as a result of the widespread panic that ensued after shots were fired.
“I am shocked an disgusted by this senseless act of violence,” read a statement from Mayor Rob Ford early Tuesday morning. “I want to assure residents that this horrific criminal behaviour will not be tolerated.”
A number of area residents took to social media in the aftermath of the gunfire to express their shock at the violence.
“I’m praying for the people out there, now I’m hearing my family got shot,” said one woman. “I just seen a 19 year old die. Honestly things just need to be peaceful.”
Another young woman posted about 17 ambulances gathering outside her building and expressed her concern at the state of the neighbourhood.
“I see rum and beer on the ground and there is blood on my foot,” she wrote. “(They) were spraying bullets at random people in my neighbourhood.”
Police say the shooting took place at about 10:40 p.m. at 193 Danzig Avenue, near Morningside Avenue and Lawrence Avenue East.
“An altercation broke out among some individuals and there was an exchange of gunfire. During that gunfire a number of innocent bystanders were struck,” Blair said.
Blair said the Toronto Police homicide unit had taken over the investigation. The Emergency Task Force is also on the scene.
Officers have been called in from surrounding divisions to assist in the investigation.
Police are asking anyone with information on the shooting to call 43 Division at 416-808-4300 or Crimestoppers at 1-800-222-TIPS.