Dutch, U.S. authorities investigating needles in airline sandwiches
A second passenger aboard the same flight, Jack Drogt, told ABC's "Good Morning America" on Tuesday that he not only found a needle, but he also discovered after landing that his son found one in his sandwich aboard another flight from Amsterdam.
The objects were discovered in the sandwiches as the planes were flying Sunday from Schiphol Airport in the Netherlands to Minneapolis, Seattle and two flights to Atlanta, according to Delta spokeswoman Kristin Baur. Two of the needles were found by passengers, she said. An air marshal aboard another flight found a needle.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection issued a brief statement Tuesday saying it had seized at least one item of food containing a "foreign object" and turned it over to the FBI, which has said it is conducting a criminal investigation.
On Tuesday, Robert van Kapel, spokesman for the military police in Schiphol, said detectives there were looking into who put the needles into the sandwiches and why. Military police provide police services at civilian airports in the Netherlands, according to the Defense Ministry.
"This is a terribly upsetting situation," Gate Gourmet spokeswoman Christina Ulosevich said. "First and foremost is the safety of the traveling public. There's nothing more important to us at all than the safety of the passengers and crews."
He described the needle that punctured the roof of his mouth as being about an inch long. He said it looked like a sewing needle but did not have an eye.
"It happened so quick," he said. "I called the flight attendants, and they immediately took it. They didn't make an announcement, but they did go around and collect (the sandwiches)," he said.
"Delta requires all its in-flight caterers to adhere to strict criteria in order to offer our customers the very best onboard meals," Baur said in a statement. "The safety and security of our passengers and crew is Delta's No. 1 priority."
The discovery of needles does raise questions about oversight of off-site food preparation, where numerous people have access to food before containers are locked, he said.
Among those questions, Fuentes said, are, "Who is watching the people who are preparing the food? What kind of background checks are they going through? What kind of security exists at those locations?"