Man questioned at Miami airport released; no charges – This Just In
[Updated at 12:50 p.m.] The man questioned overnight by the FBI after authorities found a suspicious object in his luggage at Miami International Airport has been told he is free to go, a U.S. government official told CNN.
"The container was a legitimate experiment," the official said, adding that the man, a U.S. citizen, will not be charged.
[updated at 10:55 a.m.] The man currently being questioned by the FBI after a suspicious object was found in his luggage at Miami International Airport is a scientist who once spent time in prison for illegally transporting vials of deadly bubonic plague, CNN has learned.
The 70-year-old man, whom CNN is not naming because he has not been charged, was convicted of transporting the plague nearly a decade ago.
The man's criminal history helps explain why authorities shut down much of Miami International Airport late Thursday for about eight hours, and why first responders in hazmat suits were dispatched to the scene.
Authorities now say the man is cooperating with investigators, and that the device - which looked like a pipe bomb - found inside his checked luggage was found to be harmless.
The man had arrived on a flight from Brazil when TSA screeners found the device. Screeners were screening the bag evidently because it was to be placed on a connecting flight.
Authorities stress that the man has not been charged.
[Original post] A passenger was detained and bomb squad investigators were at Miami International Airport on Friday after investigators spotted a suspicious item in a baggage screening area, authorities said.
A passenger was in law enforcement custody, the Transportation Security Administration said in a statement early Friday morning. Authorities did not provide details about whether the passenger had been charged or what investigators found.
All concourses of the airport except for Concourse J were closed early Friday, said Javier Baez with Miami-Dade Police.
Concourses E and F were evacuated at 9:30 p.m. Thursday after the item was found, said Greg Chin, a Miami-Dade Aviation Department spokesman. Authorities rerouted arriving flights to other parts of the airport.
Investigators from Miami-Dade Police, the Transportation Security Administration and the Department of Homeland Security responded to the incident, the Transportation Security Administration said in a statement. Airport roads were also closed "to ensure public safety," the statement said.