Radical Islamist Abu Hamza al-Masri extradited to U.S.
"We have worked tirelessly -- alongside the U.S. authorities, the police and the prison service -- to put plans in place so that tonight these men could be handed over within hours of the court's decision," May said. "It is right that these men, who are all accused of very serious offenses, will finally face justice."
The charges against al-Masri include conspiracy in connection with a 1998 kidnapping of 16 Westerners in Yemen, and conspiring with others to establish an Islamic jihad training camp in rural Oregon in 1999. He could be sentenced to life in prison if convicted.
The UK Home Office earlier welcomed the High Court decision, and May said in her statement "that these men ... used every available opportunity to frustrate and delay the extradition process over many years."
"All of these defendants will be guaranteed the same rights provided to American citizens charged with crimes in the U.S. They will be afforded a full opportunity to challenge the evidence against them in U.S. courts," an embassy statement said.
The suspects' lawyers had sought to persuade Thomas and a second senior judge to prevent the extradition on medical and human rights grounds. It had already been approved by British courts, the European Court of Human Rights and Britain's home secretary.
"Today I have lost my eight-year and two-month battle against extradition. I would like to thank all those over the years who supported me and my family: lawyers, politicians, journalists and members of the public from all walks of life," it said.
He added: "We will never abandon our struggle for justice and the truth will eventually emerge of what will be forever remembered as a shameful chapter in the history of Britain."
He also dismissed the medical argument put forward by Bary's lawyer against extradition, saying: "It is clear to us that there has been no material change in the psychological condition of Abdul Bary."
Lawyers for Ahmad and Ahsan presented what they said was fresh evidence to support their calls for the two men to be charged with similar terrorism-supporting offenses in Britain, rather than have them face trial in the United States.
"As in the UK, legal counsel will be provided at the expense of the U.S. government if the defendants do not have the resources to pay themselves," a U.S. Embassy briefing note on the extradition said.