Girl killed in Pakistani-administered Kashmir acid attack
A mother and father in Pakistani-administered Kashmir have been arrested for murdering their 15-year-old daughter by dousing her with acid "in the name of an honour", police say.
They say it is one of the first such cases of its kind in the region.
Honour killings happen when mostly male family members believe the victim has brought dishonour to their community.
The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan reported 943 women were killed in honour killings last year.
That represented an increase of more than 100 from 2010.
But such happenings are rare in parts of Kashmir under the control of Pakistan.
Police say that the incident took place in a remote village in the southern district of Kotli. They say that the case was brought to their attention by the couple's eldest daughter.
It will not be clear until Friday - when the parents are due in court - if they admit or deny murder charges.
Local police officer Raja Tahir Ayub told the BBC that the girl's father became enraged when he saw his daughter "looking at two boys" riding on a motorcycle outside their home on Monday.
Police say that the parents suspected she was having illicit relations with one of the pair.
"He took his daughter inside, beat her up and then poured acid over her with the help of his wife," Mr Ayub said.
Police say that that the couple did not take their daughter to hospital until the next morning, and she succumbed to her injuries on Tuesday evening.
The head of the state-run district hospital in Kotli - Muhammad Jahangir - confirmed the death.
He said that the girl was brought to hospital in a serious condition with more than 35% burns.
"There was no way she could survive," he said.
Police say that the dead girl's married elder sister informed them of the alleged incident on Wednesday morning.
They say that she became suspicious when her parents did not allow mourners to see the face of the dead girl before she was buried - otherwise a normal practise in Kashmiri Muslim society.
In March the government of Pakistani-administered Kashmir made acid attacks a criminal offence punishable with life imprisonment.