Maria Ridulph’s Killer Gets Life 55 Years After Her Death
“Witnesses have compared this to remembering where they were when President Kennedy was shot,” he said. “That’s the impact that this kidnapping had on this community.”
During the trial, prosecutors argued that Mr. McCullough, then 17, befriended Maria and a playmate, and later choked her with a wire and stabbed her.
But Mr. McCullough’s public defender, Tom McCulloch, said the outrage over Maria’s kidnapping has itself been an issue in a case where many potential witnesses were long dead and those still alive gave testimony about events that took place decades ago.
“There were a lot of problems,” Mr. McCulloch said, adding that he had filed an appeal with the 16th Judicial Circuit Court. “This was almost like a public Salem witch trial thing.”
He said that no forensic evidence had tied his client to the crime and that the prosecution’s main witnesses were Maria’s playmate, now 63, who identified Mr. McCullough from a photograph taken in the 1950s, and one of Mr. McCullough’s sisters, who testified that their mother had identified him as the killer in 1994 as she lay dying.
The case was believed to be the oldest unsolved murder in the nation to result in an arrest. But legal scholars said that the very age of the case — and of the man convicted of the murder — raised questions about the goals of a prison sentence.
“We’ve never fully resolved whether we think of sentencing as mostly a backward-looking assessment of what a person deserves or a forward-looking assessment of what society needs,” said Douglas A. Berman, a law professor at Ohio State University who highlighted Mr. McCullough’s case on his blog, Sentencing Law and Policy. “I couldn’t imagine a more starkly drawn example.”
Mr. Berman said that if Mr. McCullough had not committed further crimes — he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor in the 1980s but otherwise appears to have avoided the criminal justice spotlight — he should perhaps “get some slight sentencing benefit for proving himself not to be a continuing threat to society.”
But Joshua Marquis, the district attorney in Clatsop County, Ore., and a member of the board of directors of the National District Attorneys Association, said: “We don’t punish people for what they are now. We punish them for the acts they committed.”
Mr. Marquis said that Mr. McCullough would end up paying only “a fraction of the cost that he would have paid if he would have been caught in a timely fashion.”
Still, that payment is likely to last through his remaining years.
“Jack’s 73 years old,” Mr. McCulloch said. “Most any sentence he got today is going to have some aspect of a life sentence.”