ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Northern Territory police say they are sheltering a number of people in a house at Yuendumu, as more forces arrive to deal with violence at the remote Central Australian community.
Alice Springs Commander Anne-Marie Murphy says a group of 20 to 30 people armed with iron bars and sticks have set fire to five cars and a house and there are reports five people have been injured.
"There are a number of people that are being targeted by the offenders and we are making every effort to keep them safe and keeping them in a secure area that we can monitor and look after them," she said.
No arrests have been made but police say the offenders will be dealt with.
Police have taken the unusual step of issuing a travel warning for the community and a tactical response team is being flown in to try to calm things down.
Earlier this week police increased their numbers in Yuendumu because of ongoing threats of violence between families.
Police say the situation was exacerbated by the stabbing death of a Yuendumu resident in Alice Springs and the subsequent arrest of two people over the death.
Long-term Yuendumu resident Frank Baarda says the trouble in the community is linked to the stabbing death, but it is not payback in the traditional sense.
"A long time ago payback used to be very ritualised and so on, and now it's not quite the same now; it's a little bit less structure and so on," he said.
Mr Baarda warns against drawing conclusions about Yuendumu and worries what the violence will mean for the community's reputation.
"All I know is that in situations like this, in the past people have tended to overreact and make it sound like it was a war zone," he said.
"Whilst as I say the place is tense and there's been some fights and disturbances... a few cars got burnt down and it's not necessarily over because that tension's still there.
"At the same time, I can say that at the moment things are very calm and that it doesn't affect non-Warlpiri people that are not directly related to the incident in town."
Vice-president of the NT branch of the Australian Education Union Stephen Nimmo is also worried about disruptions for the town's children.
"The violence in the community will automatically lead to fewer kids attending school," he said.
"Whilst there were 20 kids at the school, there's normally an awful lot more than 20 kids at that school.
"So that's obviously having an immediate effect and you're not sure how long it's going to take before attendance levels return to normal.
"When this sort of incident happens there's often relocations of family groups away from the community which causes a certain amount of unrest.
"In the longer term, it makes it very difficult to staff remote schools because if you're thinking of working remote in the Northern Territory and you look up Yuendumu and you find violence and lockdowns as the first things on your Google search, you're probably going to think of maybe working somewhere else."