3 found slain in rural Sonoma County home
Three men were found shot to death Tuesday inside a small home on a wooded property in rural west Sonoma County in a slaying that authorities described as a targeted attack.
The men - none of whom lived at the home - were found in a bedroom at about 3:15 p.m. by a brother of one victim.
The brother and his girlfriend had grown concerned when they could not reach the dead man on the telephone for four to six hours, said Sonoma County sheriff's Lt. Dennis O'Leary.
He said one of the other two victims had a family member associated with the home, which sits behind the main house on a 10-acre property on the 9700 block of Ross Station Road, between Graton and Forestville west of Highway 116.
The men were pronounced dead at the scene. O'Leary declined to identify them, but said they had no known history with local law enforcement.
He said detectives - who had to back out of the home for a time to wait for a search warrant after the initial discovery - found no signs of a struggle.
"This was not a random crime," O'Leary said. "I don't believe there is any danger to the citizens of Sonoma County or anywhere else."
He said he believed the killings happened Tuesday.
After deputies responded to the scene in the afternoon, neighbors reported that they had heard sounds earlier in the day that might have been gunfire. They didn't immediately report the sounds, O'Leary said, because they thought they might be the innocent pops of controlled burns in the area.
Efforts to reach the property owners - who live in the main house, according to neighbors, and rent out other houses on their land - were unsuccessful. The property is located off of a narrow paved road that leads to the Iron Horse winery.
As deputies swarmed the property late Tuesday, working out of a mobile command center, neighbors said they were stunned.
"This is just really unexpected on a street that's very quiet and peaceful," longtime resident Kathi Spork said. "It's just sad, and I'm waiting to hear more."