Atlanta testing scandal begins long march to justice
ATLANTA -- The indictment has been handed down, the charges filed and dozens of educators freed on bond as the alleged, massive cheating scandal involving standardized test scores in the city's public schools winds its way through the legal system.
Thanks to the large number of defendants and complicated charges, that could take awhile.
David Chamberlain, assistant to Fulton County Superior Court Judge Jerry Baxter, said a plea and arraignment hearing for the 35 indicted educators had not been set. He also said he didn't know if the educators would have individual hearings or a group one.
The star of the show, former schools superintendent Beverly Hall, was freed on a $200,000 bond Tuesday night. All the defendants were indicted Friday on 65 counts, including racketeering, making false statements and improperly influencing witnesses.
The racketeering charges involve Georgia's Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations statute. The law is modeled on the federal RICO statute used to prosecute organized crime.
RICO cases involve establishing a criminal enterprise, in this case the Atlanta Public Schools system, and a pattern of criminal behavior.
"This is difficult case, and you will find people at the lower end of the totem pole saying 'All I was doing was following orders," said Jeffrey Grell, a former assistant attorney general in Minnesota and expert on RICO cases. "People higher up might claim they had no idea that any of this was happening, that 'nobody ever told me about it, this is something they did without my authority.'"
Grell said he expects that prosecutors are trying to work out plea agreements with some defendants who may be able to testify against people "higher up."
The investigation was sparked by reports of widespread erasures on student 2009 Criterion-Referenced Competency Tests. The center of the controversy is Hall, who was named national superintendent of the year in 2009 by the American Association of School Administrators -- in large part because of students' improvement on standardized tests.
District Attorney Howard's 21-month criminal investigation followed a 2011 probe initiated by then-governor Sonny Perdue into testing irregularities and cheating allegations on 2008-2009 standardized exams in dozens of schools.
Howard created a special unit of prosecutors and investigators to explore potential criminal activity connected with the allegations. The investigation included a review of testing activity associated with at least 50 of the city's public schools.
Prosecutors allege the 35 defendants conspired to either cheat, conceal cheating or retaliate against whistleblowers in an effort to bolster test scores -- and obtain bonuses -- dating back as far as 2005.
In addition to Hall, the indicted defendants include four high- level executive administrators, six principals, two assistant principals, six testing coordinators, 14 teachers, a school improvement specialist and a school secretary.
Hall, superintendent from 1999 to 2011, and other defendants have maintained their innocence.
"I consider this one of the most important, one of the seminal developments in the history of American education law. It's the largest school teaching scandal yet recorded in the country," University of Georgia law professor emeritus Ron Carlson said. "A high-profile case like this one puts public attention and public pressure on the various moves made by prosecutors and defense attorneys."
Meanwhile, in Atlanta, school must go on.
"We intend to let the legal process take its course," current schools Superintendent Erroll Davis said. "Our focus has been and will continue to be to provide a quality education for our children in an ethical environment and fully support the 95% of teachers who were not implicated in this scandal."