A.T.M. Robbery Suspects May Have Caused Own Undoing
Despite the sophistication of the crime, the men from Yonkers seemed genuinely awe-struck by their good fortune, according to a law enforcement official involved in the investigation, and their eagerness to flash their profits helped lead to their arrests.
Alberto Yusi Lajud-Peña, who is believed to have been the leader of the crew, fled to Dominican Republic and quickly bought a pickup truck as he started spending what apparently was his share of the take.
He was killed last month, the victim of a botched robbery devised by his in-laws, according to local law enforcement officials. And the splurges on luxury goods by other members of the crew — many documented in photographs snapped on their cellphones — helped build prosecutors’ case against them.
After the scope and details of the crime became public on Thursday with the unsealing of an indictment in Brooklyn, bank managers flooded the authorities with worried calls, and anyone with a bank card tucked in a wallet was left to wonder, in a world where millions of dollars can be moved with a keystroke, how safe savings were.
But most of the New York crew members seemed to be unaware of the dimensions of their crime, said law enforcement officials and people who have spoken to the young men who have been charged.
“They probably couldn’t even find the countries where this scheme was created” on a map, said Patrick Brackley, a lawyer representing Elvis Rafael Rodriguez, one of those indicted.
Mr. Rodriguez, like the others, entered a not-guilty plea. But Mr. Brackley did not dispute that Mr. Rodriguez was one of the people shown in photographs posing proudly with stacks of stolen cash.
“That is the class of criminal you are dealing with,” Mr. Brackley said, noting that whatever the skills required of the global operation, the New York participants were at the “very, very low, low end.”
Investigators around the world are still working to identify members of the network and to determine how it was organized and how its participants were recruited. In court documents made public, investigators point to e-mail correspondence between Mr. Lajud and an organization in Russia known to be involved in money laundering.
They also cite a trip three of the men made to Bucharest, the Romanian capital, on Jan. 9 — 19 days after the first $5 million was withdrawn from 4,500 A.T.M.’s. The plane tickets, according to court documents, were bought in cash after American Airlines canceled the original reservation, suspecting a stolen credit card had been used to book the flight.
“We believe they were carrying a large amount of money with them,” according to one of the law enforcement officials, who requested anonymity because of the continuing investigation.
The Secret Service was alerted soon after the A.T.M.’s were drained in December.
The authorities seized bank surveillance video showing withdrawals by “cashing crews” in New York and elsewhere, leaving investigators thousands of hours of footage to review.
But after crews in about 24 countries struck again on Feb. 19, stealing $40 million in more than 36,000 A.T.M. transactions, the authorities in New York were able to start matching faces from the two series of thefts, the law enforcement official said.
The cashing crews largely targeted machines at big banks, rather than at delis or convenience stores, because they allow larger withdrawals, the official said.
In the December and the February thefts, hackers obtained account information from bank card processing companies, then raised withdrawal limits. Crews then encoded the information on cards with magnetic strips and used them at the A.T.M.’s.
The men arrested as part of the New York crew are Jael Mejia Collado, 23; Joan Luis Minier Lara, 22; Evan Jose Peña, 35; Jose Familia Reyes, 24; Mr. Rodriguez, 24; Emir Yasser Yeje, 24; and Chung Yu-Holguin, 22.
Only Evan Peña has been in prison before, on a drug conviction. A search of public records did not reveal criminal records for any of the other men.
Learning about the case this week, Milton Velez, 49, who has known Mr. Rodriguez since childhood, shook his head in disbelief.
“That guy? Wow. I’m really surprised,” he said. “He was always a good kid. I’d drive him and his mom and his little brother to ShopRite, and he’d help me upstairs with the groceries.”
But when the authorities started to round up his friends in early March, Mr. Rodriguez fled to John F. Kennedy International Airport to board a flight to the Dominican Republic. He was arrested at the airport, according to the law enforcement official.
Mr. Lajud, the suspected crew leader, was more successful, arriving in the Dominican Republic around April 11, friends and relatives said. He split time between Santiago, his birth city, and San Francisco de Macorís, the nearby city where his wife lived.
Soon after arriving in the Dominican Republic, he paid $23,000 for a 2006 Toyota pickup truck.
His wife’s cousins, with whom Mr. Lajud and his wife lived after he arrived, realized that he had come into a large amount of money and orchestrated a plan to rob him, local prosecutors said.
“We are continuing to investigate, but we don’t have any reason to believe that it was related to the case in the United States,” Regis Victorio-Reyes, a local district attorney, said.
For his part, Mr. Lajud seemed aware that someone might be out to harm him.
“He’d go straight from the house to the truck with the pistol in his hand for everyone to see,” a San Francisco resident said.
On April 27, Mr. Lajud was playing dominoes with his wife’s cousins in a single-story concrete home. In the bedroom lay an envelope filled with $100,000, along with an M-16 machine gun, a 9-millimeter Smith & Wesson pistol, a .22-caliber Ruger handgun and boxes of ammunition, the police said.
When two hooded men entered the home, Mr. Lajud drew a .45-caliber Glock pistol but was shot five times, according to Col. Juan Luis Sierra of the National Police. The hooded men and the wife’s cousins fled, leaving the cash.