Czech Premier Says He Won’t Resign, Despite Raid and Arrests of Officials
Petr Tluchor and Ivan Fuksa, former members of Parliament from Mr. Necas’s party, were detained. Both had recently resigned under unexplained circumstances.
While the motives for the arrests remained unclear on Thursday, analysts said that the detention of a senior member of Mr. Necas’s inner circle threatened to bring down the center-right coalition government, already weak after a series of corruption scandals that had pushed it to the brink of collapse.
But Mr. Necas told reporters that he remained confident in Ms. Nagyova and had no reason to think she had done anything illegal. He said he had no intention of resigning.
“I am personally convinced that I did not do anything dishonest and that my colleagues have not done anything dishonest either,” he said. “I expect that law enforcement agencies will quickly explain their reasons for launching such a massive operation.”
President Milos Zeman’s office said he would meet on Friday with Mr. Necas, Justice Minister Pavel Blazek, the national police chief, the chief of public prosecutors and the head of the opposition Social Democrats to discuss how to proceed.
The opposition Social Democrats called a party leadership meeting for Thursday afternoon to discuss its response. Some opposition members were already calling for early elections.
Jiri Pehe, a political scientist who is director of New York University in Prague, said that if people close to the prime minister were implicated in corruption, he would come under heavy pressure to resign or face a no-confidence vote. His coalition partners could also withdraw their support and bring the government down. “Unless the police have completely misfired, this could have serious and far-reaching repercussions because it concerns people close to the prime minister,” Mr. Pehe said.
The police declined to comment on the reasons for the arrests. But Pavel Hantak, the spokesman for the organized crime unit, confirmed that an extensive operation had taken place in which several people had been arrested. “We have to be careful about what information we make public and when, so as not to endanger the future of the operation,” he told reporters.
The Czech news media reported that the organized crime unit raided the government headquarters in Prague at 12:30 a.m. on Thursday, about 90 minutes after cabinet members had left the building. About 400 officers conducted raids across the country on Wednesday and Thursday, and the raids were continuing.
Across east and Central Europe and the Balkans, countries have been grappling with a surge of corruption, a hangover from decades of Communist rule.
The European Union is so concerned about rampant lawlessness among its newest members that Romania and neighboring Bulgaria have so far been denied entry into the Union’s passport-free area. In Croatia, which is set to join the European Union in July, former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader has been charged with embezzlement.
In the Czech Republic, the arrests come amid a growing backlash against corruption that has blighted confidence in the political class. In Transparency International’s 2012 Corruption Perception Index — in which the lower the ranking, the more corrupt the country is perceived to be — the Czech Republic was ranked 54th alongside Latvia and Bahrain on a list of 176 countries.
When former President Vaclav Klaus issued an amnesty decree at the beginning of the year that exonerated dozens of individuals on trial on financial corruption charges, the national outrage was so fierce that some mayors and teachers took his portrait off the walls of their offices and classrooms. Mr. Klaus was subsequently accused of treason, an accusation for which he was later cleared.
Karel Janecek, an entrepreneur and leading anticorruption campaigner, said the arrests appeared to be a milestone in a country that had turned a blind eye to corruption for decades. He said that corruption was a byproduct of the crony capitalism of the 1990s when, in the aftermath of communism, state assets were privatized, financial regulation was weak and collusion flourished between government agencies and corporate interests.
Vaclav Laska, a lawyer specializing in corruption cases, added that the prosecution of corruption cases until recently had been rare in a country where graft and bribery were considered a normal part of daily life. “Bribery has been perceived in Czech society as something normal,” he said. “Nobody is even surprised to hear about it anymore.”
Corruption is so endemic that one industrious Czech started a corruption bus tour around Prague. The stops on the tour include fancy villas, hospitals with a reputation for graft and a nonexistent house that 589 companies have registered as their headquarters.