72 Shot in Chicago in Wave of Holiday Weekend Violence
A 7-year-old boy enjoying the holiday with his family is gunned down in a Chicago park. Lauren Jiggetts reports. (Published Thursday, July 4, 2013)
Twelve men were killed and at least 60 other people were wounded in shootings throughout Chicago during the holiday weekend, including eight people who were shot in a West Side attack Saturday.
The weekend's latest shooting took place Sunday afternoon around 3:30 p.m. in the 4700 block of South Ashland when two men were shot, one fatally.
According to preliminary information, one man, whose age was not known, was killed in the shooting after being shot in the back and another was taken in critical condition with wounds to the arm and chest, said Chicago Police News Affairs Officer Joshua Purkiss.
Two men reportedly fired on a group of people at a home in the 2800 block of West Flournoy Street in the Lawndale neighborhood around 6 p.m. Saturday, police said.
The evening shooting left one person dead, four people in serious-to-critical condition at John H. Stroger Hospital and another in fair-to-serious condition at Mount Sinai Hospital, according to fire officials.
Police said a total of six people were hospitalized after the incident.
One man, 49-year-old Terry Patterson, of an unknown address, was pronounced dead, according to the Cook County Medical Examiner's office.
One of the victims also included an elderly woman, 72, who was shot in the ankle, police said.
No one was in custody for the shooting as of Sunday morning.
A 5-year-old boy was among the wounded -- shot early Friday alongside two men at a West Pullman park. Several hours earlier, a 7-year-old boy was also shot in a park -- this one in Chatham.
A 24-year-old man was charged Saturday in connection with the shooting of the 5-year-old boy.
Chicago Police Superintendent Garry McCarthy released a statement on the weekend's violence stating "no shooting or murder is acceptable."
"While to date we've had significantly fewer shootings and significantly fewer murders this year, there's more work to be done and we won't rest until everyone in Chicago enjoys the same sense of safety," McCarthy said in the statement.
At least 16 other people were reported wounded in shootings since Friday.
One murder was reported to police about 5:15 a.m. Friday in the Rogers Park neighborhood. Elliot Frazier, 26, was found dead with multiple gunshot wounds in the 7400 block of North Paulina Street, authorities said. Frazier, of the 7400 block of North Winchester Avenue, was pronounced dead on the scene at 7:10 a.m., according to the Cook County medical examiner’s office.
Later Friday, a man who was shot the day before in the Gage Park neighborhood died, authorities said. 20-year-old Shavonte Howard died at 2:47 p.m. Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital, according to the medical examiner’s office. Howard, of the 5300 block of South Hoyne Avenue, was shot in the head about noon Thursday in the 5600 block of South Western Avenue, authorities said.
Two men were charged Friday in connection to Howard's murder.
Tommie Harris, 25, of the 5200 block of Racine Avenue, was charged with first-degree murder and aggravated discharge of a firearm.
Quintion Humphries, 19, of the 12000 block of South Loomis Street, was also charged with first-degree murder and aggravated discharge of a firearm.
Thursday night, a man was shot to death in the West Englewood neighborhood on the South Side. The man, 31-year-old Marlon Obanner of the 6500 block of South Paulina Street, was standing on a porch about 9:40 p.m. in the 6200 block of South Marshfield Avenue when two males approached on foot and opened fire, authorities said.
In another murder, 21-year-old Steve Mabins of the 0-100 block of West Washington Street was shot in his side multiple times about 1:30 p.m. Thursday in the 600 block of South Francisco Avenue in the East Garfield Park neighborhood, authorities said.
The man was initially taken to Stroger Hospital, where he was declared dead at 2:02 p.m., according to the Cook County Medical Examiner’s office.
Earlier, 36-year-old Cheodis Young of the 100 block of South Carpenter Street was shot in the head about 12:05 p.m. Thursday in the 7300 block of South Wabash Avenue in the Greater Grand Crossing neighborhood and was dead on the scene, authorities said.
On Wednesday night in the Woodlawn neighborhood, three men were shot about 7:25 p.m. in the 6600 block of South Champlain Avenue, police said.
All three men showed up at St. Bernard Hospital without the help of paramedics, police said. One of the men, 26-year-old Ernest McMullen of the 800 block of East 46th Street, was shot in the head and declared dead at 7:38 p.m., authorities said.
Another one of the men, an 18-year-old, was transferred to Stroger Hospital with a gunshot wound to the chest, police said. The third man, 19, was shot in the shoulder and was initially listed in “stable” condition.
The survivors were not cooperating with detectives, authorities said.
Later Wednesday, a gunman exited a green vehicle and shot 24-year-old Rayford Brown in the back around 6:50 p.m. in the 2400 block of East 79th Street, authorities said. Brown, of the 2400 block of East 77th Street, died at Northwestern Memorial Hospital at 7:27 p.m., according to the medical examiner’s office.
The violence began Wednesday afternoon when a man was fatally shot as he sat in a vehicle in the 8700 block of South Loomis Street, according to Chicago Police News Affairs.
William Jones, 26, of the 7800 block of South Emerald Avenue, was pronounced dead on the scene around 1:31 p.m., according to the medical examiner's office.
Additionally, Chicago Police fatally shot 17-year-old Christian Green about 1:10 p.m. Thursday in the 5600 block of South State Street after he allegedly pointed a gun at officers, authorities said.
Nobody is in custody for any of the murders.