Swedish gangster who claimed he had photos of the king in compromising sexual situations is found dead with four bullet wounds to the head
Notorious Serbian-Swedish gangster Milo 'Mille' Markovic has been found dead with four bullet wounds to his head in Stockholm.
The 52-year-old was shot dead while sitting in a car outside his home in Ulvsunda, in the western part of the Swedish capital, just after 6pm last night, the engine still running.
Markovic was unofficially credited as one of the sources for the controversial 2010 biography about the King of Sweden in which the monarch was accused of attending strip clubs and having extramarital affairs.
'It sounded like fireworks,' a witness told Aftonbladet.'Then I saw two men in dark clothing from afar.'
'They were standing by a car where the sound of fireworks came from. One of them said "he is dead".'
Markovic gained fame as the owner of 'porn club' Prive and is said to have been one of the main sources for The Reluctant Monarch, a biography of King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden.
The book revealed that the king and his friends had enjoyed the company of 'coffee girls' - women who would 'entertain' the group, consisting of members of the remains of Swedish aristocracy.
It also alleged that the king visited underground strip clubs, and that he had been involved in an extramarital affair with a famous Swedish singer in the 90s.
Following the publication of the book Markovic claimed that he had compromising photographs of the king with naked women, taken at one of his sex clubs in the 1980s.
Markovic had lived under threat for 'a long time' and had been wearing a Kevlar vest as a precaution, a police source told Aftonbladet.
According to the source, the reason why Markovic was shot in the head may have been that his killers knew he was wearing the protective vest.
Today, Swedish tabloid Expressenrevealed that Markovic may have caught his own murder on camera as he had at least two CCTV cameras in operation outside his house.
Police are looking for two men said to have left the scene in a white Toyota, but refused to comment on the possible CCTV footage.
Markovic, a 70s boxing champion, was born in Serbia but fled to Sweden with his father as a young child, becoming a neutralized citizen in 1982.
The 52-year-old former porn-club owner had a long history of criminal activity, with previous convictions of assault, tax crimes, and preparing to blackmail world-famous tennis ace Bjorn Borg.
Markovic had planned to lure Borg to Club Prive, and there take photographs of him having sex with one of his 'girls'.
Last year he was charged with attempted murder in connection with a shooting at his former club, but the case was dropped after a witness retracted statements during the trial.