3 killed in shootings at Kansas City-area Jewish centers
"It's too early in the investigation to try to label it. We know it's a vicious act of violence. Obviously, at two Jewish facilities, one might make that assumption, but we're going to have to know more about it," he said.
Authorities arrested the suspect at a nearby elementary school after the shootings, Douglass said. The suspected shooter is not from Kansas and did not appear to know his victims, he said.
"The timing is terrible. The timing is awful," Mandl said. "From what I understand from my contacts, this is a one-person event, and this is hopefully under control now."
"This was a community center full of young teens, and they were on lockdown after the shots started," CNN affiliate KSHB reporter Lisa Benson told CNN. "Some of these kids were taken into locker rooms and told to lay on the floor as the shots rang out."
Jeff Nessel told the Kansas City Star he had just dropped his 10-year-old son off at the community center when a staff member told him to get back inside because there had been a shooting.
Two of the victims were a grandfather and grandson who were members of the United Methodist Church of the Resurrection in Leawood, a U.S. congressman said. Rep. Kevin Yoder told CNN the church's minister announced the news during services Sunday night.
"I have asked my team to stay in close touch with our federal, state and local partners and provide the necessary resources to support the ongoing investigation," he said in a statement released by the White House. "While we do not know all of the details surrounding today's shooting, the initial reports are heartbreaking."
"While it is too early to label these shootings as a hate crime, the fact that two Jewish institutions were targeted by the same individual just prior to the start of the Passover holiday is deeply troubling and certainly gives us pause," the organization said. "We have reached out to local, state and federal law enforcement and stand willing and able to offer guidance and assistance to the community if this incident turns out to have been motivated by anti-Semitism."
The ADL said it warned last week of the increased possibility of violent attacks against community centers during the coming weeks, "which coincide both with the Passover holiday and Hitler's birthday on April 20, a day around which in the United States has historically been marked by extremist acts of violence and terrorism."