Outcry over reported children's remains from Irish unwed mothers home
front-page report in the Irish Mail on Sunday The grim discovery was highlighted in a front-page report in the Irish Mail on Sunday , which cited the efforts of local historian Catherine Corless to research the burial sites of 796 children listed as having died at the home, which was run by the Sisters of Bon Secours.
According to the newspaper, Corless believes their remains are all buried in the unmarked mass grave next to the place where the home once stood. Local children stumbled upon the grave in the 1970s, local media reported, but the site was never examined afterward.
The revelation has sparked calls for an investigation and renewed questions about the treatment of unmarried mothers and their children by the Catholic Church and institutions associated with it.
Minister for Children and Youth Affairs Charlie Flanagan said in a statement Wednesday that "active consideration" is being given to how to address the details that have emerged about the burial of children who died in homes for unmarried mothers.
"Many of the revelations are deeply disturbing and a shocking reminder of a darker past in Ireland when our children were not cherished as they should have been," he said.
"We need to hear from the Taoiseach today about the Government's plans to investigate the circumstances surrounding the death of these children, the dumping of their remains, the treatment of their mothers and the State's role in the activities at this home."
The petition, which is addressed to the Irish Minister for Justice and Equality, says, "We are concerned that evidence suggests that the mortality rate for these children was significantly higher than the national rate of infant mortality at the time.
"And we are shocked at reliable, contemporaneous accounts that the children were malnourished and seemingly uncared-for, when the Irish State was paying the Bon Secours to look after them."
"I was greatly shocked, as we all were, to learn of the extent of the numbers of children buried in the graveyard in Tuam," he said in a statement. "I can only begin to imagine the huge emotional wrench which the mothers suffered in giving up their babies for adoption or by witnessing their death."
"It will be a priority for me, in cooperation with the families of the deceased, to seek to obtain a dignified re-interment of the remains of the children in consecrated ground in Tuam."
was the subject of an Oscar-nominated film And earlier this year, Philomena Lee -- whose decades-long search for the son she was forced to give up for adoption in the 1950s was the subject of an Oscar-nominated film -- launched the Philomena Project in hopes of compelling the governments of Ireland and the United States to open access to adoption records.