UK police release Pakistani MQM founder Altaf Hussain, supporters end protest
Thousands of supporters of the exiled leader of Pakistan's MQM party ended a four-day protest Saturday after he was bailed by London police following his arrest on suspicion of money laundering.
Altaf Hussain was arrested at his suburban home in the British capital on Tuesday, prompting street demonstrations in Karachi -- Pakistan's biggest city and his party's power base.
More than 2,000 party workers and supporters danced, embraced one another and distributed sweets in Karachi after hearing the news, a AFP reporter witnessed.
Hussain's arrest had sparked major protesters which included the torching of at least a dozen vehicles while the Karachi Stock Exchange plunged three percent on the back of the news.
Hussain left Pakistan for Britain in 1992 after a military operation to end ethnic unrest in Karachi, going on to gain British citizenship in 2002.
He said Saturday that he had complete trust in the British judicial system and vowed to "keep speaking the truth till my last breath".
Hussain also thanked Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif after his office issued a brief statement following the arrest offering him "all kinds of legal and moral support".
Hussain founded the MQM in 1984 in response to the marginalisation of Mohajirs -- migrants who fled India amid the violence of the sub-continent's partition.
They are mainly concentrated in the cities of the southern Sindh province, especially Karachi where they form a majority of the city's population of 20 million.
Altaf Hussain remains an important figure in Karachi, Pakistan's economic centre and main port, wielding effective control over the city from his London home and addressing supporters using a loudspeaker linked to his telephone.
He is revered by his fiercely loyal supporters while his critics accuse him of running his party as a violent, mafia-like organisation.
"Altaf Hussain is very influential, especially when it comes to Karachi," Dr Sajjan Gohel, international security advisor at The Asia Pacific Foundation, London, told Radio Australia's Asia Pacific program.
"He fled from Karachi, Pakistan, claiming that his life was in danger, but he has been the key component in the MQM's decision-making process ever since then.
"[W]hatever decisions the MQM makes, either at a regional level, in Sindh Province or in terms of politics in the nation, he is very much the key person who either sanctions it or vetoes it.
"There are a lot of controversies tied to the party itself, but unfortunately that is only emblematic of what takes place in Pakistan's complex political environment."