More Irish mass graves likely to be found, warns Archbishop of Dublin
The Archbishop of Dublin called on the Irish government to establish a fully-fledged independent inquiry into secret graveyards for infants and mothers consigned to nursing homes run by the Roman Catholic church in the last century.
Dr Diarmuid Martin, the second-highest ranking prelate in the country, said only an independent commission of investigation with judicial powers could address public concerns in the wake of the discovery of a mass grave of infants and children found in the grounds of a convent run by the Bon Secours order of nuns in Tuam, Co Galway last week.
The Government has established a preliminary inter-departmental official inquiry to set the scope of a more thorough investigation.
"The indications are that if something happened in Tuam it probably happened in other mother-and-baby homes around the country," Archbishop Martin told state radio. "That's why I believe we need a full-bodied investigation."
Any investigation that focused on a single site would set the stage for a drip-drip of new revelations. "There's no point investigating just what happened in Tuam and then next year finding out more. We have to look at the whole culture of mother baby homes; they're talking about medical experiments there," he said. "They're very complicated and very sensitive issues, but the only way we will come out of this particular period of our history is when the truth comes out."
Catherine Corless, a historian who made the discovery, says her study of death records for the St Mary's home in Tuam in County Galway suggests that a former septic tank near the home was a mass grave for up to 800 victims.
The Irish parliament is to debate the challenge presented by the discovery of the mass graves this week and bitter exchanges are expected to be traded between the government and opposition.
Caoimhghín Ó Caoláin, an opposition MP, called on the Government to initiate a fully independent judicial inquiry into what he called "this latest shameful episode involving a religious order and the failure of the State in its duty of care to its most vulnerable and defenceless citizens".
He said the inquiry needs to look at the care in the homes, infant mortality rates and the burial of children in unmarked graves.
Enda Kenny, the prime minister, has instructed officials to "draw together a number of senior officials from across the departments until we see what the scale is, what's involved here, and whether this is isolated or if there are others around the country that need to be looked at."
During a trade visit to California, he told reporters that Dublin must decide what is the "best thing to do in the interest of dealing with yet another element of our country's past."
St Mary's, run by the Bons Secours Sisters, was one of several such 'mother and baby' homes in early 20th century Ireland.
Another such institution, the Sean Ross Abbey in Tipperary, was where Philomena Lee gave up her son for adoption in the 1950s. Her story was made into the Oscar-nominated film "Philomena" last year.