Viktor Bout extradition to US a step closer
Alleged arms dealer may be in America by weekend after Thai court dismisses secondary charges against 'Merchant of Death'
The man alleged to be the biggest illegal arms dealer in history faces trial in America, and could be in the US by the weekend after a Thai court ruling cleared the last legal hurdle to extradite him.
Russian Viktor Bout, nicknamed the "Merchant of Death" for his alleged arms smuggling network which spanned three continents and a decade, has been fighting US efforts to extradite him since he was arrested in a sting operation in a Bangkok hotel in 2008.
But a Thai court today dismissed secondary charges of money laundering and fraud against the 43-year-old, clearing the way for extradition. He faces charges in the US of conspiring to kill American citizens.
The court said Bout could be extradited after 72 hours, meaning he could be moved as soon as Friday if the Thai government gives its – expected – approval.
Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva has already said he would make the final decision on Bout's extradition.
Shackled in leg-irons, Bout was led from court by armed soldiers in flak jackets and balaclavas. He said he would fight the allegations but he could not get a fair trial in the US. "American lawyers are expensive. I have no money now."
Bout's wife, Alla, said his US case would be a show trial designed to discredit the Russian government, with whom he is said to have close links.
"I don't have any idea when the extradition will happen," she said. "But I believe it will happen very quickly, maybe even within the next few hours."
She said the charges against her husband were a fantasy and that American interests "had created an image of Viktor Bout as the Merchant of Death. It is not true."
The US alleges Bout, a former Soviet air force officer, used a fleet of cargo planes throughout the 1990s to traffick weapons to Africa, Central America and the Middle East.
He is alleged to have brokered weapons deals in Afghanistan, Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Liberia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Sudan, and to have armed the militaries of the former Liberian dictator Charles Taylor and the Libyan dictator, Muammar Gaddafi.
Bout was arrested in 2008 after reportedly telling US agents posing as Colombian guerrillas that he could supply them with hundreds of surface-to-air missiles, more than 5000 AK-47s, millions of rounds of ammunition, as well as C4 explosive, landmines and unmanned aerial drones.
He has maintained he never traded in weapons, but ran a legitimate air cargo business.
The issue of his extradition is sensitive for Thailand. Whichever decision it arrives at, it will displease a major trading partner and key ally.
An official from government house at the hearing told the Guardian: "This is not a good decision for Thailand. These countries are big countries, they are important to Thailand, and whatever decision we make we will make one of them angry with Thailand. We cannot win."
The Bout camp has argued the prosecution has been politically motivated from the outset.
Unsubtle pressure has been exerted from both sides, with US and Russian politicians publicly leaning on Thailand to make a decision in their favour. Experts say Bout has knowledge of Russia's military and intelligence operations and Moscow does not want him to go on trial in the US.