Uganda anti-gay law challenged in court
Constitutional court petitioned to scrap law that calls for gay people to be jailed for life and obliges Ugandans to denounce them to authorities
Ugandan activists are seeking to overturn the country's tough anti-gay law by petitioning the constitutional court to declare it invalid.
Signed by Uganda's veteran president, Yoweri Museveni, in February, the law calls for homosexuals to be jailed for life, outlaws the promotion of homosexuality and obliges Ugandans to denounce gay people to the authorities.
The activists argue that the law was passed in parliament without the necessary quorum of lawmakers. The 10 petitioners – including two Ugandan rights organisations – also claim that the law violates the constitutional right to privacy and dignity, as well as the right to be free from discrimination and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.
Judges have adjourned the hearings until Friday, when they are expected to rule on the quorum issue.
Ugandan state lawyers defended the law on Thursday, the second day of the hearings, asking judges to dismiss the petition. "There is no evidence about the quorum," state attorney Patricia Mutesa told the court in the capital, Kampala.
But prominent gay-rights activist Frank Mugisha, one of the petitioners, said he was optimistic that judges would rule in favour of scrapping the law. "I think that we could have a very good judgment tomorrow, and if we get that judgment then it's over – and we just have to celebrate," said Mugisha, who heads the Sexual Minorities Uganda group.
Anti-gay preacher Martin Ssempa, who was also in court, said he feared the "judicial abortion of our bill" due to international pressure.
"This case is moving at lightning speed," he said, claiming the petition was being pushed to polish Uganda's international reputation before Museveni travels to Washington next week to meet President Barack Obama at a landmark US-Africa summit.
"There are efforts … to drum up a legal precedent to try to show [Washington] that, 'Hey, we are not that bad on homosexuality,'" Ssempa claimed.
The US secretary of state, John Kerry, has likened the Ugandan law to antisemitic legislation in Nazi Germany.