Son of Jackie Chan Arrested on Drug-related Charges, Chinese Media Report
The current crackdown on drugs in China has ensnared one of its highest-profile celebrities yet, with Chinese state media reporting on Monday that Jaycee Chan, the actor and son of the Hong Kong movie star Jackie Chan, had been arrested in Beijing on drug-related charges.
The younger Mr. Chan, 31, who also goes by the name Fang Zuming, was arrested along with the Taiwanese actor Ko Chen-tung, 23, also known as Kai Ko, according to The Beijing News, which cited unnamed sources and Taiwanese media reports. The official Twitter account of China Central Television, the state broadcaster, quoted the Beijing police as saying that Mr. Chan was arrested after more than 100 grams of marijuana was found at his home on Aug. 14.
The arrests of Mr. Chan, who starred in the 2012 Taiwanese action-comedy film “Double Trouble,” and Mr. Ko, who appeared in the popular Chinese film “Tiny Times,” appear to be part of a larger campaign being waged by the Chinese authorities against illegal drug use. Although the crackdown — one of the most vigorous in recent years — is being aimed at the wider populace, including foreigners living in China, the entertainment industry has seemingly come under particular scrutiny.
Last week, 42 artist management agencies in Beijing signed an agreementwith the local police pledging to take action against illegal drug use in the industry, following a string of much-publicized drug-related celebrity detentions in recent months.
According to The Beijing News, Mr. Ko’s manager sent a statement to news outlets saying that the management company had already sent representatives to Beijing to investigate the situation but did not address the reports of drug-related charges.
Jackie Chan, who is probably best known for his starring role in the popular “Rush Hour” films, has stirred up controversy in his native Hong Kong in recent years for his pro-Beijing stance. In 2009, he faced a backlash after he told a forum that “we Chinese need to be controlled,” and last year he was selected to join the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, the country’s top political advisory body.
Also in 2009, the elder Mr. Chan was officially nominatedby the China National Anti-Drug Committee to serve as a goodwill ambassador for the country’s effort against illicit drugs.