Hannah Graham case: Jesse Matthew arrested in Texas
A Virginia man has been arrested in the abduction of a British-born student missing for more than 10 days.
Jesse Matthew, 32, was taken into custody by police in Galveston, Texas, 1,300 miles (2,092km) from where Hannah Graham, 18, was last seen.
Mr Matthew was seen walking with Ms Graham on CCTV footage the night she disappeared from Charlottesville.
Police are still looking for Ms Graham and have offered $100,000 (£61,200) for information on her whereabouts.
The University of Virginia student went missing on 13 September after an evening of drinking and socialising in the town.
On Wednesday, Charlottesville Police Chief Timothy Longo announced Mr Matthew had been arrested and would be extradited to Virginia but did not explain why authorities still had not located the missing teenager.
Mr Matthew, a nursing assistant, was identified as a suspect soon after Ms Graham's disappearance.
Witnesses reported seeing a man matching his physical description drinking with Ms Graham on the night she went missing, and he appeared twice in CCTV footage walking alongside her, police said.
At 01:20, Ms Graham sent a text message to a friend saying she was lost.
She was neither seen nor heard from again.
On Saturday, police searched Mr Matthew's apartment and vehicle. He then visited a Charlottesville police station accompanied by relatives, spoke briefly with officers, then asked for a lawyer.
He was allowed to leave, then drove away from the police station at high speed, prompting police to charge him with reckless driving and obtain a warrant for his arrest.
By Tuesday investigators had gathered enough evidence to charge him with abduction with intent to defile, a felony that applies when a person kidnaps someone intending to have sex with him or her.
Mr Longo said on Wednesday that the community had donated funds to increase the reward for Ms Graham's rescue to $100,000.
Despite having Mr Matthew in custody, the police chief said there was "a long road ahead" in the case, "and that includes finding Hannah".