Marysville school shooting: 'Run, get out of here'
Jaylen Fryberg What he saw was freshman Jaylen Fryberg go up to a table with students, "came up from behind ... and fired about six bullets into the backs of them," Luton told CNN. "They were his friends, so it wasn't just random."
By the time it was over, two people -- the gunman and a female student -- were dead and four were wounded, according to authorities. Those wounded were all under the age of 18, they said.
Three are "very critically ill" with "very serious" injuries, she said. One is in serious condition. One of the boys, age 14, suffered a jaw injury. The other, age 15, was critically injured in the head.
The gun used in the shooting has been traced to Fryberg's father, a law enforcement source with knowledge of the investigation told CNN. It is a "high capacity" weapon but did not have an extended magazine, the source said on condition of anonymity.
"He put some bullets in the back of the students," he said. "He turned and looked at me and my girlfriend ... and kind of gave us a smirk."
"I have no idea what his motive was because yesterday at football practice, he was all fine, talking .... having a good time," he said. "And then today, just horrible. I don't know what went through his head or what caused him to do it."
By all accounts, Fryberg was a popular student. Just a week ago, he had been named as the high school's freshman homecoming prince, according to a YouTube video of the ceremony and accounts provided by students to CNN.
Luton could not confirm reports that Fryberg had been bullied. But two weeks ago, according to Luton, Fryberg got into a fight after somebody said "something racist" to him.
"When I saw him, I was like 'Oh my God, that's Jaylen.' I would have never expected it would have been him, out of all people," she said.
"At first, I thought it was just someone making a really loud noise ...like a big loud pop ... until I heard four more after that. And I saw three kids just fall from the table."
Austin said he ducked under a table. When the shooting stopped, he said he looked out and saw the shooter was trying to reload.
"When that happened, I just ran in the opposite direction, and I was out of there as fast as I could," he said.