Nazi who worked in concentration camps found new job as torturer for Syria’s regime
Yet rather than facing up to his murderous crimes, former SS captain Alois Brunner fled to Syria in the 1950s where he continued his hate-filled legacy by advising the Syrian regime on torture. Now it appears he cheated justice to the very end, with new information emerging from the war-ravaged country suggesting he died four years ago in Damascus. One of Adolph Hitler's most trusted lieutenants, Brunner evaded capture for 65 years and survived two assassination attempts by the Israeli secret service, Mossad. In a crushing blow to the families of his many victims, he went to his grave aged 98 showing not one shred of remorse and openly admitting he wished he had sent more Jews to their deaths. Nazi hunter Dr Efraim Zuroff, of The Simon Wiesenthal Centre, a global human rights organisation, broke the news after being given a tip-off by a trusted contact. Dr Zuroff, the director of the centre's Israel office, says: "We have received information from a former German secret service agent who had served in the Middle East who said that Brunner was dead and buried in Damascus. "Given his age it would not be surprising and the information came from someone who we consider reliable. "There is much evidence of what he (Brunner) did and no lack of clarity about his huge guilt in four different countries. "We are talking about someone who helped send 128,500 Jews to the death camps, the majority were murdered. "The victims' families are a very large group and it's fair to say the people who suffered at his hands would have wanted him to be punished and would be disappointed, but he is not the only Nazi war criminal who got away, far too many got away."
Born in 1912 in the Austrian village of Rohrbrunn, Brunner was the assistant to notorious Nazi, Adolf Eichmann, the architect of the Holocaust, who described him as his "best man". He was responsible for the deportation of thousands of Jews from Austria, Greece, Slovakia and France to concentration camps and the gas chambers that awaited them. Brunner only managed to slip the net at the end of the Second World War because his identity was mixed up with that of another SS officer, Anton Brunner, who was later executed for war crimes. During the post war years, he is said to have got work as a driver for the U.S Army in Berlin under a false name and claims also to have been involved in espionage. He was linked to a shadowy unit of former Nazi generals called the Gehlen Organization, which was set up by the Americans to spy on the Soviets. However, Brunner left Germany in 1954 using a fake Red Cross passport to travel to Rome and then across the Mediterranean to Egypt, where he worked as a weapons dealer. The fugitive soon crossed into Syria and was hired as a government advisor under the pseudonym Dr. Georg Fischer. He is believed to have advised Bashar al-Assad's father, Hafez, on torture and repression techniques picked up from his time with the SS. While the Syrian authorities protected him from numerous extradition bids, there were still attempts on his life. He lost an eye and fingers on his left hand after opening letter bombs sent to him by Mossad agents in 1961 and 1980. In 1999, rumours began spreading that Brunner was dead and buried in a Damascus cemetery but the claims were scotched when he was spotted at the city's Meridian Hotel by German journalists that same year. He was last seen alive at the same hotel in late 2001 and in 2003 was named as "the world's highest-ranking Nazi fugitive believed still alive".
The civil war raging in Syria between government troops and rebels from the Islamic State means Brunner's last activities in the country, as well as his final resting place, are unlikely to be known until fighting ceases. In recent months, Damascus has seen heavy shelling and air raids on the rebel-held suburb of Jobar. "No sane person is going to try to travel there to find out," says Dr Zuroff. "It seems fairly obvious that Brunner's dead. He lived under the false name of Georg Fischer but his presence was no secret. He actually received two letter bombs, apparently from Mossad. "He lost three fingers and an eye." Although Brunner's exact role within Hafez al-Assad's government has never been confirmed, Dr Zuroff says: "He was involved in the harsh treatment of the Jewish community of Syria and was an expert in terror and torture. "He said himself his one regret was he did not kill more Jews. He was unrepentant." This summer, the School of African and Oriental Studies in London worked with the Holocaust Museum in Washington D.C to persuade the U.S government to release Brunner's war crimes indictment. The document was among suppressed records from the UN War Crimes Commission of 1943 to 1948 that have been made public for the first time. Dr Dan Plesch, director of the school's Centre for International Studies and Diplomacy, says: "The commission in London lodged charges against Brunner very early in February 1944 relating to a whole list of concentration camps and a whole range of crimes. "The document shows an SS officer being charged with a range of issues, including forced prostitution, in the concentration camp system in France. But he like thousands of others simply escaped justice." At least 67,400 of Brunner's victims, including 6,000 children, were sent to their deaths from the Drancy internment camp outside Paris, which he commanded between June 1943 and August 1944. Among them were relatives of award-winning poet, writer and former Children's Laureate, Michael Rosen, who revealed his father's aunt and uncle were taken to Auschwitz via Drancy and never seen again. "Lives are being lost and international interests being played out in Syria," says the 67 year old from London. "I wouldn't want the story of Brunner to be any kind of trophy or bargaining chip in all this. "I would hope that as and when the people of Syria find peace and justice they are also able to tell us more of what he did, what happened to him and why." The Simon Wiesenthal Centre, based in Los Angeles, has now removed Brunner from its most wanted list and is focusing its work on bringing other surviving Nazis to justice. Dr Zuroff adds: "We have to work on the list of people who can be brought to justice."