Radio DJ Ray Teret, Friend of Jimmy Savile, Jailed for 25 Years Over Sex Attacks
Former radio DJ Ray Teret has been jailed for 25 years following his conviction for a series of rapes and indecent assaults on "star-struck" young girls in the 1960s and 1970s.
Teret was found guilty of seven counts of rape and 11 charges of indecent assault carried out on 11 girls aged between 12 and 15, last week at Manchester Minshull Street Crown Court. All the offenses took place between 1963 and 1979 when Teret was judged to have exploited his celebrity status as a popular DJ to lure his young victims.
The 73-year-old former DJ for British pop station Radio Caroline was a close friend of the former BBC Radio 1 DJ and serial sex abuser Jimmy Savile and was described during his trial as "following him around like a shadow."
A year after Savile's death in 2011, a formal criminal investigation was held looking into historic allegations of child abuse by Savile and a number of other British TV and radio personalities. Savile, who received a knighthood in 1990, was subsequently judged by the NSPCC to have abused at least 500 people, the youngest of whom was just two years old.
Sentencing Teret, whose nickname was Ugly Ray, Mr Justice Baker said: "It is clear that you exploited your celebrity status to sexually abuse young girls. Those who were raped had little or no understanding what was happening to them and felt they could do little to prevent the abuse taking place." 
The judge told Teret that the 25-year sentence means that he is likely to spend the rest of his life in jail.  Several of his victims were in the court room to hear the sentence read out and are reported to have cheered and clapped as Teret was taken down into the cells. 
Following the hearing, Detective Chief Inspector Graham Brock said Teret's crimes had "cast a dark shadow" over his victim's lives. 
"After decades of hiding behind the veneer of being a distinguished radio presenter, Ray Teret has finally been exposed as the manipulative and dangerous sexual predator that he is," Brock told reporters. 
Following Teret's trail, four further women have come forward to say that they were also abused by the former DJ. Greater Manchester Police has said that it is investigating the new allegations. 