Turkey Issues Arrest Warrant for a Rival of Its President
As allies, Mr. Erdogan and Mr. Gulen embarked on an uneasy partnership to remove the military from Turkish politics, but once they accomplished that goal, quiet tensions between the two men festered and burst into a public feud last year when Mr. Erdogan accused Mr. Gulen of instigating a graft inquiry that implicated members of his inner circle.
Mr. Erdogan called the investigation a coup attempt and accused Mr. Gulen’s followers — particularly those with high-ranking positions in the police and judiciary — of forming a “parallel state” to overthrow his government. Mr. Gulen has denied playing any role in plotting against the state.
The arrest warrant represents the latest attempt in Mr. Erdogan’s campaign to root out Mr. Gulen and his supporters. Over the past year, Mr. Erdogan has systematically purged his followers from the police and judiciary and earlier this week the police detained journalists and others in a new crackdown against Gulen-affiliated institutions. Eight of those arrested, including the editor of Turkey’s largest-selling newspaper, were released Friday, but four others remained in custody.
Analysts say that the arrest warrant for Mr. Gulen was a symbolic move and if a formal extradition request were to follow, it would likely worsen relations between Washington and Ankara, which were already strained over Turkey’s reluctance to more aggressively challenge Islamic State militants across the border in Syria.
“I don’t think that the Turkish prosecutors can have any serious expectations in getting Gulen in Turkey,” said Howard Eissenstat, a history professor at St. Lawrence University who has written extensively on Turkey. “I think that the best rationale for going through with this extradition effort is not so much to bring him to court, as it is to highlight the seriousness of their campaign and to emphasize the whole narrative of the parallel state and Turkey against enemies at home and abroad ahead of the next year’s elections.”