Senior Guangdong official Zhu Mingguo expelled from party over graft
Former Guangdong political advisory body chairman Zhu Mingguo has been stripped of his government titles and expelled from the Communist Party for allegedly taking huge bribes and violating the birth control policy, Beijing's corruption watchdog said yesterday.
Zhu - the most senior Guangdong official to be toppled in President Xi Jinping's sweeping crackdown on corruption - was investigated in November and removed as chairman of the Guangdong Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference last month.
The Central Commission for Discipline Inspection said Zhu had also been stripped of his title of alternate member of the Communist Party's 18th Central Committee.
Details have yet to emerge, but analysts say it is rare for a senior official to be pinpointed for the relatively trivial issue of violating the birth control policy.
According to the watchdog's website, Zhu took huge sums of bribes in exchange for promoting cadres and obtaining profits for others. He also severely violated the birth control policy.
"Zhu has severely violated discipline and law … [He] has shown no sign of stopping or easing … The nature is awful and the circumstances of the case are serious," the agency said.
Zhu is a close aide of Wang Yang , who brought him to Guangdong from Chongqing , where Zhu headed the province's public security bureau between 2001 and 2006.
In Guangdong, Zhu served in several senior posts including head of the province's anti-graft agency, deputy provincial party chief and secretary of the provincial politics and law committee.
In 2011, he was sent by Wang to deal with the massive anti-corruption protests in Wukan township. He became Guangdong's top political adviser in January last year.
Zhu's relative, Chen Jinchang , who is police chief of Dingan county in Hainan province, is said to have also come under corruption investigation last month.
Guangzhou Academy of Social Sciences researcher Peng Peng said: "Zhu might have more than just a couple of children, thus resulting in the high-profile mention.
"Even until now, we are not sure what went wrong with Zhu or in which part of his career … he misbehaved."
Meanwhile, the anti-graft agency said former Jinan city party chief Wang Min and Taiyuan city party chief Chen Chuanping also faced prosecution for corruption.