Blackmailers threaten to poison New Zealand infant milk formula
New Zealand police are investigating a threat to poison infant formula if the use of 1080 pest control baits continues after March 2015.
New Zealand police are investigating a threat to poison infant formula if the use of 1080 pest control baits continues after March 2015.
A blackmail threat to poison baby formula is a form of "eco-terrorism", says New Zealand's prime minister John Key.
New Zealand police are currently investigating blackmail threats made against dairy processor Fonterra.
The threats were made as part of a campaign to stop the use of agricultural pesticide 1080 in New Zealand.
New Zealand police said that anonymous letters were received by Federated Farmers and Fonterra in November 2014, accompanied by small packages of milk powder, which subsequently tested positive for the presence of a concentrated form of 1080.
The letters threatened to contaminate infant and other formula with 1080 (sodium monoflouroacetate) unless New Zealand stopped using it for pest control by the end of March 2015.
"We have tested just over 40,000 raw milk and product samples and we have had no 1080 detections," said a statement from the NZ Ministry for Primary Industries.
"New Zealand's food safety model is among the best in the world."
While the department's deputy director-general Scott Gallacher said people should keep using formula "as they always have".
New Zealand is the world's leading dairy exporter.
Asked how he would characterise the threat, Mr Key replied: "It's a form of eco-terrorism without doubt. The person's motive is to try and bully the government into not using 1080."
Mr Key said his advice was that it was extremely unlikely that anyone could deliberately contaminate formula during the manufacturing process and there was no evidence that this had ever occurred.
"It was the government's intention to inform the public of this threat next week," he said.
"As you know from police, the blackmailer had threatened to go public at the end of March.
"But the first priority of the police was to carry out a thorough investigation and we needed to work with the industry to protect the supply chain before the public was informed."
Authorities warned parents to examine packaging for signs of tampering and supermarkets removed formula cans from shelves to storerooms so shoppers could not access them directly.
Deputy Commissioner of National Operations with NZ Police, Mike Clement, said the threat may be a hoax, but must be treated seriously.
He said no further letters had been received after the initial batch and the matter was being treated as blackmail rather than terrorism.
In a release to the stock exchange, Fonterra NZ said that the New Zealand Government had advised that there was no health risk to consumers.
Fonterra chief executive Theo Spierings said the criminal threat targeted New Zealand and the entire dairy industry.
He said Fonterra had begun its own testing regime in mid-January as a further assurance of product safety, tasting every tanker of raw milk.
"We can fully assure our customers and consumers that all of our milk and products are safe and of high quality, and our supply chain continues to be secure and world-class," Mr Spierings said.
"We are playing our part in helping the government manage the criminal threat, as is the rest of the dairy industry.
"We have taken immediate and decisive steps to give our customers and consumers added confidence, including increased testing and security measures."
President of New Zealand's peak farming body, Federated Farmers of New Zealand (FFNZ), William Rolleston, said he was confident security measures at the country's milk processing plants were rigorous.
"I would say that it would probably be easier to break out of prison than to break into one of these factories and do anything. The security is pretty tight." Dr Rolleston said.
He said he believed his organisation was targeted by the anonymous letter writer due to their support for the use of 1080 to control possum populations.
"Unlike you guys in Australia who protect your possums, they are not a welcome visitor here, I'm afraid," he said.
"We do endorse the use of 1080. It's a highly effective and safe product when used properly and it's biodegradable, so it breaks down in the environment very quickly, it doesn't have an impact on our native species, so it's a very good toxin to use for dealing with what is a major issue for New Zealand."
The New Zealand Food and Grocery Council said it had introduced extra testing of infant milk powder products to reassure parents, but said it had "absolute confidence" that products were safe.
"This is an attack on Brand New Zealand," the council said in a statement.
"Our country has a reputation for producing safe, high-quality food products which are in demand around the world, and this coward's letter doesn't change that at all.
"These letters are an attack on all New Zealanders, designed to gain publicity and cause the maximum damage to the New Zealand economy," the Food and Grocery Council statement said.
Infant Formula Exporters Association chairman Michel Barnett said the industry did not need another crisis.
"This could be extremely damaging for New Zealand's exports offshore," he told TVNZ.
"Not just dairy, not just milk formula, our whole reputation as an exporter of food is at risk as a result of this nutter."
In 2013, Fonterra ordered a global recall of some products, amid fears whey in baby formula may have been contaminated with bacteria that caused botulism.
There was concern about sales in China, the biggest consumer of New Zealand dairy exports, which are worth a total of $14 billion a year. The bacteria scare proved to be a false alarm.
The New Zealand dollar dropped to a six-week low and the share market dipped on the news of the blackmail threat.