Four suspects arrested after 5 shot outside Driftwood Ave. townhouse
Four people are currently in custody in connection with a shooting near Jane and Finch that sent five people to hospital late Thursday afternoon, Toronto police have confirmed.
It happened on the front lawn of a townhouse complex on Driftwood Avenue, just east of Jane Street, shortly before 6 p.m.
According to Toronto Paramedic Services, three males were transported to a trauma centre, one with life-threatening injuries.
The victim with life-threatening injuries was initially found without vital signs, but was revived at hospital, police said.
The other two had critical injuries, paramedics said.
The remaining two patients - a male and a female - were transported to a local hospital. The female victim had been shot in the leg, police said.
Paramedics said all patients suffered gunshot wounds. The ages of the victims were not immediately available.
Toronto police Sgt. Steve Hicks, who was the first officer on the scene, said there were a number of young children in the area at the time of the shooting.
In a press release issued Thursday night, police confirmed that four suspects had been arrested.
"During the course of the arrests, one of those arrested was shot in an interaction with police," the release said.
"It is reported that person has non-life-threatening injuries. The Special Investigations Unit has exercised their mandate and they are investigating. The law prevents the TPS from making any comments on that incident."
Four guns were also recovered.
According to a release issued by Ontario’s Special Investigations Unit, the suspects were arrested following an altercation with police on Elmhurst Drive at around 6:15 p.m.
No additional suspects are being sought, police said.
Eight investigators and three forensic investigators have been assigned to the case, the SIU said.
The arm's-length agency investigates reports involving police where there has been death, serious injury or allegations of sexual assault.
Anyone with information is asked to contact investigators at 416-622-0748 or 800-787-8529 ext. 1872.