South-East Asian migrant crisis: Thai general faces arrest warrant on suspicion of human trafficking
A Thai military general has been suspended after police ordered his arrest on suspicion of human trafficking, the country's army chief says.
Southern Thailand has been a major base for smugglers and traffickers taking people by boat from Myanmar and Bangladesh to South-East Asia in a trade that activists say has flourished for years.
Lieutenant General Manus Kongpan is the first military figure to be implicated in the illicit trade as Bangkok pursues a crackdown in response to a surge in the numbers of migrants.
Thai army chief General Udomdej Sitabutr said Manus will be questioned by the military and could be expelled if found to have breached its code of conduct, prior to facing a criminal trial.
"I have been told of his involvement. The arrest warrant is not unexpected," said General Udomdej, who is also deputy defence minister in Thailand's ruling military junta.
"Police have collected enough evidence to proceed with the case."
It was unclear whether or not Manus had been arrested.
Most migrants say they are fleeing persecution and looking for better lives abroad, but many fall prey to gangs that Thailand has until now been accused of doing little to stop.
The United States last year downgraded the kingdom to the lowest category in its annual Trafficking in Persons report, citing a lack of enforcement and involvement of some officials.
Police said last week there were no longer any human trafficking camps in southern Thailand, after a crackdown led to thediscovery of scores of graves on both sides of the Thai-Malaysian border.
About 4,000 migrants have landed in Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Myanmar or Bangladesh since Bangkok launched its crackdown last month.
The United Nations estimates some 2,000 may still be adrift in boats on the Andaman Sea or the Bay of Bengal after traffickers abandoned them rather than bring them ashore and risk arrest.
Countries affected by the migrant crisis have agreed to set up an anti-trafficking task force, and approved a broad list of measures to tackle the root causes of the crisis.