Lauren Wasser who lost leg to toxic shock files lawsuit against Kotex tampons
Her infection had turned into gangrene, and she had to have her right leg amputated below the knee
A young model who lost her leg to toxic shock syndrome (TSS) and almost died is suing the company that manufactured the Kotex tampons she used - and the grocery stores that sold them - in the hope that her horrifying ordeal will make women become better informed about their risks.
Lauren Wasser’s lawsuit alleges that the Kimberly-Clark Corporation and grocery stores Kroger and Ralph's are 'negligently, wantonly, recklessly, tortuously, and unlawfully responsible in some manner' for Lauren's hospitalization for TSS in part because the disclaimer on the tampon box was not clear enough,Vice reports.  
The brand’s warning reads: 'Change your tampon every four to eight hours, including overnight’, which the family argues is confusing since it can mean longer than eight hours, especially when it comes to teens who sleep in on weekends. 
Three years ago Lauren, then 24,  was living her dream life. When the five-foot-eleven stunner, who appeared on the cover of Italian Vogue when she was only two years old, was not modeling she filled her days with acting classes, athletics and nights out on the town. 
'Everything was based on looks,' she told Vice. 'I was that girl, and I didn't even think about it.'
The ordeal that would transform her life forever began on October 3, 2012, when Lauren ran down to a nearby Ralph's to stock up on her go-to brand of tampons, Kotex Natural Balance.
Like most girls, Lauren knew the rules about changing the tampon every three to four hours, and on that day Lauren recalled replacing her tampon in the morning, afternoon and evening. 
Later that night at a friend's party, she started to feel seriously sick - so she drove home and crashed out in bed. The next thing she remembered was waking up to the police pounding on her door.
Still in a daze, Lauren went back to bed. A friend came back with the police and found her facedown on the bedroom floor with a fever of 107 degrees.
Lauren was rushed to the hospital, where doctors said that her internal organs were shutting down, she had suffered a massive heart attack and was ten minutes from death. The medical team was baffled, until an infectious disease specialist asked if she had a tampon in.
They sent it to the lab, where it came back positive for toxic shock syndrome. 
TSS is basically a complication of bacterial infections, frequently involving staph bacteria (or Staphylococcus aureus). Though rare, TSS has been linked to use of superabsorbent tampons ever since Proctor & Gamble's Rely tampon resulted in a number of deaths during the 1980s.
According to a study conducted by the Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, 'the gelled carboxymethylcellulose' in Rely tampons 'acted like agar in a petri dish, providing a viscous medium on which the bacteria could grow.
Because TSS is rarer today, affecting around one person per 100,000, the syndrome does not often make headlines.  
Lauren said that she does not remember being put into a medically induced coma, or friends coming in to pay their last respects. She does remember waking up with 80 pounds of fluids being pumped into her, and black toxins pumping out.
'My belly was huge. I had tubes everywhere. I couldn't speak,' she said. 
But her nightmare was far from over: The infection had turned into gangrene, and Lauren had to have her right leg amputated below the knee.
By filing suit, the family's legal team also wants to create awareness about the use of synthetic materials throughout the tampon industry, and to make women aware of the dangers of TSS.
Over the past 50 years, tampons have morphed from using cotton to synthetic ingredients like rayon and plastic, and some experts assert that these synthetic fibers, along with a tampon's absorbency, can form an ideal environment for staph bacteria to flourish.
Vice contacted a spokesperson for Kimberly-Clark, but the rep said only that the company 'does not comment regarding ongoing litigation.'
In the fall, Lauren hopes to appear in front of Congress with New York Representative Carolyn Maloney. Ms. Maloney is trying to pass the Robin Danielson Act, named after a woman who died of TSS in 1998, that would 'establish a program of research regarding the risks posed by the presence of dioxin, synthetic fibers, chemical fragrances, and other components of feminine hygiene products'.
Lauren said that for a long time, she felt like the four walls were prison, and it took her a long time to come to grips with her new identity. 'You live your whole life and think, "I'm an athlete" or "I'm a pretty girl" but this was something physical that I had no control over,' she said. 
'It took me a while to figure out if I was still worthy, if I was still pretty.' 
Today Lauren has come a long way and can even crack jokes about the situation. She was helped by photographer girlfriend Jennifer Rovero, who took hundreds of pictures of Lauren as she recovered, treating the process as a sort of therapy. 
However, Lauren still can't stand watching the carefree girls portrayed in the tampon commercials.
'You know cigarettes can kill you, so when you use them, it's your choice,' she said. 
'Had  I known all the info about TSS, I would never have used tampons.' 