DA: Sandra Bland's death to be investigated as murder
(CNN)The investigation into the death of Sandra Bland is being treated like a murder investigation, a district attorney said Monday.
Police say they found the 28-year-old dead last week after she hanged herself with a plastic bag inside the Waller County Jail, where she was incarcerated after allegedly assaulting an officer during a July 10 traffic stop.
"It is very much too early to make any kind of determination that this was a suicide or a murder because the investigations are not complete," Waller County District Attorney Elton Mathis told reporters. "This is being treated like a murder investigation."
He said the case would go to a grand jury.
The mother of Sandra Bland, Geneva Reed-Veal, center, and sister Shavon Bland mourn at the gravesite during the funeral at Mount Glenwood Memory Gardens West cemetery, on Saturday, July 25, in Willow Springs, Illinois. Bland was arrested on July 10 for allegedly assaulting an officer during a routine traffic stop. On July 13, she was found dead in her jail cell. Police say the 28-year-old hanged herself with a plastic bag. Her family disputes that.
Hundreds of people attended Sandra Bland's funeral near the Chicago suburb where she grew up.
Jeanette Williams places a bouquet of roses at a memorial for Sandra Bland near Bland's alma mater, Prairie View A&M University, in Prairie View, Texas, on Tuesday, July 21.
Lanitra Dean hugs Bland's friend Carlesha Harrison during the Prairie View vigil on July 19. Bland had been arrested by the Texas Department of Public Safety, which said she became "argumentative and uncooperative" during a traffic stop.
The Revs. James Miller and Lana Parks Miller lead a prayer walk remembering Bland in Lisle, Illinois, on July 19. Bland lived in the Chicago suburb of Naperville, Illinois. Her family questions that she would commit suicide. Sharon Cooper, one of Bland's sisters, said the idea of her sister committing suicide is "unfathomable" to her.
Quanell X, leader of the New Black Panther Party, holds a plastic bag while speaking at a rally at the Waller County Courthouse in Hempstead, Texas, on Friday, July 17. Authorities said there were no cameras in Bland's jail cell to show that she hanged herself, but cameras in the hallway show no one entering or leaving the cell before her body was discovered.
From left, Hempstead Mayor Michael Wolfe, Prairie View Mayor Frank Jackson and Texas state Sen. Lois Kolkhorst listen as Waller County District Attorney Elton Mathis, right, speaks to the media in Hempstead on July 17. "The death of Sandra Bland will not be swept under the rug," Mathis said. The Texas Rangers and the FBI are investigating her death.
"There are too many questions that still need to be resolved. Ms. Bland's family does make valid points that she did have a lot of things going on in her life that were good," Mathis said.
Bland lived 1,000 miles away in the Chicago suburb of Naperville, Illinois, but was in Texas because she was taking a job as a student ambassador to the alumni association at Prairie View A&M University. She graduated from the historically black school in 2009.
The Texas Department of Public Safety, whose trooper pulled over Bland for allegedly failing to use her signal while changing lanes, has issued a statement saying Bland became "argumentative and uncooperative" and was arrested on a charge of assaulting a public servant.
According to a sheriff's office statement, she was found "in her cell not breathing from what appears to be self-inflicted asphyxiation." Bland received CPR, and an ambulance was called, but she was pronounced dead a short time later.
Many people have questioned the police account of Bland's death. Those who know her say she was anything but suicidal.
"Based on the Sandy I knew, this is unfathomable to me," Sharon Cooper, one of Bland's sisters, told reporters in Chicago. "People who knew her, truly knew her, the depth of her, that's unfathomable right now."