Witness: Stabbing on Boulder's University Hill 'seemed like a blur'
Stabbing suspect James Hammack appears in court at the Boulder County Jail on Monday. (
Boulder police arrested a 30-year-old man on suspicion of attempted murder over the weekend after witnesses said he came up from behind and stabbed another man twice in the forearm on University Hill .
James Hammack, of Boulder, is facing charges of attempted second-degree murder, first-degree assault and multiple counts of menacing.
Boulder police spokeswoman Laurie Ogden said four men told officers they were walking in the area of 10th Street and Pleasant Avenue just after midnight on Sunday when they saw Hammack "mumbling and yelling."
One of the men in the group, Ildemaro Asprino, said he and his other college-aged friends were heading down to Pearl Street to celebrate his birthday when they saw Hammack.
"It was like out of a movie," Asprino said in an interview. "The street lamp went out and then he sort of emerged from the shadows."
Asprino said the man had a dog on a leash and did not appear to be threatening at first. But he said Hammack started mumbling threats and saying things under his breath, then began walking toward them.
"He started approaching us mumbling and yelling, but we didn't take it seriously though," Asprino said.
Ogden said one of the men made some funny noises in the direction of Hammack, who then yelled out across the street, "You trying to die tonight?"
Asprino said that friend was making a joke, and that it was not meant to provoke Hammack.
The men told police Hammack then ran at them. Three of the men were able to flee, but Hammack caught up to a fourth and stabbed him in the forearm twice, police said.
"It seemed like a blur because it happened so quickly and it was so unexpected," Asprino said. "You don't expect that in Boulder."
The men were able to get to a nearby residence to call 911.
A police officer found Hammack at 12:20 a.m. Sunday near Columbia Cemetery with blood on his face and shirt, and he was taken into custody.
The men who reported the incident were able to positively ID Hammack as the man who ran at them, police said.
Ogden said the men did not know Hammack before the incident.
Police said Hammack was behaving "erratically," alternating between being combative and then crying and expressing remorse. Officials said he may have been under the influence of drugs, Ogden said.
A Leatherman tool was found on a lawn at 1100 Lincoln St., and a knife also was found in Hammack's car at his house. Police do not know yet whether either was used in the reported stabbing.
The victim was taken to Boulder Community Health for treatment, but later released, Ogden said.
Hammack lives in Boulder, but is originally from New Mexico, Ogden said. Police are not sure how long he has been living in the city.
Boulder County Judge John Stavely set Hammack's bond at $200,000 at the suspect's first court appearance Monday.
John Gifford, Hammack's attorney, told Stavely he would address bond at a formal filing of charges on Wednesday.