Jared Fogle reaches plea agreement in porn case
(CNN)Former Subway pitchman Jared Fogle will plead guilty to child pornography charges and to crossing state lines to pay for sex with minors, prosecutors and defense attorneys announced after his initial appearance in federal court.
Fogle "has notified the court that he intends to plead guilty," U.S. Attorney Josh Minkler said in Indianapolis. The prosecutor described the case as a "five-year criminal scheme to exploit children."
The plea deal, filed in court Wednesday, would see Fogle serve between five and 12½ years in prison.
The court will have to approve the agreement, in which Fogle pleads guilty to possessing and distributing child porn, and to traveling across state lines to have sex with at least two teenage girls.
Under the plea deal, the government agrees to recommend less than 13 years in prison for Fogle. Also, Fogle's lawyers agree to ask the judge for no less than a 5-year prison term.
Fogle, 37, also will pay restitution to the 14 victims who were secretly photographed in the images possessed by Fogle or who he paid for sex. Each victim will get $100,000, funds intended for counseling, support and other assistance.
According to court documents, the charges against Fogle are related to his relationship with Russell C. Taylor, the executive director of the Jared Foundation, who was arrested more than two months ago on federal child pornography charges.
• Fogle had conversations with Taylor about the child porn, but instead of alerting authorities, he "chose to benefit from such production by obtaining access to a significant amount of such material."
• One victim told investigators she had sex with Fogle twice when she was 17 in exchange for money, once at the Plaza Hotel and once at the Ritz Carlton, both in New York City.
"Jared also understands that he requires significant psychiatric medical treatment and counseling. He has already begun that process by being extensively examined by a world-renowned expert in sexual conditions in order to chart a course to recovery. It is Jared's intent and goal to become healthy again," they said.
"Most importantly, Jared understands that he has hurt innocent people, vulnerable people, and his family. He has expressed remorse ... to his loved ones, and will, when given the opportunity, express that remorse to this court and to the people he has harmed. His intent is to spend the rest of his life making amends."
"Obviously, I am extremely shocked and disappointed by the recent developments involving Jared," she said in a statement via her attorney. "I am in the process of seeking a dissolution of the marriage. My focus is exclusively on the well-being of my children."
Fogle became a household name as "Jared from Subway" after a dramatic weight loss that he attributed to eating at Subway restaurants. He became famous in 2000 when the sandwich chain released a commercial centered on his claims that he dropped about 245 pounds -- from a peak weight of 425 -- in one year as an Indiana University student, thanks in part to exercise and a simpler diet involving Subway subs.
His celebrity grew. He was asked to serve as grand marshal in NASCAR races, and he helped ferry the Olympic torch through Indiana ahead of the Salt Lake City Games.
Fogle flipped the coin before the 2003 Fiesta Bowl and began traveling the world visiting troops. In 2006, the same year he started the Jared Foundation, he penned a memoir, "Jared, the Subway Guy: Winning Through Losing: 13 Lessons for Turning Your Life Around."
This fame helped him become one of the biggest -- and most effective -- faces in advertising, according to a 2013 study by Technomic's Consumer Brand Metrics, which monitors 120 eateries' brands on attributes including image and customer loyalty, according to Advertising Age.