FAA says San Diego standoff canceled 30 flights
SAN DIEGO (AP) — The latest on an active shooter at a San Diego apartment complex (all times local):
Authorities have released more details on the number of flights affected at the San Diego airport after a gunman fired off rounds inside a nearby apartment complex.
Ian Gregor with the Federal Aviation Administration says about 30 arriving and departing flights were canceled at the San Diego International Airport, and about 30 flights were diverted.
Authorities say the gunman surrendered to police after a more than five-hour standoff Wednesday, and no injuries were reported.
The FAA halted incoming flights for several hours as a precaution because planes swoop low near the apartment complex before landing.
Police have identified the gunman who fired off sporadic rounds inside an apartment complex, disrupting air traffic at the nearby San Diego International Airport.
Officials say 33-year-old Titus Colbert surrendered to police after a more than five-hour standoff Wednesday, and no injuries were reported.
The Federal Aviation Administration halted incoming flights for several hours as a precaution because planes swoop low near the apartment complex before landing.
San Diego Police Lt. Scott Wahl says Colbert threw "multiple weapons" out the window of a rooftop apartment before being taken into custody.
Wahl says officers exchanged gunfire with the suspect in the morning after responding to a domestic violence call at the apartment, where the victim lives.
Flights to the San Diego International Airport have resumed after police took into custody a gunman who fired shots at a nearby apartment complex, posing a threat to air traffic.
Police Lt. Scott Wahl says the domestic violence suspect walked out of the complex Wednesday afternoon, ending a more than five-hour standoff with officers.
Officers swarmed the building and exchanged gunfire with the man after responding to a domestic violence call.
The Federal Aviation Administration lifted its orders barring all flights from landing after the gunman moved into a part of the apartment where no longer posed a threat to air traffic.
He surrendered shortly after that.
Wahl says no one was reported hurt.
A passenger on a Southwest flight bound for San Diego says word spread quickly on board that the plane was being diverted because there was an active shooter near the airport.
Erik Carstensen was on a flight from Chicago that was diverted to an airport in Ontario, outside Los Angeles, after officials stopped planes from landing at San Diego International Airport.
Arriving planes swoop low over the neighborhood where the domestic violence suspect was holed up in a rooftop apartment, shooting sporadically.
Carstensen says passengers were told there was a security problem at the airport, but people on the Internet soon spread the news of the gunman.
He says he was worried since his wife was at the airport. He later learned the gunman was in a nearby neighborhood.
A man who lives next to the San Diego apartment where a gunman was holed up says he heard a bang and then spotted a hole in the stucco wall between the two apartments.
Tom Neu told reporters that he cowered in his bathtub, talking to friends and co-workers on his cellphone as SWAT team members swarmed the building.
Police Lt. Scott Wahl says the officers exchanged gunfire with the suspect Wednesday morning after responding to a domestic violence call at the apartment, where the victim lives.
Wahl says no one has been reported hurt. It's unknown if anyone is inside the apartment besides the suspect.
Federal Aviation Administration spokesman Ian Gregor says flights are being barred from landing at the nearby San Diego International Airport as a precaution.
Rescuers led Neu out of the complex.
This item has been corrected to show the suspect does not live in the rooftop apartment.
Police say a man who was firing off shots at a San Diego apartment complex is holed up in a rooftop apartment, where they have him surrounded.
Lt. Scott Wahl says officers swarmed the building and exchanged gunfire with the man after responding to a domestic violence call Wednesday morning.
He says no one has been reported hurt. It's unknown if anyone is inside the apartment besides the suspect, who has been identified by police but not named publicly.
Federal Aviation Administration spokesman Ian Gregor says flights are being barred from landing at the San Diego International Airport as a precaution, since the complex is under the airport's approach path.
Authorities are asking people in the area to stay inside and away from windows.
Flights are not being allowed to land at San Diego International Airport because of an active shooter at a nearby apartment complex.
Federal Aviation Administration spokesman Ian Gregor says the complex is under the airport's approach path. He says departures are being allowed.
Police say the man has been firing sporadically inside the apartment complex in a trendy neighborhood near downtown. But so far, no one has been reported hurt.
Lt. Scott Wahl says officers responding to a domestic violence call heard gunshots at the complex shortly after 9 a.m.
Authorities are asking people in the area to stay inside and away from windows.
Police say a man was firing sporadically inside a San Diego apartment complex, but no one was reported hurt.
Lt. Scott Wahl says police responding to a domestic violence call heard gunshots at the complex in the upscale neighborhood near Little Italy shortly after 9 a.m. Wednesday.
Authorities are asking people in the area to stay inside and away from windows.
The complex is in the 2400 block of Brandt Street.