Ex-Saints player Will Smith shot dead at crash scene
(CNN)Will Smith and his wife, Racquel, were "having a blast" at a city festival mere hours before they were both shot, leaving the former New Orleans Saints defensive end dead and his wife hospitalized.
New Orleans Police Department spokesman Tyler Gamble was reluctant to use the term "road rage," but a police statement says Smith and the driver of a Hummer SUV "exchanged words" before the Hummer's driver shot Smith multiple times and shot Smith's wife in the right leg.
Former New Orleans police officer Billy Ceravolo, who was at dinner with Will and Racquel Smith before the shooting, told CNN over the phone that Racquel Smith was on the mend, but he declined to answer further questions.
"She is out of surgery and doing well, and that's the highlight of today," he said.
Investigators recovered the weapon they believe he used, and it had no record, Harrison said. Hayes also had a male passenger in the car with him. He was not identified, and Harrison said he had no information suggesting the passenger was involved in the shooting.
according to the city's crime map It's a relatively low-crime area, especially when compared with Central City to its west and the Central Business District and French Quarter to its north. Of more than 500 crimes reported in New Orleans in the last week, only a handful occurred in the Lower Garden District, most of them thefts, though there was an assault reported Friday, according to the city's crime map
"We are devastated and saddened by Will's tragic and preventable death due to a senseless act that will leave a lasting scar on our community forever. Will was more than an exceptional football player he was a father, a husband, a son, a brother and teammate to so many and an inspiration to countless more," Saints owners Tom Benson and his wife, Gayle, said in a statement.
Kingsley HouseBridge House and Grace House He also played a big role in Kingsley House , as well as Bridge House and Grace House , and according to the Saints, he had been hosting an annual Smith Family Christmas event for Kingsley House families since 2012. The event, which was often held at the Saints practice facility, included a holiday meal, Christmas gifts from Santa Claus and a tour of the facility.
"bountygate" scandal The following year, he was suspended for four games after he and three other Saints were implicated in the franchise's "bountygate" scandal The suspension was later lifted. According to the NFL's allegations, the Saints paid bonuses for targeting and injuring opposing teams' players between 2009 and 2011.
according to The Times-Picayune Off the field, Smith was arrested in 2010 and charged with public intoxication and domestic abuse battery after he allegedly dragged his wife by her hair outside a Lafayette, Louisiana, nightclub, according to The Times-Picayune . He and his wife both said it was a misunderstanding, the newspaper reported, and the charges were dropped after he completed community service and counseling requirements.