Tara Brown and 60 Minutes crew heading home from Beirut
The 60 Minutes crew arrested in Beirut are on their way home to Australia after being released from custody with Brisbane mum Sally Faulkner.
The crew has touched down in Dubai in transit and is expected to arrive in Sydney later this evening.
Brown said the first thing she did after being freed was call her husband, John McAvoy.
"Had a chance to call John - I was ordered to call home straight away," Brown told 9NEWS with a laugh.
"But not the kids yet, I can't wait to speak to them obviously, although they have no idea about any of this."
"It's great to talk to home and it's great to be going home."
Brisbane mother Sally Faulkner said she was "just so glad to be out of there".
"I mean they treated us well, I can't complain about that, it's just the uncertainty that sort of kept me awake at night, not knowing if it was going to be a life-long sentence," she said.
The rest of the crew members were also relieved when they spoke to 9NEWS on their way to the Beirut Airport.
“Half an hour ago we were sitting in a very, very small cell, this has just come completely out of the blue,” producer Stephen Rice said.
Sound recordist David Ballment said the group were all “hoping for the best but prepared for the worst” before their sudden release.
Cameraman Ben Williamson simply said he can’t wait to “hug my wife and my kids and tell them I love them”.
The van carrying the 60 Minutes crew left the prison, heading for Beirut Airport, last night at about 11pm AEST.
Nine Network CEO Hugh Marks has announced a full review will be launched into the events which led to the crew’s arrest.
“Nine will conduct a full review that will be headed by Gerald Stone, with David Hurley and General Counsel Rachel Launders, to ascertain what went wrong and why our systems, designed to protect staff, failed to do so in this case,” he said in a statement.
“We will task the review with recommending the necessary actions to ensure that none of our colleagues are put in a similar position in the future.”
But he also said the issue of child abduction was “profoundly in the public interest”.
“What has happened to Sally happens all too often and affects thousands of Australian families,” he said.
“It is a story that not only is profoundly in the public interest but also one the public is interested in. It’s an issue that we will continue to highlight.”
Mr Marks also expressed gratitude to the numerous parties that helped the crew and Ms Faulkner with their situation.
“I would like to personally thank the Australian Government, the Foreign Minister Julie Bishop, the Australian Ambassador to Lebanon, Glenn Miles, and his consular staff in Beirut and staff at the Department of Foreign Affairs in Canberra for their advice and assistance,” he said.
Mr Marks acknowledged the families of the crew and thanked them for their courage.
“This has been an extraordinarily stressful time for the crew and for their families,” he said.
“I want to very publicly acknowledge how much they have been through and thank them for their courage, their perseverance and for the trust they placed in us to resolve events.”
Meanwhile, Ms Faulkner will be staying in Beirut for a custody hearing with her estranged partner Ali Elamine. 
Mr Elamine last night told a judge he wanted the charges dropped against the group.
He said he believed the news team, led by veteran reporter Brown, was "just doing their job".
A spokeswoman for the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said it was too soon to comment on any conditions attached to the group's release.
"We are pleased to hear of the news of the release of Ms Faulkner and the four 60 Minutes crew members on bail," the spokeswoman said in a statement.
"It is premature to comment on how soon the released Australians will be able to depart Lebanon or any conditions attached to their release."
The decision by Mr Elamine breaks a deadlock in the case since Ms Faulkner and the 60 Minutes team were arrested earlier this month, accused of attempting to retrieve a child on a street on April 7.
Ms Faulkner has faced charges of kidnapping her two children, five-year-old Lahela and three-year-old Noah, and belonging to a criminal gang.
Ms Faulkner claims Mr Elamine did not return the children as agreed after taking them on a holiday to Lebanon last year.
Brown, along with 60 Minutes cameraman Ben Williamson, sound recordist David Ballment and producer Stephen Rice, were facing charges of kidnapping, physical assault, hiding information and criminal conspiracy.