No indictment in Tamir Rice case
(CNN)Prosecutors say the police officer who killed 12-year-old Tamir Rice outside a Cleveland recreation center last year won't face criminal charges. Neither will the other officer who was with him.
An Ohio grand jury decided not to indict Officers Timothy Loehmann and Frank Garmback, prosecutor Tim McGinty said Monday.
"Given this perfect storm of human error, mistakes and communications by all involved that day, the evidence did not indicate criminal conduct by police," McGinty said.
"It is likely that Tamir, whose size made him look much older and who had been warned his pellet gun might get him into trouble that day, either intended to hand it over to the officers or show them it wasn't a real gun," McGinty said. "But there was no way for the officers to know that, because they saw the events rapidly unfolding in front of them from a very different perspective."
"Prosecutor McGinty deliberately sabotaged the case, never advocating for my son, and acting instead like the police officers' defense attorney," the statement said. "In a time in which a nonindictment for two police officers who have killed an unarmed black child is business as usual, we mourn for Tamir, and for all of the black people who have been killed by the police without justice. In our view, this process demonstrates that race is still an extremely troubling and serious problem in our country and the criminal-justice system."
The officers involved haven't spoken publicly about what happened that day. In a statement released on behalf of both officers by Loehmann's lawyer Monday, they said they were grateful for the grand jury's "thorough review of the facts" and hadn't spoken earlier because it would have been "prejudicial and irresponsible."
"We respect the justice system and the dedication of the jurors from our community," the statement released by attorney Henry Hilow said. "This case is a tragedy for the Rice family and officers involved. Our thoughts and prayers are with all."
"Both of the officers are and will remain on restricted duty. They have been on restricted duty since this incident happened," he said. "That's part of our process, not to allow officers involved in critical incidents to go back out there into the fray. They will remain on restricted duty until we complete the administrative process."
No matter what happens next, the public is likely to be skeptical, given how long it took to complete the investigation and the prosecutor's comments about the case, CNN legal analyst Sunny Hostin said.
Information that the gun the caller saw was probably not real and that the person holding it appeared to be a juvenile was not conveyed to Loehmann and Garmback, according to recordings that law enforcement released.
The officers were "prepared to face a possible active shooter in a neighborhood with a history of violence," McGinty said. "There are, in fact, memorials to two slain Cleveland police officers in that very park, a short distance away, and both had been shot to death nearby in the line of duty. Police are trained that it only takes a third of a second or less to draw and fire a weapon at them. Therefore, they must react quickly to any threat."
The expert analysis included a statement by a 20-year veteran of the FBI and a former instructor at the agency's academy that Loehmann's response was reasonable, given what he knew at the time.
McGinty had previously said his office wasn't using the reports to reach a conclusion and that the grand jury would get to consider all theevidence to reach its decision.