British Member of Parliament Joanne Cox Killed in 'Horrific' Gun, Stabbing Attack
A British member of Parliament was killed in a broad daylight shooting and stabbing after a town hall meeting at a library in West Yorkshire, England.
"Jo Cox, MP for Batley and Spenborough, was attacked and fatally wounded on Market Street," temporary Chief Constable Dee Collins told a news conference.
A 52-year-old man was arrested, and police confirm that they are not looking for any other suspects in the horrific attack, around 1 p.m. local time. The suspect's motives remain unknown.
Crime Commissioner for West Yorkshire, Mark Burns-Williamson, told reporters that this was a localized incident, albeit with "much wider impact."
Cox, 41, a Minister of Parliament (MP) for the Labour Party, was campaigning for the U.K. to remain in the European Union ahead of a national referendum on the issue June 23, and she was known for her work on Syria-related issues.
Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of the Labour Party, said the country would be "in shock at the horrific murder" of Cox, a "much-loved colleague."
In a statement he said, "The whole of the Labour Party and Labour family —- and indeed the whole country -- will be in shock at the horrific murder of Jo Cox today. Jo had a lifelong record of public service and a deep commitment to humanity. She worked both for Oxfam and the anti-slavery charity the Freedom Fund before she was elected last year as MP for Batley and Spen — where she was born and grew up."
"We send them our deepest condolences. We have lost a much-loved colleague, a real talent and a dedicated campaigner for social justice and peace. But they have lost a wife and a mother, and our hearts go out to them," Corbyn wrote.
An eye witness told ABC News that he saw a man in a baseball cap suddenly pull a gun from his bag. Hichem Ben Abdallah, who works at the Azzurro Café Restaurant near the library, said he heard the suspect shouting something but it was unclear what.
The leader of Britain’s far right wing party “Britain First” distanced himself from reports that the attacker shouted the party name before he killed her.
Standing in front of the party’s logo which says “Taking our Country Back,” Paul Golding condemned the attack as a “heinous crime” and dismissed the reports as “hearsay.”
Police presence in the area has been increased as a reassurance to the community.
Campaigning on the EU referendum has been suspended for the day because of the shooting.
On a visit to Gibraltar, Prime Minister David Cameron made a short statement, saying "My thoughts are with Jo's husband, Brendan, their two children and their wider family. We've lost a great star. She was a great campaigning MP, with huge compassion and a big heart."
Gabrielle Giffords, who represented Arizona's 8th congressional district and survived an assassination attempt in 2011 wrote a short tribute to Cox on Twitter.