MAP, CHARTS: The Death Toll of the War on Drugs
These interactive map and charts show the drug-related fatalities reported since May 10, 2016 based on ABS-CBN’s independent monitoring of national and local news reports, and PNP Regional Office press releases.
ABS-CBN categorized these fatalities tagged in drugs by the way they were killed: 1.) those who were killed during police operations as reported in media; 2.) those who were killed by unidentified assailants in reported drug-related shooting incidents or by gunmen “riding in tandem”; and 3.) “salvage” victims, or those whose bodies were found with an attached label or signage tagging them in drugs. The proportion of each category relative to the total death toll is illustrated in the pie chart.
The heat map illustrates the magnitude of drug-related deaths per province/city: the redder the color of a province/city in the map, the higher the number of drug-related deaths reported in that area.
The table meanwhile, shows the names and aliases of those who were killed, as well as the dates and areas where the killings took place. Each column in the table is sortable.
The data on the map, charts, and table are interconnected. For example, clicking on a province/city on the map will show the corresponding details for that area in the charts and tables, such as the death toll in that province/city; the names of those killed and the dates when the incidents took place; and the type of incident. Clicking on the chart and tables will likewise reveal the corresponding information on the map.
The data may also be viewed per province/city by ticking on the list. It is possible to tick more than one province/city on the list.
Clicking on the white space anywhere on the chart will restore the map, charts, and tables to default view.
Sources: News sites of ABS-CBN, GMA 7, Philippine Daily Inquirer, Philippine Star, Manila Bulletin, DZIQ Radyo Inquirer 990 AM, DZRH News, Sunstar Bacolod, Sunstar Baguio, Sunstar Cagayan de Oro, Sunstar Davao, Sunstar Cebu, Cebu Daily News, The Manila Times, The Standard, Tempo, Bombo Radyo Philippines, The Freeman, MindaNews, Mindanao Times, Mindanao Goldstar Daily, The Bohol Chronicle, Bicol Today, and press releases from PNP Regional Office websites.