Washington mall shooting: Gunman at large after killing 5
(CNN)A man carrying a rifle entered a Macy's store at a mall in Washington state, shot dead four women and a man, and vanished into the night, police said.
Authorities believe only one person fired the shots Friday night at Cascade Mall in Burlington, about an hour north of Seattle.
A search is underway for an armed man who headed toward Interstate 5 after the attack, said Sgt. Mark Francis, a spokesman for the Washington State Patrol.
Francis released a blurry surveillance photo of a man described as the suspect. His motive or relationship to the victims, if any, are unclear, he said.
The names of the victims were not immediately released.
"I didn't know anything," she said. "The theater attendant came in and apologized for stopping the movie and said they were asked to have everyone leave immediately."
2012 shooting at a movie theater "But you immediately think about what happened in Aurora, Colorado, so you start moving faster," she said, referring to the 2012 shooting at a movie theater that left 12 dead.
When they got outside, they saw police vehicles but no officers in sight, Montreuil said.
"We didn't know if it was a fire so we were looking for smoke of some kind. Then a few officers started canvassing through the crowds, asking if anybody saw anything."
Armando Patino said he was working at a T-Mobile store near Macy's when he heard the commotion.
Patino told CNN affiliate KOMO-TV "Out of nowhere I just hear somebody yell and then after that, I turn around and just look at the Macy's and I just hear shots," Patino told CNN affiliate KOMO-TV in Seattle.
"I hear one shot and then stand kinda still and like two three other people start running out saying, 'gun.' "
"We went in the back where we have a door ... and we just stayed there until they told us to evacuate."
Dozens of cars were left behind in the parking lot, according to Francis of the State Patrol. He said it's unclear if one of them belongs to the gunman.
Those who left their cars at the mall were told to check back the next day.
Authorities released a photo of a man they said was the shooter, saying he prowled the mall armed with a rifle.
"Here is the shooter. We believe just one shooter. ... Armed with rifle," Francis tweeted. A manhunt is underway as police work on a few leads.
"Follow detour warnings, stay close to friends and loved ones as we await more information and, hopefully, news of the suspect's capture," he tweeted.
Inslee sent his condolences to the families of the victims and prayers to those injured.