Iowa police shootings: 2 killed; suspect in custody
(CNN)A suspect in Wednesday morning's apparent ambush killings of two Iowa police officers was taken into custody hours later, after he flagged down a natural resources officer a county away from where the killings occurred, police said.
Investigators believe Scott Michael Greene, 46, shot Urbandale police Officer Justin Martin and Des Moines police Sgt. Anthony "Tony" Beminio while they sat in squad vehicles at intersections roughly 2 miles apart shortly after 1 a.m., authorities said.
Greene, of Urbandale, was taken into custody later that morning after he flagged down a state Department of Natural Resources officer while walking on a gravel road in Dallas County and asked him to call 911, police said.
Greene was not charged in the killings as of noon, but he is "suspected of doing this," Des Moines police Sgt. Paul Parizek said, citing unspecified tips and leads.
Urbandale police said they had interacted with Greene before, including about two weeks ago, when they told him to leave a high school football game.
But Parizek said there was nothing to immediately indicate that Martin or Beminio had any previous contact with him.
Nor did it appear the officers had much warning that someone was about to shoot them, Parizek said.
"On the surface right now ... it doesn't look like there was any interaction between these officers and whoever the coward is that shot them while they sat in their cars," Parizek said, holding back tears, before Greene was named a suspect.
Greene was taken to a hospital after complaining of an issue with an existing medical condition, and detectives are expected to interrogate him, Parizek said.
Police discovered Martin's body about 1:05 a.m., after residents reported shots being fired. Martin's body was seated in his squad car, at an Urbandale intersection just northwest of Des Moines, Parizek said.
Beminio died at a hospital, Parizek said. He said both officers were on patrol. Neither was responding to a service call, and neither had radioed about a confrontation.
Greene was asked to leave after he waved a Confederate flag in front of "people of color" during the national anthem, and other people complained it was offensive, McCarty said.
"He said he was invoking his First Amendment rights, and we were trampling on them," McCarty said.
Police warned Greene to "cease and desist," and he afterward was negotiating with the school about when he'd be permitted at the school, which his daughter attends, the chief said.
The shootings bring renewed pain to a community that recently mourned the deaths of two other Des Moines police officers. They were killed in March when their vehicle was hit head-on by a driver going the wrong way, police said.
CNN affiliate KCCI showed As news of the shootings spread, a woman gave bottled water and other supplies to an Urbandale police officer who was standing along a street, and tearfully gave him a hug, video from CNN affiliate KCCI showed
"I want you to go home to your families, because I want my dad to come home to me and I want my friends to come home to me, and I'm sorry," she said.
Long apparently visited Dallas after the shootings there, posting a YouTube video July 10 in which he spoke of the protests, and a notion that victims of bullying need to resort to brute force.