Four dead and others fighting for life as details emerge about alleged driver
The man who allegedly drove into pedestrians in Melbourne's CBD yesterday, killing four and leaving more than 30 injured, is expected to be charged by police today.
A 10-year-old girl, a 25-year-old man and 32-year-old woman were killed at the scene and a 33-year-old man died in hospital last night after a Holden Commodore allegedly driven by 26-year-old Dimitrious "Jimmy" Gargasoulas mowed down people in the Bourke Street pedestrian mall just after 1.30pm.
A further 31 people were injured in the rampage, and an infant is among five people still fighting for life.
Victoria Police Deputy Commissioner Andrew Crisp said police hoped to interview and charge Mr Gargasoulas as soon as today. 
"We're certainly hoping we can interview the male today," Deputy Commissioner Crisp told Weekend Today this morning.
"He did receive a gunshot wound to the arm, it's certainly not life threatening and we're hoping we can interview and charge later today."
Deputy Commissioner Crisp said the incident had been traumatic for emergency services. 
"Words really can't explain how horrific this particular situation has been for victims, for families, for police and other emergency services and the broader community," he said. 
It’s also alleged Mr Gargasoulas stabbed his brother in the hours before the CBD incident.
Detectives believe the Bourke Street attack is linked to the stabbing of Mr Gargasoulas' brother Angelo, who is fighting for life in hospital.
Mr Gargasoulas allegedly stabbed his brother repeatedly during an argument at a property in Raleigh Street in Windsor.
Mr Gargasoulas fled but later appeared in the background of 9NEWS reporter Neary Ty's live cross from the scene, waving and swearing at the camera.
Following the stabbing, it is alleged Mr Gargasoulas took a woman, who is known to him, hostage in his car.
She managed to escape on the Bolte Bridge before the car was driven into the Melbourne CBD.
Mr Gargasoulas was seen doing burn-outs near Flinders Street Station before he turned onto Swanston Street at around 1.45pm and turned left into the busy Bourke Street pedestrian mall.
Police shot Mr Gargasoulas, who was the only person in the car at the time.
He was arrested near the corner of Bourke and William Streets, and was seen handcuffed on the ground, shirtless and wearing a pair of red underwear.
Premier Daniel Andrews has labelled the attack an "evil criminal act" and pledged the governments support for those affected.
"A terrible criminal act was committed in the CBD of our great city," Mr Andrews said this afternoon.
"This is a heart-breaking incident and one that has torn families apart."
Witnesses reported hearing at least five gunshots before the man was arrested.
"There's someone on the middle of the ground and there's blood all over the street," Rishi Hathiramani, a CBD shopkeeper, said.
A number of CBD businesses were placed into lockdown, while others were evacuated.
"A heap of people ran into my store, it was horrible. Half of my staff are in tears," a Strandbags manager said.
City office worker William Mulholland said he came out of a laneway and saw a number of people lying on the pavement receiving CPR from police and emergency workers.
Read more: Traffic and public transport diverted as police lock down Melbourne CBD
Victoria Police is urging witnesses and victims requiring support to call the Victim's Support Helpline on 1800 819 817.