ABC Radio National (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Damien Carrick: Hello, welcome to the Law Report, Damien Carrick here. Should Indigenous prisoners who create paintings in a prison art studio be able to sell those artworks and pocket the proceeds? Two art exhibitions, one in Melbourne and the other in Brisbane, highlight the dramatically different approaches taken around the country. That's later in the program. For the first time, Australia has a female chief Justice. On Monday in an impressive ceremony at the High Court of Australia in Canberra, Susan Kieful was sworn in as the nation's top judge. Susan Kiefel: When I came to the bar in 1975, there were very few women members of the profession. This is not the occasion to consider why this was so. The point presently to be made is that this has changed, and so has the composition of this court. Damien Carrick: Although the speeches were dignified and subdued, there was a palpable sense of celebration and history in the courtroom. Dr Heather Roberts is a senior lecturer at the Australian National University. She attended the swearing-in. Heather Roberts: The courtroom was full of distinguished women lawyers, and you could see also the future generation for women in the law with the associates seated behind the judges on the court. Of the 11 associates there, six were women, so a very different gender picture today from what we could imagine happened 30 years ago with the swearing-in of the first woman of the court, Mary Gaudron. Damien Carrick: So this is of course a historic moment in time. Australia has its first female Chief Justice. How was this acknowledged in the speeches? Heather Roberts: In many different ways. The attorney general, as perhaps we might have expected from the way he announced the appointment of Susan Kiefel, placed great emphasis on the fact that she is an extraordinary judge with an unusual background, and her story is one of inspiration for both men and women. This was the starting point for his speech. He then went on to emphasise the historic first for women. That was very different to the second speaker welcoming the new Chief Justice, Fiona McLeod, President of the Law Council of Australia, who framed her speech to signify the great importance of the event for women in the law in Australia for marking the fact that we have a first female Chief Justice, and noting also that the ceremony started with a dramatic visual difference for women, the fact that our new female Chief Justice took her oath of office and allegiance from another female justice, Justice Virginia Bell. Damien Carrick: How about Susan Kiefel herself, how did her speech address this momentous occasion? Heather Roberts: Her speech was one of emphasising the extraordinary importance of the role of the Chief Justice within the Australian legal system. And she also acknowledged of course that when she was appointed as a Queen's Counsel in Queensland, she was the first woman to that role and the landscape for women was very different. But her speech was one of emphasising that for women of talent, the pathway through the judiciary was available to them. Damien Carrick: Of course she is remarkable for a number of reasons, not least being that she left school at aged 15 and she worked as a legal secretary and then completed high school part-time. And then instead of studying law at university, which is sort of the traditional way of getting your degree, she studied law in the evening through the barristers' board system. So she really has an unusual and quite inspirational journey. Heather Roberts: She definitely does. The last time a High Court judge took this pathway into the law was 1987 with Justice Michael McHugh, and it's an incredible story. I think particularly it was a wonderful coincidence that the news of her appointment came out just as year 12 students were getting their university results. So any that might have been disheartened that they couldn't get into law straight away need only to look to the example of Susan Kiefel to see that there are other pathways to success in the law. Damien Carrick: Heather Roberts, this is a smashing of the glass ceiling in a very profound way. Was there a sense of muted, dignified nevertheless, but sense of celebration and a sense of extraordinary moment in history? Heather Roberts: Definitely Damien. The assembled audience, particularly after the ceremony, there was a real buzz in the High Court in a very positive sense of what this moment means for the Australian legal community and women in law. Fiona McLeod's speech, this was a very prominent theme. More muted certainly from the Attorney General. But we could be left with no doubt that everyone in the room recognised that history was being made. Damien Carrick: Now, Susan Kiefel has been a member of the High Court since 2007. From the way that she has carried out her role so far on the bench, what can we tell about the way she might carry out her role as Chief Justice? Heather Roberts: That's a fabulous question Damien. We do have to be a little bit careful because we've had Chief Justices in the past who have somewhat surprised us in how they've transformed from being a Justice to being a Chief Justice. Chief Justice Mason is a notable example. But one of the key themes in her swearing-in speeches and in the welcomes today was the importance of collegiality in the way Susan Kiefel approaches her role and how she views the court as a collegiate institution. So based on her past decisions and what she said at her swearing-in, we can expect a court that will work towards joint judgements where it's possible and also recognise that of course individual judges need to write their own decisions when they disagree or have a different perspective. Damien Carrick: Susan Kiefel's appointment is of course momentous, but it was in no way a surprise, was it. Heather Roberts: No, I don't think we can say it was a surprise. She was the most senior judge on the court at the time of the retirement of Chief Justice French, and it's a tradition in Australia, although by no means required, that a new Chief Justice will be selected either from the most senior judge currently sitting on the bench or taken from outside. Susan Kiefel's record on the High Court was one that is greatly respected. Prior to her elevation as Chief she has extraordinary judicial experience. So it certainly wasn't a surprise, but that does not make it any less welcome. Damien Carrick: Absolutely, it's a historic day. Rather lost in the excitement was the swearing-in of the newest member of the court, Justice James Edelman in the afternoon. He's a bit of a wunderkind, isn't he. Heather Roberts: He has certainly been described as a precocious intellect. He is one of the youngest judges of the High Court. You have to look back to judges born in the 1880s to find any younger judge appointed to the court… Damien Carrick: How old is he? Is he early 40s? Heather Roberts: He is, that's right, 43 years old, he is just pipped at the post for the second youngest judge by Sir Owen Dixon, one of Australia's most notable judges. Damien Carrick: So if the age of retirement is aged 70, that means he's going to be around for a long time on the High Court. So he is a likely future Chief Justice, can we go that far? Heather Roberts: I think just by the length of time that he will be on the court, he would definitely be a likely candidate for a Chief Justiceship, and that was the path of course that Sir Owen Dixon took when he was appointed. He was appointed very young and was ultimately a very famous Chief Justice of Australia. Damien Carrick: Heather Roberts, a final question. On a personal level, what did you take from yesterday's big events? Heather Roberts: It was extraordinary to see Australia's first female Justice sworn in at such a significant event and a milestone for Australian society to recognise that women are performing these key public roles. What was so interesting, contrasting the two ceremonies that happened yesterday, Damien, was to see the different ways in which women in law are welcomed, but also perhaps a changing perspective on the importance of having broad diversity in the courts, diversity not just in gender but also diversity in age of the people who are deciding our key legal disputes. Justice Edelman is a judge born in the 1970s. Damien Carrick: Heather Roberts, thanks so much for speaking to the Law Report. Heather Roberts: Thanks very much Damien. Damien Carrick: Dr Heather Roberts, senior lecturer at the Australian National University.