Groton Quadruple Murder Appears To Be Case Of ‘Tragic Family Violence’ « CBS Boston
BOSTON (CBS) – Police say there is no reason for the community to feel unsafe after four people were found dead Friday at a Groton home in what is being described as a case of “tragic family violence.”
Orion Krause, 22, was arrested and will be charged with four counts of murder after a man and three women were found dead at a home on Common Street.
Three bodies were found inside the home and a fourth was discovered outside.
The identities of the victims have not been released.
Middlesex District Attorney Marian Ryan said the victims were an elderly man and woman, along with two middle-aged women.
All four people died from blunt trauma. Ryan said investigators have found what they believe was the murder weapon.
“I just want to reiterate what the district attorney said and assure people in the area that there is no cause for alarm,” said Groton Police Chief Groton Police Chief Donald Palma. “This was not a random act. We do believe at this point that the people were all connected and had relationships. The town is safe as it pertains to this particular incident.”
Neighbor Wagner Alcocer said he couldn’t believe what he was seeing. Alcocer said he saw a naked man standing at his back door Friday evening. He said the man was covered in mud, asking for help.
Alcocer said Krause told him, “I need help, I need help. I murdered four people.”
“I asked him ‘Where are your clothes?’ and he said he left them in the woods,” Alcoc
He says he gave Krause a blanket and told him to wait outside on the chair. Krause wrapped himself in the blanket and sat on the chair.
“He was extremely calm and never raised his voice. He surrendered himself. He did what I asked and followed instructions,” Alcocer said.
He adds that he thought the victims were nice people.
“We have seen them going up the street a very nice elderly people beautiful home with gorgeous garden,” Alcocer said.
Friends stopped by the scene of the murders Saturday morning.
“They’re a nice family trying to keep their parents at home and enjoy themselves in their last years. It’s just hard to really fathom it. I can’t get my heard around how anyone could do that,” said one woman who stopped at the home to leave flowers.
Another said, “We’re all touched by this in some way.”
Groton selectman Josh Degen said on Facebook a vigil will be held Sunday on Town Field, located behind Groton Public Library.
“We live in a small tight-knit community and must all work through this tragedy together,” he wrote.
Krause is scheduled to be arraigned on Monday.