Countryfile's Miriam O'Reilly wins BBC ageism claim
Former presenter of BBC1 rural affairs show succeeds in ageism and victimisation complaints, but not sexism claim
Former BBC presenter Miriam O'Reilly has won her case for age discrimination against the corporation after she was dropped from BBC1's rural affairs show, Countryfile.
O'Reilly, 53, took the BBC to an employment tribunal claiming age and sex discrimination after she was one of four female presenters, all in their 40s or 50s, who were dropped from the 23-year-old show.
The tribunal upheld her claim for age discrimination but not sex discrimination. It also upheld O'Reilly's claim for victimisation.
O'Reilly claimed she was hounded out of the BBC after she was unfairly blamed for newspaper stories criticising the corporation for dropping middle-aged women presenters.
The presenter, who will now receive damages from the corporation as a result of today's verdict, told MediaGuardian.co.uk: "Words cannot describe how happy I feel. It's historic and it's going to have huge implications for all broadcasters."
In its judgment, the tribunal found that discrimination against O'Reilly "was not justified" and that she had been "dismissed almost entirely out of hand" along with two other former Countryfile presenters.
"The wish to appeal to a prime-time audience, including younger viewers, is a legitimate aim. However, we do not accept that it has been established that choosing younger presenters is required to appeal to such an audience," the judgment stated.
Today's verdict is a significant embarrassment for BBC1's former controller Jay Hunt, whose evidence was a central plank of the corporation's defence against O'Reilly's allegations.
The timing could barely be worse for Hunt, who started her new job as chief creative officer of Channel 4 yesterday .
The BBC today issued an apology to O'Reilly and said it would be "speaking to her". The corporation said it was "committed to fair selection" and "clearly did not get it right in this case".
In light of the tribunal's ruling, the BBC said it would give additional training to senior editorial executives and issue new guidance on the fair selection of presenters. The findings "raise questions that need to be addresed by the whole industry", the corporation added.
"We accept the findings of the tribunal and would like to apologise to Miriam. We will be speaking to her," said the BBC in a statement today.
"The BBC is committed to fair selection in every aspect of our work and we clearly did not get it right in this case.
"We will ensure that senior editorial executives responsible for these kind of decisions in the BBC undergo additional training in the selection and appointment of presenters, and produce new guidance on fair selection for presenter appointments,
"These findings also raise questions that need to be addressed by the whole industry. As Chair of the Cultural Diversity Network, Mark Thompson will raise the topic of fair representation of people of all ages across the broadcasting industry.
"We would like to acknowledge the important contribution Miriam has made to the BBC over more than 20 years and we would welcome the opportunity to discuss working with her again in the future."
O'Reilly was dropped from the show, along with Charlotte Smith, Juliet Morris and Michaela Strachan, when it was moved from Sunday mornings to a new peak-time slot in April 2009.
In its ruling the tribunal criticised the BBC for the "lack of documentation" about the decision making process that led to younger presenters being hired for Countryfile's peaktime move, and the "failure to apply a formal procedure".
This was not in itself evidence of discrimination, but "makes it much more difficult for the respondent [the BBC] to explain the decisions and state with clarity the grounds upon which the decisions were taken".
The BBC said it chose new "second tier" presenters for Countryfile over O'Reilly because they had "substantial network profile that might attract primetime audience" - but the tribunal ruled that this was not the case. "We consider a significant factor in their choice was their comparative youth; and in the decision not to consider the claimant, her age."
The judgment also stated that Hunt's evidence to the tribunal in which she said had never discussed O'Reilly or the other presenters who left the show with Andrew Thorman, BBC head of rural affairs, was "inconsistent with her emails that show that she was aware that they were to be dropped".
However, the tribunal said it accepted Hunt's "genuine concerns about the lack of older women in television, particularly in authority roles".
Kate Kinninmont, the chief executive of the creative industries networking organisation Women in Film & TV, said she was "absolutely delighted" with O'Reilly's "landmark" victory.
"Whether she had won or not it was still a landmark case because it got everyone focusing on these very important issues," Kinninmont added, saying that the BBC's acceptance of the decision should also be applauded.
"One of the shocking things from this case was the unimpressive way in which the decisions about on-screen talent were made, there was all sorts of confusion and hearsay. That's utterly not on for TV and I think the BBC will put that right.
"Miriam is delighted not only because people have accepted the version of events which she gave, but because she has loved the BBC for a long time. They were a great employer and she was disappointed at how things transpired."
Accusations of ageism have previously been levelled at the BBC over the departure of other high-profile presenters including Arlene Phillips, who was dropped as a judge on BBC1's Strictly Come Dancing but returned as a panellist on a new BBC1 talent show format.
O'Reilly, who became a familiar voice on BBC Radio 4 presenting environmental programme Costing the Earth as well as Woman's Hour and Farming Today, is now considering offers of a return to the BBC.
The presenter rejected an opportunity to settle with the corporation before the tribunal began last year.
It is understood the BBC offered her a substantial sum, believed to be between £75,000 and £100,000, not to take the case to the tribunal.
In the course of her evidence to the central London tribunal O'Reilly claimed a Countryfile director had warned her "to be careful with those wrinkles when high definition comes in" nine months before she was axed.
And she claimed her fellow Countryside presenter Juliet Morris, who was also dropped from the show, told her that Hunt, who was then still in charge of BBC1, had made the decision because she "hated women". Morris later denied making any such remark.
Hunt said the suggestion that she hated women as "categorically untrue and profoundly distressing and utterly offensive on every level".
Another BBC executive, Andrew Thorman, said Hunt had sealed the fate of O'Reilly and two of the other female presenters dropped from the show in just eight words: "I think their experience is mainly radio, no."
Hunt denied it, saying: "It is not the sort of decision I would be taking on a whim with a few words dismissing someone's career like that."
Speaking ahead of the tribunal last year, O'Reilly said: "The BBC has dismissed claims about ageism and sexism with a wave of its hand. I want for the first time to see what a judge has to say about it. I want to know why I was treated this way after so long. I would like justice out of this."
• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 3353 2000.
• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for publication".