Charles Taylor war crimes trial: as it happens
Carole White gave dramatic evidence at the special court for Sierra Leone on Monday, contradicting the supermodel's account about how she received "blood diamonds" from the ex-dictator after a charity dinner hosted by Nelson Mandela in 1997.
On Thursday Campbell testified that she was never told who the gift she was from, but White claimed that Campbell and Taylor were "mildly flirting" and that the former president of Liberia had allegedly promised to present the gift to the supermodel that night.
Proceedings are relayed to the public with a 30 minute delay. Times are BST.
1032 Carole White is allowed to step down. Her cross-examination is over and her testimony ends. To sum up, it contradicted much of what Naomi Campbell said last week.
1029 White confirms that she and Campbell talked about the diamonds on the Blue Train.
1023 White doesn't recall having breakfast with Mia Farrow the day after Campbell received diamonds.
1003 The supermodel's former agent said she didn't hear arrangements to give Campbell diamonds at dinner table, despite apparently earlier claiming to have done so. Mr Griffiths repeatedly quizzed White about a witness statement in which she said she heard Taylor promising to give Campbell the diamonds at the dinner table.
But admitted that she did not hear him say he would make the gift.
"He nodded that he was going to send her diamonds. I didn't hear the words, I don't recall them," she said.
0953 White insists that her testimony is true and nothing to do with long-running dispute she has with supermodel.
0947 White says Campbell didn't do anything illegal but was just accepting a gift.
0915 Defence lawyer claims Taylor and his staff didn't have mobile phone in 1997. White had claimed that Campbell had been in touch with Taylor's men over delivery of diamonds.
0850 White looking uncomfortable. Defence being quite aggressive in his questioning. He accuses her of further "complete fabrications".
0845 White picked up for innacurately claiming that Mandela's wife, Graca Machel, was not at dinner. Defence counsel says White's earlier claim was "complete nonsense". Judge ticks him off and calls for him to "temper his language".
0845 Defence lawyer's mobile phone goes off. He curses "wretched thing".
0840 Taylor's lawyer begins by quizzing White on who was sitting beside who at Mandela's dinner. Defence counsel suggests White is wrong when she says supermodel was sitting beside Taylor. He says White has "made up" claim of flirting between Campbell and Taylor. It is a "figment of her imagination", he suggests.
0835 Carole White is back in the chair. She'll be hoping for a shorter day after yesterday's grilling.
0830 And they're off. Tuesday's session is under way.
16:00 The proceedings come to a close and White will resume her evidence tomorrow at 10am.
15:56 Charles Taylor and his retinue were not staying in Mandela's compound. Liberians would not therefore not have been able to gain access at the late hour, the Defence asserts. After several attempts and the intervention of a judge, White agrees that the men never claimed to be bringing the gift on behalf of Mr Taylor.
15:30 "My question was very simple" is becoming something of a refrain as Taylor's lawyers try to present White as evasive.
15:20 White says she is suing Campbell over a perfume contract. She says Campbell owes her $600,000 plus future earnings for breaking off the deal two years ago. Defence states that they believe White has a motive for lying about her former employee, she denies the accusation.
15:12 White seems to have been aware that her staff were watching the tribunal on Sky news but won't express anything stronger than "surprise" that they seem to have spent much of their time chatting on social network sites about it.
15:10 More extracts from the Facebook page. In reaction to Naomi Campbell's complaint that her appearance last Thursday was an "inconvenience", Ms Wilshaw wrote "That is the Campbell line! When she said that the whole agency laughed. Can't wait for Carole to bring her down at The Hague." White says she doesn't use Facebook and didn't know the case was the talk of the office. She didn't even watch Campbell's testimony.
15:04 The court is shown a picture from the Facebook page of one of White's employees – Annie Wilshaw – showing White and others relaxing in a room. The photo is captioned: "Blood Diamond night"
15:00 White is asked whether she held a 'Blood Diamonds party' at her London office. She denies the suggestion, saying she had a party for her brother's birthday, but is again reprimanded for failing to give a straight answer.
14:58 White is repeatedly challenged by the Defence over whether she had agreed to appear on a US talk show this evening. She insists that she had never given her permission, although appears unable to explain what arrangements might have been made on her behalf.
14:39 Jeremy Ractcliffe, the former chief of the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund, appeared "shocked" and "horrified" when Campbell gave him the diamonds to help raise funds, White claims
14:34 White says she was worried about the diamonds because she knew it was illegal to possess them and she thought she would have to carry them. She claims she advised Campbell not to keep them.
1425 White describes when the diamonds were handed over. Two men arrived at their guesthouse in the middle of the night, "took out a quite scruffy paper and handed it to Ms Campbell and said: 'These are the diamonds'," White tells the Special Court for Sierra Leone in The Hague.
"She showed it to me," adds White. "She was quite disappointed because they were not shiny."
1421 Campbell was excited and waiting for men to arrive in the middle of the night to deliver the diamonds, White says. The supermodel was "in communication" with someone and kept saying "they're nearly here, they're nearly here".
1415 Taylor nodded in agreement to concur that a gift was going to be given. White says Taylor and Campbell were "mildly flirting". "Naomi was flirting with him and he was flirting back. They were just enyoing each other's company," she says.
1412 Carol White is back in the chair. White says Campbell told her during the dinner that Taylor "was going to give her some diamonds".
1302 Right, that's lunch. More later ...
1258 White says she accompanied Campbell on "blue train" from Pretoria to Cape Town where she attended a dinner at Nelson Mandela's.
1256 White takes the stand. She begins by explaining her relationship with Campbell – agent for 17 years
1245 Mia Farrow's testimony ends. Phew. Next up is Carole White, Naomi Campbell's former agent.
1236 Judge asks Farrow whether she has ever watched the film "Blood Diamonds". The judge asks if watching the Leonardo Di Caprio film had confused her memories about her conversation with Campbell.
Farrow concedes that Campbell may not have used the word "huge".
She says: "I know she didn't say 'a few' and certainly not 'stones'.
"She may not have used the word 'huge' but she did say a diamond. My recollection might not be accurate on the size part."
1233 Anyah quizzes her on why she removed the words "if true" from a report in which it was suggested that if Campbell received diamonds from Taylor it would change the case. Farrow said she removed the words because she "knew it to be true".
1221 Farrow admits to uploading a newspaper article about blood diamonds the day Naomi Campbell gave evidence to the war crimes tribunal.
1214 Defence lawyer Morris Anyah repeatedly asking Farrow about Sudan and Darfur. Seems to be suggesting that her humanitarian work and campaigning for Africa is influencing her answers. He refers to quote from Farrow about her belief that the ICC is the best chance of justice for people from Sierra Leone.
The court is shown an ABC News report in which Farrow told Campbell to "step up" and do her part in the prosecution.
She tells the reporter: "I'm eager to see the people of Liberia and Sierra Leone see justice. They need that."
The actress was asked about her "preoccupation" with Africa, and her particular interest in Darfur.
She took part in a water-only fast to call for justice in the region, lasting into a 13th day.
Farrow is asked about her apparent view that Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir is guilty of genocide even though he has not yet been tried.
She said: "My view is that he is guilty."
1153 Miss Farrow has just been called Miss Campbell for, I think, the third time. Confusion and tiredness beginning to kick in but defence lawyer shows no signs of stopping his questioning.
1135 Farrow says she didn't realise that diamond incident was so consequential. The actress seems slightly puzzled by the number of questions she's facing.
"Yes, I regret that I didn't put it together earlier, I suppose. Anyway, that's when I remembered it."
Farrow told the court: "If indeed he is guilty of the crimes he is accused of, I am gratified that he is in this procedure, involved in a procedure that will bring him to justice.
"I have confidence that the procedure will reveal whether he is guilty or not."
1125 Again she maintains that she didn't mishear Campbell when she talked about single diamond. We've been here before I feel.
"I don't know how many diamonds there were or what state they were in because I didn't see them.
"I can only tell you, and I swear on the Bible to this court and beyond, that is what Naomi Campbell said that morning at breakfast."
1105 Farrow back on the stand after a short break. Not sure where the defence lawyer's questioning is going. Farrow gives the impression she has said all she knows about the diamonds.
1030 Questioning of Mia farrow ends for a break. The actress was expected to make a brief appearance but gave evidence for more than 1 hour and 30 minutes.
1005 Farrow says her and Campbell have drifted apart since the dinner in South Africa and have had little contact since.
0954 Actress says she didn't see any "flirtation or communication" between Campbell and Taylor.
0950 Farrow says she doesn't remember Charles Taylor being at the dinner. She says it was a big gathering with perhaps three tables. Campbell said there was only one.
0950 Defence labouring the point about whether diamond was singular and large or whether they were plural and small. Lawyer ticked off by judge.
0936 Farrow admits "Maths is not her forte" after being told by the judge that if her son was born in 1970 then he was 27 when he attended Mandela's dinner in 1997, not 17.
0935 Defence queries why Farrow talks of "one huge diamond" when Campbell and White talk of "several little diamonds". Farrow says she did not see diamonds and is repeating what Campbell told her.
0925 Actress says she doesn't know identities or nationalities of men who delivered diamond to Campbell in the middle of the night. She also says she knows nothing about the origin of the diamond or why it was given to Campbell.
0925 Farrow says she "stands by everything she has said" and denies exaggerating.
0925 Prosecutors questioning of Farrow ends. Cross examining begins. The prosecution claims Taylor traded guns to rebels in neighbouring Sierra Leone in exchange for uncut diamonds — known as "blood diamonds" for their role in financing conflicts — during the country's 1992-2002 civil war, which left more than 100,000 dead.
If Farrow's account is true, it would dent Taylor's denials of any involvement with the trade in illicit diamonds.
0920 Farrow says Campbell said "of course I don't intend on keeping diamond".
0915 Farrow claims she didn't know anything about Charles Taylor in 1997. She also claims that she doesn't know Carole White and has no relationship with her.
0915 Farrow says an "excited" Campbell claimed at breakfast that men from Charles Taylor had given her a diamond. The actress says it was Campbell, and not her or White, who made the suggestion that the diamonds came from the former Liberian dictator.
"What I remember is Naomi Campbell joined us at the table but before she even sat down she recounted an event of that evening, Farrow told the court.
"And she said that in the night she had been awakened, some men were knocking at the door. They had been sent by Charles Taylor and they were giving a huge diamond."
"And she said that she intended to give the diamond to Nelson Mandela's children's charity."
Asked who said the gift came from Taylor, Farrow said: "Naomi Campbell."
Farrow was asked again if she was the one at the breakfast table who said the gift came from Taylor.
She said: "Absolutely not."
She was asked who did make the suggestion.
She said: "Naomi Campbell said they came from Charles Taylor."
Farrow says her children remembered the same thing. "The moment was unforgettable," the actress says.
0910 Court is shown transcript of Campbell's appearance at tribunal on 5 August. Farrow again claims Campbell's evidence is inconsistent. She denies seeing the diamonds despite Campbell's claim she had shown the actress and White what the men had delivered her.
0905 Farrow is shown video clip of Campbell interview in which she denies receiving diamonds from Charles Taylor. The Hollywood actress says Campbell's statement was not consistent with what the supermodel told her at breakfast.
0905 Farrow says her three children, who met Campbell on the Blue Train trip, "adored" the supermodel.
0900 Farrow says she remembers Naomi Campbell recounting receiving a "huge diamond" during the night from Charles Taylor. Farrow said the supermodel planned to give the diamond to one of Mandela's charities.
"She said in the night she had been awakened by men knocking at her door that said they had been sent to her by Charles Taylor, and they had given her a very huge diamond," Farrow told the court.
The evidence contradicts Campbell's claim that, at the time, she did not know that the diamonds were from the former Liberian dictator.
0855 Farrow says she met Charles Taylor for first time at the dinner but was told that he was not supposed to be there
0850 Hollywood actress explains that she was at Nelson Mandela's charity dinner in support of his children's charities through the former South African president's "Blue Train" scheme.
0850 Farrow takes oath to tell truth on bible.
0845 Prosecution apologises for "inverting" list but claims it was due to "miscommunication". Farrow will give evidence first after judges overrule complaint.
0840 Confusion over whether Farrow or White will appear first. Defence counsel kicking up a fuss after being told that Farrow would take stand before White, despite having prepared to question Namoi Campbell's former agent first. Lawyer Courtenay Griffiths claims confusion is "out of order".
0835 Monday's court session gets under way.