Assange to appeal extradition order
A BRITISH judge has ordered Julian Assange to be extradited to Sweden to face sexual assault allegations, but the Australian plans to lodge an appeal and still hopes the matter can be finalised in the UK.
The 39-year-old WikiLeaks founder was confined to a London court complex overnight after Chief Magistrate Howard Riddle gave his ruling but was still to decide on bail.
"I have specifically considered whether the physical or mental condition of the defendant is such that it would be unjust or oppressive to extradite him," Judge Riddle said.
"In fact I am satisfied that extradition is compatible with the defendant's convention rights; I must order that Mr Assange be extradited to Sweden."
Mr Assange denies allegations that in August 2010 on separate occasions, he violently sexually assaulted one woman and raped another.
He says the sex was consensual and his lawyers have opposed moves to have him extradited to Sweden, saying the claims are politically motivated in light of secret government documents published by his controversial website.
Mr Assange has also held fears that if extradited to Sweden, he will be passed over to United States authorities, who are investigating his secret-revealing organisation.
Judge Riddle rejected defence claims that Swedish authorities acted inappropriately in their attempt to extradite and interrogate Mr Assange and also addressed the possibility of Mr Assange being sent to the US.
"There was at one stage a suggestion that Mr Assange could be extradited to the USA (possibly to Guantanamo Bay or to execution as a traitor)," the judge said.
"The only evidence on the point came from (a) defence witness ... who said it couldn't happen.
"In the absence of any evidence that Mr Assange risks torture or execution (Assange's lawyer Geoffrey) Robertson was right not to pursue this point."
Outside court, solicitor Mark Stephens spoke about the "reasonably expected" outcome, including that the judge had been "hamstrung" in his decision-making.
"At this point in time, we are still hopeful that there will be an appeal.
"It's got to be lodged within the next seven days and at the end of that process the matter will then go to the ... High Court here in London and we can take the matter and get it resolved in this country," Mr Stephens said.
The outspoken solicitor again criticised the "secrecy" that has surrounded the matter.
Speaking from Melbourne, Mr Assange's mother said her son's extradition battle has been a "David and Goliath" situation.
Christine Assange says her son has been abandoned by the Australian Government and left to operate under a flawed legal process.
"It's a real David and Goliath situation," Mrs Assange said. "You've got misuse of the European arrest warrant, first time ever that it's been used this way.
"I would say that what we're looking at here is political and legal gang rape of my son."
Mr Assange is expected to address media later today.