John Galliano headed to rehab after French court says he will stand trial over alleged anti-Semitism
LONDON — Superstar fashion designer John Galliano is headed to rehab in Arizona after a French court announced Wednesday the disgraced designer will appear in court to face allegations of making “racist insults,” according to media reports
“Following an investigation, the Paris prosecutor’s office announces John Galliano will be prosecuted by direct summons before the criminal court for public insults towards an individual on grounds of their origin or religion … following complaints from three people,” the office said.
Galliano was persuaded to seek help for alcohol problems by his friends in the fashion industry, a source told The New York Times. While his treatment has not been confirmed, it is expected he will enter The Meadows, a facility in Wickenberg, Ariz., where British singer Elton John and Italian fashion designer Donatella Versace have been patients.
The designer will appear in a French court between April and June of this year.
Galliano “completely” denied the claims of anti-Semitism against him but “unreservedly” apologized for his behavior, in a statement issued Wednesday by his lawyers in London.
“I completely deny the claims made against me and have fully co-operated with the police investigation,” the British designer said, after his arrest in Paris on Thursday on allegations of assault and making anti-Semitic remarks.
He added: “Anti-Semitism and racism have no part in our society. I unreservedly apologize for my behavior in causing any offense.”
Galliano was fired by French fashion house Dior Tuesday after a video surfaced showing him insulting people in a cafe and declaring “I love Hitler.”
The British couturier, 50, had already been suspended by the historic firm after he was arrested and questioned by French police over allegations that he had subjected a couple to a drunken, anti-Semitic tirade in Paris.
In a statement issued by London law firm Harbottle & Lewis, Galliano said: “Since the events of last Thursday evening I have not been able to make any public comment on what took place based upon advice from my French lawyer.
“However, given the continuing delays at the French prosecutor’s office I should make my position clear.”
Denying the claims against him, he confirmed he would be taking legal action against his accusers and said they had verbally harassed him.
“A number of independent witnesses have given evidence and have told the police that I was subjected to verbal harassment and an unprovoked assault when an individual tried to hit me with a chair having taken violent exception to my look and my clothing,” he said.
“For these reasons I have commenced proceedings for defamation and the threats made against me.”
The designer continued: “However, I fully accept that the accusations made against me have greatly shocked and upset people.
“I must take responsibility for the circumstances in which I found myself and for allowing myself to be seen to be behaving in the worst possible light.
“I only have myself to blame and I know that I must face up to my own failures and that I must work hard to gain people’s understanding and compassion.”
Gibraltar-born Galliano added: “I have fought my entire life against prejudice, intolerance and discrimination, having been subjected to it myself.”