UPDATE: Tooting MP praises decision to charge officers over Babar Ahmad attack
Tooting MP Sadiq Khan has praised this morning’s decision to prosecute four officers over an attack on Tooting terror suspect, Babar Ahmad.
Speaking after the announcement by Keir Starmer, Director of Public Prosecutions, Mr Khan said it was important “justice is seen to be done”.
The MP has supported Mr Ahmad since his arrest in 2003 and was famously bugged by police while visiting him in prison.
He said this morning: "I am pleased that the CPS decided to look at this incident again.
"Mr Ahmad's injuries, which he received £60,000 compensation for, show there are serious issues to be examined here surrounding the conduct of the arresting officers.
"It is important that these very serious allegations are properly considered in a criminal court, and that justice is seen to be done."
PC Nigel Cowley, PC John Donohue, PC Roderick James-Bowen and PC Mark Jones will face a joint charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm.
The Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) is now preparing the case against the officers, who were members of the territorial support group.
Simon Clements, head of the CPS Special Crime Division, said: “Babar Ahmad was arrested by the officers on suspicion of terrorism offences.
“Mr Ahmad suffered a number of injuries during that arrest, including heavy bruising to the head, neck, wrists and feet.
“The CPS received a file of evidence on how those injuries were caused from the Independent Police Complaints Commission in 2004.
“We have now completed our review of the evidence. Our conclusion is that there is sufficient evidence and it is in the public interest to charge four of the officers involved in the arrest of Mr Ahmad.”
The officers will appear at City of Westminster Magistrates’ Court on Wednesday, September 22.
Mr Ahmad, who was born in London, was originally arrested by anti-terrorist police in Tooting in December 2003.
The 36-year-old won a £60,000 payout from the Metropolitan Police in March 2009 after the force admitted he had been attacked.
This morning’s announcement comes after an independent review by retired senior judge Sir Geoffrey Grigson into the handling of the case.
An inquiry by officials at the Met originally concluded that no officer should be disciplined over the incident.
Mr Ahmad is currently in the low-secure Long Lartin prison after being held without trial for six years.
He said in a statement: "I am pleased that the CPS has decided that a jury will hear the evidence in this case.
“It will now be for the jury to determine whether any police officer should be punished for the assault upon me in December 2003."
The American Government issued a warrant for his extradition in 2004, claiming he was involved in terror websites.
Judges at the European Court of Human Rights are due to announced next year whether extradition would breach his human rights.
In a separate incident in 2008, it emerged conversations between Mr Ahmad and Mr Khan had been bugged by police.
After a public outcry, an investigation found no unlawful conduct on the officers' part.