San Francisco judge delays final gay marriage decision
California opponents given more time to appeal Ruling allows higher courts to get involved
The drawn-out battle over gay and lesbian marriage in California has been extended for another week after a federal judge kept same-sex unions on hold to give opponents the chance to appeal to a higher court.
Dozens of gay couples who had spent hours standing outside City Hall in San Francisco hoping to see an immediate resumption of marriages had their hopes dashed, at least until 5pm on 18 August when Judge Vaughn Walker has ordered the ban on the ceremonies to be lifted.
Opponents of the unions were also frustrated as they had been hoping for a long-term postponement while all legal appeals are exhausted.
The judge's decision amounts to something of a fudge, designed to allow higher courts to get involved and have their say. The question of gay marriage, and whether or not it conforms to the US constitution, is such a fundamental issue it is likely to go all the way to the US supreme court, the highest judicial panel in the country.
Walker's ruling followed his decision last week to overturn Proposition 8, the referendum of California voters in 2008 that had banned gay marriage.
On 4 August, Walker gave his judicial opinion that the proposition was unconstitutional as it failed to protect all citizens equally.
Disapproval of same-sex unions was not enough, he ruled, to deny gays the basic right to marry.
By delaying the lifting of the ban for another week, however, the judge is giving opponents of same-sex marriages the chance to take their case to the US appeal court. That will in turn have to decide whether to allow marriages to start up again or whether to keep them on hold in expectation of a supreme court challenge.
Some 18,000 same-sex couples already married before Proposition 8 came into effect and their status has been allowed to stand.
The gay marriage issue has become a lightning conductor for the deep divisions across America. Angry supporters of Proposition 8 also gathered outside the city hall in San Francisco to protest against the interference of the courts in what they see as the will of the people.
Protesters carried banners saying "No to Judicial Tyranny" and "California: the state where votes don't count".
The campaign in favour of gay marriage was backed by several high-powered figures including California's governor, Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Explaining his decision, the judge said that supporters of Proposition 8 had failed to convince him that anyone would be harmed should same-sex marriages start up again. "The evidence at trial showed, however, that Proposition 8 harms the state of California," he said.
The ban on gay and lesbian marriages passed in 2008 with the support of 52% of voters to 48%. The movement behind the referendum was led by Protect Marriage, a coalition of right-wing and religious groups.
Charles Cooper, the lead lawyer for Protect Marriage, said the next appeal would stress what he called the "basic constitutional authority of the seven million Californians who voted to retain the traditional definition of marriage."
He said: "The decision whether to redefine the institution of marriage is for the people themselves to make, not a single district court judge."