30 killers could win freedom years early under Oregon Supreme Court ruling
Thirty killers in Oregon, including some of the state’s most notorious, could get out of prison up to a decade early following a court ruling that rehabilitation trumps mandated prison terms.
The convicts are serving life terms with minimum 30-year sentences for aggravated murder, including some double homicides.
The state Supreme Court ruled recently that once the Parole Board finds an inmate fit for rehabilitation, it must move to release the prisoner regardless of the sentence imposed by a judge.
The state Parole Board has already concluded the 30 killers can be reformed. Based on the Supreme Court ruling, parole authorities will start hearings in July that could lead to freedom. At such hearings, a possible release date could be set, but inmates then face one more step -– an exit interview hearing –- before they are cleared to leave prison.
Victims’ families and prosecutors have been reacting with shock, parole board officials said.
“It cannot be emphasized strongly enough that such a result has never been the intent or practice of the board,” the Parole Board said in a statement on its website
One of the 30 killers is Kevin A. Roper, who was 19 when he pleaded guilty to a charge of aggravated murder in the 1987 death of Eddie L. Gibbs, 20, in exchange for a life sentence.
Roper, of Southeast Portland, told police he hit Gibbs in the head with a hatchet after he and another man robbed Gibbs. The men then tied Gibbs to a pole at a Southeast Portland drive-in theater and left him to die.
The Parole Board statement explained that under Oregon law, the board must conduct a hearing for an inmate who has served 20 years of a life sentence. The hearing determines whether an inmate is “capable of rehabilitation within a reasonable period of time.”
The board said that even when it has found rehabilitation possible, it hasn’t considered releasing murderers until they have served the minimum 30-year sentence.
“The Supreme Court did not order any prisoner to be released,” the board said in its statement. “However, the court has allowed certain prisoners, convicted of aggravated murder, to be considered for release into the community soon than many – including the board – anticipated.”
The Oregon Parole Board has set hearings for 30 convicted killers. Here's a list, with the counties they're from.
July 19: Terry Zion, Washington; Kevin Roper and Michael Meehan, Multnomah; Pepe Rivas, Clackamas; Bryan Mikesell, Polk   July 27: Kenneth Janowski and Steven Wilson, Washington; Ridge Fleming and Charles Potter, Multnomah; Donald Severy, Deschutes; Douglas Miller, Marion Aug. 3: Charles Pope, Multnomah; Michael Lissy, Lane; Ricky Douglas, Douglas