Judge orders Anwar to enter defence
After 59 days of court hearing which began early last year, the Kuala Lumpur High Court has today found a prima facie case against Opposition Leader Anwar Ibrahim and ordered him to enter his defence.
Earlier today, the Jalan Duta court complex was under tight security as Anwar supporters arrived as early as 4.30am and gathered at the Federal Territory mosque which is adjacent to the court complex, to show their support for the opposition leader and PKR de facto leader.
Party supporters were at the mosque this morning for a solat hajat (special prayers) to seek divine intervention in the court case.
Some came as far as Anwar’s constituency of Permatang Pauh in Penang and there was also a bus filled with supporters from Gopeng, Perak.
Police presence outside the court complex was stronger than usual as Anwar's supporters milled outside the building.
Anwar, 64, has been charged with sodomising his former aide Mohd Saiful Bukhari Azlan, 25, at the Desa Damansara condominium on June 26, 2008.
If found guilty under section 377B of the Penal Code, Anwar could face a jail term of not less than five years and a maximum of 20 years.
High Court judge Mohamad Zabidin Mohd Diah took almost two hours in reading his judgment in which he said the prosecution has established a prima facie case and therefore Anwar's defence must be called.
7.36am: There are hundreds of Pakatan Rakyat supporters in the lobby of the court complex. Some of the supporters are also seen at the Wilayah mosque and at the nearby food stalls for breakfast.
8.05am: All foreign press representatives are already here.
The courtroom can fit about 75 people in the public gallery. Judging by the number of people queuing outside the courtroom on the fifth floor of the building, it appears that all the passes have already been taken up.
8.11am: The police ban Pakatan supporters from entering the court building. A few police officers are stationed at the entrance to check those seeking to enter the building. They have to show court documents before be granted permission to enter.
All bags are inspected and journalists are not allowed to bring cameras into the court complex.
8.17: Some 200 supporters outside the court complex shout ‘reformasi’, ‘hancur Najib’, ‘hancur BN’, ‘tangkap Najib, siasat Rosmah’, ‘tolak fitnah’ for five minutes.
Later packets of ‘nasi lemak’, wrapped in Umno-owned Utusan Malaysia newspaper, are distributed to the crowd ( right ).
Many of the supporters sit on the floor and have a short prayer before enjoying the nasi lemak.