Man who shot US senator unstable 26/05/2011
Jane Cowan reported this story on Thursday, May 26, 2011 08:09:00
PETER CAVE: The man accused of shooting the US congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords in Tucson, Arizona in January has been found incompetent to stand trial. At one stage during today's hearing, Jared Lee Loughner had to be taken out of the room after an outburst. I asked our North America correspondent Jane Cowan exactly what had been decided. JANE COWAN: Well, Peter, the federal judge Larry Burns has today said that Jared Lee Loughner is mentally incompetent to stand trial. The judge is saying that he doesn't have a rational understanding of the proceedings. This ruling is the result of mental health evaluations that have been done recently on the 22-year-old by two doctors appointed by the court and they have concluded that Loughner appears to suffer from schizophrenia and to experience delusions and irrational thoughts. What this means is that the criminal case against him now goes on hold indefinitely. As it stands he has pleaded not guilty to the attack and to those 49 federal charges associated with it but it isn't necessarily the end of the story by a long shot because now Loughner will be sent to a psychiatric facility for a period of four months in an effort really to restore his mental health and at that point there will be another hearing to judge whether he understands the charges against him at that point. PETER CAVE: What happened with that outburst in the court? What was that about? JANE COWAN: Well, it was quite dramatic. It caused him to be dragged from the courtroom screaming. He shouted what reporters who were there say sounded like: thank you for the freak show, she died in front of me, you're treasonous. Later on he was brought back in and given the option by the judge to stay if he behaved himself or watch proceedings from another room and at that point he opted for the latter saying that he wanted to watch the TV screen but it was a very different looking Jared Loughner who was in court today. He no longer had that shaven head. He had longer hair that was sticking out in all directions and he was said to have slumped in the chair like an old man throughout the entire proceeding. PETER CAVE: This case has of course, attracted a lot of attention because of who was shot. What's the latest on the injured congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords' condition? JANE COWAN: Well she is said to be continuing to make a remarkable recovery but she is yet to appear in public, Peter. She did travel to Florida to watch her husband the astronaut Mark Kelly go into space the other week in the last ever mission for the space shuttle Endeavour but she wasn't filmed. She watched that from a private viewing area and since then she's had another operation to reconstruct part of her skull but that too has gone well although it is not clear whether she is able to speak in full sentences or whether she even fully understands what happened that day she was shot. PETER CAVE: North America correspondent Jane Cowan.