Phone hacking: Buscombe admits News of the World lied to PCC
Interviewed on BBC by Andrew Neil, press watchdog chief says she is 'deeply unhappy with what happened'
Press Complaints Commission chairman Baroness Buscombe said on Tuesday lunchtime that she was lied to by the News of the World over phone hacking, in a combative television interview with veteran journalist Andrew Neil.
She said she did not know the extent of the scandal when she came on board the PCC in 2009, but admitted she had been "misled by the News of the World" – after she had previously concluded just the opposite.
Two years ago the PCC published a report following allegations it was misled by the News of the World during an inquiry into phone hacking at the paper it conducted in 2007. At the time, Buscombe put out a statement arguing that: "Having reviewed all the information available, we concluded that we were not materially misled."
However, appearing on the BBC's The Daily Politics, Buscombe admitted the PCC had not been told the truth. She said: "There's only so much we can do when people are lying to us. We know now that I was not being given the truth by the News of the World."
Facing a combative Neil, Buscombe was forced to deny she had sided with the under-fire tabloid newspaper that is now accused of using a private investigator to hack into the phone of murdered schoolgirl Milly Dowler. When Neil said she sided with the News of the World, Buscombe interrupted him, saying, "I didn't".
Buscombe refused to be drawn further on specifics, saying she was angry with the newspaper. Instead she went on: "My answer to this is the PCC takes all of this incredibly seriously. I'm seeing all the publishers and proprietors, I'm deeply unhappy with what happened."
After Neil repeatedly asked her to name "one useful thing" the PCC has done over the issue, Buscombe said: "What I'm saying is we've beefed up our sanctions, we're making more demands, I've demanded to see all the proprietors."
Neil also questioned the role of the PCC in the scandal, asking: "Have you exposed any of the phone hacking?" Buscombe responded: "We had one complaint about phone hacking which was withdrawn."
Neil suggested that after the PCC "played no part" in bringing about the phone hacking revelations that the newspaper industry should be subject to statutory regulation. She replied: "All I will say is that I think we have to be very careful about newspaper industry that's regulated by the state."
She refused to go into the issue of the PCC reaching a settlement with Mark Lewis, a lawyer who is involved with bringing allegations of phone hacking against the News of the World, after he sued the press watchdog for libel.
It is understoodthe PCC paid Lewis damages over comments Buscombe made about how many people reportedly had their voicemails intercepted.
• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk emaileditor@mediaguardian.co.ukor phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for publication".
• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian onTwitterandFacebook