T-Mobile reviews News of the World advertising over Milly Dowler phone hacking claims
A T-Mobile spokesman told the Telegraph: "We’re currently reviewing our advertising position with News of the World, following the recent allegations, and await the outcome of the ongoing police investigation.”
It is also understood that Currys and PC World are reviewing their options.
On Tuesday afternoon, it emerged that car manufacturer Ford has pulled its advertising in the News of the World.
Ford has suspended all advertising with the News of the World until the phone hacking claims have been fully investigated.
The car manufacturer said in a statement: "Ford is a company which cares about the standards of behaviour of its own people and those it deals with externally. We are awaiting an outcome from the News of the World investigation and expect a speedy and decisive response. Pending this response we will be using alternative media within and outside News International Group instead of placing Ford advertising in the News of the World."
Halifax is also reviewing its position and could follow Ford.
A spokesperson from Halifax bank told the Telegraph on Tuesday they would be "reviewing and considering their options with regards to future advertising" in the News of the World, following Npower and Ford's decision to consider places ads in the Sunday tabloid.
Energy giant Npower is deciding whether to stop advertising with the News International Sunday title.
“We are just reviewing our options. A decision hasn’t been made by the business yet,” a spokeswoman said.
Twitter and Facebook were from Monday busy with users urging advertisers to boycott the News of the World. Many threatened specific companies that they would withdraw their custom unless those companies dissasociated themselves from the newspaper. There was also a Facebook page campaigning for a boycott.
WM Morrison and The Co-operative supermarkets are standing by the News of The World by continuing to advertise in the paper, despite Monday’s allegations that the newspaper hacked Milly Dowler’s phone after she went missing.
WM Morrison is understood to be holding fire on reviewing whether to continue.
The Co-operative Group, which also owns The Co-operative bank, said in a statement: “The Co-operative Group believes it would be irresponsible to contemplate a ban on advertising in the NOTW based on allegations that are still being investigated.”
Supermarket giant Tesco, who currently has an advert on the News of the World's website, wrote on Facebook: "We know that you have a lot of questions surrounding recent News of the World allegations.
"These latest allegations will cause huge distress to a family which has suffered enough. It’s now a matter for the police; like everyone, we await the outcome of their investigation."
Meanwhile, tens of other companies across the media, retail and transport sectors, contacted by The Telegraph, are still prevaricating on whether to pull advertising.
Fashion retailer Next does not advertise with News of the World and has no ads booked with its sister tabloid The Sun, but it said that it regards the latter paper as editorially independent of NOTW and so would be unlikely to change its marketing strategy.
Virgin Media said it “patiently awaits the outcome of any investigation”, although it said it also does not advertise much in News International publications, while BT declined to comment at all. Marks & Spencer also downplayed its involvement with News of the World. It said it advertised recently in Fabulous magazine, but was not reviewing whether or not it would have any future involvement.