Tucson shooting suspect can refuse anti-psychotic drugs, court rules
Tucson shooting suspect Jared Lee Loughner has the constitutional right to refuse anti-psychotic medication while he appeals the treatment prescribed by prison mental health authorities, a federal appeals court ruled Tuesday.
The government has important interests in seeing Loughner healed of his schizophrenia and brought to trial for the Jan. 8 shooting rampage that killed six and injured 13 others, including U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, the three-judge panel of the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals noted. But Loughner’s right to be free from unwanted drugs that could harm or kill him trumps those considerations, the court said in extending its July 1 temporary order against forcible medical treatment.
“Because Loughner has not been convicted of a crime, he is presumptively innocent and is therefore entitled to greater constitutional rights than a convicted inmate,” said the appeals panel headed by Chief Judge Alex Kozinski.
The panel said the injunction against involuntary treatment with psychotropic drugs would remain in force until the 22-year-old’s appeal of the prison medical team’s treatment plan is decided. The next hearing in that appeal was set for Aug. 29 in San Francisco.
Loughner’s attorneys had argued that prison officials sought to medicate him against his will to render him competent to stand trial, something courts have allowed only under restrictive circumstances and when the medical benefits of the treatment outweigh the risks of violating a pretrial prisoner’s constitutional rights. In its written and oral arguments to the appeals panel, the defense team headed by San Diego lawyer Judy Clarke said the government was claiming that Loughner needed antipsychotic drugs to prevent him from being a danger to himself or others when in fact the aim was to get him in condition to stand trial.
U.S. District Judge Larry A. Burns ruled on May 25 that Loughner was incompetent to stand trial after reviewing mental health reports from the federal prison medical center in Missouri that said Loughner suffers from schizophrenia. Loughner has been in detention at the Springfield, Mo., mental hospital since Burns’ order that he be treated with the aim of rendering him able to eventually participate in his own defense.