Frail Derryn Hinch escapes jail sentence
A VICTIMS' advocate has vowed to continue Derryn Hinch's campaign to end the suppression of the names of sex offenders.
A magistrate today ordered that Derryn Hinch, 67, serve five months of home detention for naming two serial sex offenders in breach of serious sex offender laws, reported the Herald Sun. One of Hinch's supporters, victims' champion Noel McNamara, said the campaign to end the suppression of the names of sex offenders would go on. "Derryn has been gagged for five months and in a way I suppose in a way we're all in home detention with him,'' Mr McNamara said. "But the campaign will continue and we will press the attorney general to get rid of suppression orders where it is not identifying the victim. "Derryn is clearly very ill still. To get out of bed and come along for that is a pretty good effort. He copped it sweet and all power to him.'' Hinch shuffled slowly into court this morning, accompanied by his wife Chanel, and he appeared to be out of breath and struggling to make it up a wheelchair ramp. Before he was silenced by the magistrate Hinch remained unrepentant about what he had done. "I still believe that this is a bad law and it will change. It will go,'' he said. When asked what would happen if he cannot broadcast on his drive-time show on 3AW he said "I'll just be locked up and be silent. But not for long.'' Magistrate Charlie Rozencwajg told Hinch today that he had several previous serious breaches of the law in his various "name and shame campaigns" over the years. Magistrate Rozencwajg made a number of conditions on Hinch's home detention order which will mean the "Human Headline" cannot communicate with his audience. The magistrate said Hinch must not engage in gainful employment and must not use Facebook or Twitter or other social media to propagate his views. Hinch has also been ordered not to give media interviews and not to encourage others to pass on his views on his behalf. It is unknown who radio station 3AW will get to replace Hinch on his drive program. Hinch was found guilty of five breaches of section 42 of the serious sexual offenders monitoring act by naming two rapists. In his Melbourne Magistrates' Court sentence Mr Rozencwajg said the offences were committed in May, June and July 2008 when Hinch posted information on his website and publicly named the offender at a rally on the steps of state parliament. "I would regard your actions as taking the law into your own hands and encouraging others to do the same," Mr Rozencwajg said. The magistrate said that one of the ironies of the case was that Hinch would probably be the last person in Victoria to be sentenced to home detention. He said that another irony was the fact that Hinch had campaigned for the abolition of suspended sentences and encouraged the passing of a "one size fits all approach which removed judical discrection" in sentencing. Such an approach would lead to injustice, the magistrate said. Mr Rozencwajg said that Hinch had a number of prior convictions for similiar offences but had not heeded the warnings given to him over the years about his conduct. The magistrate said that if Hinch gave interviews to the massive media pack assembled at court today it would be in contravention of his order. Hinch underwent a life-saving liver transplant earlier this month and was in hospital again yesterday to have a stent removed. Professor Bob Jones, liver transplant unit director at the Austin Hospital, who was at court said the five-month enforced lay off would be good for the broadcaster's recovery. "He’s making a good recovery, but it’s still very early,” Professor Jones said. “This is a recovery after a transplant that takes several months. And Derryn is just a couple of weeks in. By all rights I would still expect him to be at hospital. “Going home so early there's a real risk he'll have to come back into hospital.” Prof Jones said that he realised staying silent would be an ordeal for Hinch. “Perhaps he can take up Zen Buddhism or something,” he said. “It's a really big ordeal (going to court). I was pretty worried about him. It's pretty intimidating. I was intimidated. "In his situation, just a couple of weeks out of a transplant it's a very tough deal to go through. "He's by no means well."