ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The injunction preventing the removal of asylum seekers to Malaysia has been extended until there is a full hearing later this month.
In a special hearing on Sunday afternoon, the High Court placed a temporary injunction on the Federal Government's plans to deport 16 asylum seekers under its so-called Malaysia swap deal.
They had been scheduled to be flown to Malaysia this morning.
Lawyers representing up to 40 asylum seekers from Afghanistan and Pakistan, who arrived at Christmas Island by boat last week, say their clients are entitled to have their claims for asylum assessed in Australia.
They told the court the refugee swap deal with Malaysia should be ruled invalid, but lawyers for the Government said the minister had the power to make such an agreement.
The full hearing is not likely to take place until the week beginning August 22.
Refugee lawyer David Manne says his clients are worried about facing persecution in Malaysia and want to remain in Australia.
"The Australian Government is prohibited from expelling our clients to Malaysia pending the outcome of this case," he said.
"This case is about our clients arguing that their claims for refugee protection should be continued in Australia instead of being expelled to Malaysia."
Immigration Minister Chris Bowen says he expected legal challenges but says no-one should doubt his resolve.
And he says his advice is still that the Government is on very strong legal grounds.
"This is an interim injunction, this in not a finding, this is not a legal outcome. This is a decision that a case should be heard and a transfer should not occur while that case is being heard," Mr Bowen said.
"This does not indicate in any way the outcome of the case."
While they await the outcome of their legal challenge, a group of men, women and children due to be deported to Malaysia have gone a hunger strike since Friday.
The Immigration Department has confirmed an ambulance was called to the centre just before noon (local time) to treat three asylum seekers suffering from dehydration.
It is believed all three are teenagers.
The paramedics treated the asylum seekers inside the detention centre rather than taking them to hospital.
The Department initially denied reports of a hunger strike, saying the detainees were either missing a meal or two, or were simply observing Ramadan.
It now concedes it has observed a number of asylum seekers missing consecutive meals, and says it is now treating their welfare as a top priority.