Riot ends as police storm Bali's Kerobokan jail
AUTHORITIES have regained control of Bali's notorious Kerobokan jail, home to Australian drug traffickers Schapelle Corby and the Bali Nine, following a riot which forced guards to retreat to the streets.
About 100 heavily-armed police entered the jail early this morning to put down the riot which was linked to the stabbing at the weekend of one prisoner and the arrests of three other inmates.
At least three prisoners were taken to hospital after they were shot in the leg with rubber bullets by riot police who at 9am local time (12pm AEDT) were still dealing with a small band of inmates who were refusing to return to their cells.
Reports that one prisoner was killed have not been confirmed. But all of the Australian prisoners being held in the jail were safe, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) in Canberra said. Bali Police deputy chief Ketut Untung Yoga said authorities had regained control of the jail and fires that were burning inside the facility had been extinguished. The riot broke out about 11pm last night, with prisoners trashing cells and throwing stones at the guards who were forced to abandon the overcrowded jail which houses more than 1000 male and female inmates. Authorities said the integrity of the jail's walls was never at risk and the guards ensured no prisoners escaped. However some inmates gained access to the registration wing of the jail, within metres of the entrance to the facility, where they set offices and furniture alight.
Outgoing prison governor Siswanto told AAP the registration wing, close to where Bali Nine drug traffickers Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran are housed, had been destroyed. Chan and Sukumaran's cells are in the maximum security section of the jail, reserved for prisoners on death row. The inmates were in charge for almost seven hours with Siswanto saying the situation at the time was "out of control". Siswanto is in Jakarta with his replacement, Bowo Nariwono. Nariwono confirmed the riot broke out in response to rising tension in the jail triggered by the stabbing on Sunday. Hundreds of heavily-armed police and soldiers remain on standby outside the jail, which is in a suburban area in Kerobokan, about a 30-minute drive from Bali's airport. Twelve Australians are held at Kerobokan, including the Bali Nine, the Gold Coast's Schapelle Corby, Sydney man Michael Sacatides and another man from Darwin, Graeme Pollock, who is awaiting sentencing on drugs charges. There have been a number of riots at the jail in recent years including one last June during a drugs raid to arrest a prisoner for dealing drugs. Guards were beaten back by inmates who went on a rampage. The jail was built to hold just over 320 inmates but houses more than three times that number.