ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Whistleblowing website WikiLeaks has begun publishing more than 5 million confidential emails from Texas-based intelligence firm Stratfor.
WikiLeaks says the emails - which it refers to as the 'Global Intelligence Files' - date from between July 2004 and December 2011.
"The emails show Stratfor's web of informers, pay-off structure, payment-laundering techniques and psychological methods," WikiLeaks said in a statement.
"The material shows how a private intelligence agency works, and how they target individuals for their corporate and government clients."
WikiLeaks says it has proof of the firm's confidential links to large corporations, such as Bhopal's Dow Chemical Co and Lockheed Martin, as well as government agencies, including the US Department of Homeland Security, the US Marines and the US Defence Intelligence Agency.
It says it has found evidence that Stratfor gave a complimentary membership to Pakistan general Hamid Gul, former head of Pakistan's ISI intelligence service, who, according to US diplomatic cables, planned an IED attack against international forces in Afghanistan in 2006.
WikiLeaks also alleges it has proof that Stratfor monitored and analysed the online activities of activists seeking redress for the 1984 Dow Chemical/Union Carbide gas disaster in Bhopal, India.
"The Global Intelligence Files exposes how Stratfor has recruited a global network of informants who are paid via Swiss banks accounts and pre-paid credit cards," WikiLeaks said.
"Stratfor has a mix of covert and overt informants, which includes government employees, embassy staff and journalists around the world."
Stratfor, which was founded in 1996, describes itself as "a subscription-based provider of geopolitical analysis".
"Unlike traditional news outlets, Stratfor uses a unique, intelligence-based approach to gathering information via rigorous open-source monitoring and a global network of human sources," according to the Texas-based firm's website.
WikiLeaks says 25 media outlets - including Rolling Stone, The Hindu newspaper and Italy's La Repubblica - have been given access to the files and important revelations will be revealed over the coming weeks.
WikiLeaks' Australian founder Julian Assange is currently in Britain fighting extradition to Sweden, where he is wanted for questioning on rape and sexual assault allegations.
The organisation has long expressed concern that if he is sent to Sweden, Stockholm would quickly send him on to the United States.
Assange attracted sharp condemnation in Washington following the publication of hundreds of thousands of classified US diplomatic files.
Bradley Manning, the man suspected of turning over that massive cache of files to WikiLeaks, on Thursday declined to enter a plea at his arraignment.
The 24-year-old US Army soldier has been held in custody since 2010 and faces life in prison if convicted.