David Cameron's defeat over Juncker could work in his favour
A century, to the day, after that shot rang out in Sarajevo, we all agree that the rulers of Europe in 1914 did not manage things awfully well. All those statesmen with ornate facial hair, all those crowned heads, all those cousins with their ententes and pacts and guarantees, messed things up.
In agreeing on this point, we imply that our leaders nowadays understand matters better. “Never again!” people said in 1919, and came up with the Treaty of Versailles. Then there was a bit of a shemozzle between 1939 to 1945, after which people said “Never again!” again. Then there was the Treaty of Rome, and perpetual peace was established. That, in brief, is the story that the European Union tells about itself.
Well, I am not predicting the imminent start of the Third World War (although the Ukraine crisis is the most serious Great Power violation of European peace since 1945), but one does wonder whether European leadership today can see much further beyond the end of its collective nose than it could a hundred years ago. Yesterday in Ypres, the EU heads of government contemplated the great problems of the age, including an EU with less popular consent and economic growth than at any time in its history, and came up with their solution – Jean-Claude Juncker. If he is their answer, how on earth did they frame the question so badly?
By getting lost in a characteristically European maze of political calculation. Angela Merkel did not want Juncker, and originally said as much to David Cameron. But she gradually realised that to head off the Socialists in Germany, placate her own Christian Democrats, who love their power in the European Parliament, and defer to the Axel Springer media group, which had enlisted Mr Juncker in its war against Google, she must back the bibulous Luxemburger after all.
These considerations proved more important to Mrs Merkel than her wish to do business with Mr Cameron. Without a German lead against Mr Juncker, the other member states found it convenient to acquiesce in the weird idea that he was the democratic choice, even though he had stood in no election and the party backing him had just done particularly badly in the Euro-elections.
What about finding a candidate who might actually reform the EU in response to the biggest anti-establishment vote in any European Parliament election ever? That simply did not come into it. More than 500 million citizens of the European Union will now have their lives managed by a federalist old lag whom no leader wanted but almost all the heads of government nevertheless chose for one piffling, second-order reason after another.
Thus does Europe fail to rise to the new challenges of the age. And thus, in her quiet way, does Mrs Merkel rule Europe.
Where does that leave the Prime Minister? Without allies, without victories, and without a strategy. But this may be a surprisingly good position from which to rebound.
He has reached it by a sort of logic. On becoming Conservative leader in 2005, Mr Cameron declared that he did not want to “bang on about Europe”. So he avoided developing a policy on the subject, thereby wasting several years. But in 2009, he did something important. He withdrew his party in the European Parliament from the European People’s Party (EPP), on the grounds that the EPP was federalist and his Tories were not. If he needed proof that his decision then was right, it has come in the fact that Mr Juncker is the EPP’s candidate now. Today the British Conservatives are in the group of European Conservatives and Reformists. In the May Euro-elections, their Euroscepticism increased the vote of this group sharply, making it the third biggest in the Parliament, overtaking the Liberals.
In a piece of the same logic, which Mr Cameron foolishly tried (and failed) to resist, his group in the European Parliament has now signed up the new Eurosceptic German party Alternativ für Deutschland. A pan-European sceptic movement now exists and flourishes, unbeholden to the EU power-brokers. No doubt Mr Cameron’s isolation yesterday is a punishment for being part of it.
But making a virtue of necessity is something Mr Cameron is good at – look how quickly and gracefully he switched when the House of Commons would not support the bombing of Syria. It is not a discreditable thing: in fact, it is an essential political skill. This is what he can now do.
The necessity comes from the fact that the debate is clearly polarised. The virtue of that necessity is that Mr Cameron can start saying what he wants and which side he is on. Instead of pretending that all sorts of interesting refinements (“seven aims”) can be turned into a deal by 2017 if only the voters and media will leave him alone in a private room with Mrs Merkel for a couple of years, the Prime Minister can say in public what the key issue is.
It is the amicable parting of the ways between the ever-closer-union-ists and the free-trade-area people. Most of the eurozone members are in the first camp; most of the rest, led by Britain, are in the second. If you drew a Venn diagram of the two groups, the overlap would be membership of the single market. On those terms, both could live happily in a reshaped European Union.
Oddly enough, Europhiles such as Jacques Delors and Nicolas Sarkozy have recently moved towards such a solution. Even Mr Juncker has hinted that he would consider it. Nothing will deflect such men from their own pilgrimage towards the “finalité politique”, the full integration about which they dream; but they are becoming reconciled to the idea that lots of their fellow-Europeans are not just slow travellers, but will never make that journey at all. They see that the exit of a country such as Britain is no longer an empty threat. So they begin to think that it might be wise to agree to differ.
Mr Cameron should embrace that idea, from the anti-federalist side. Until now, he has been saying: “Trust me, and I shall come up with something”, when trust is the commodity most lacking among British voters on this subject. Yesterday, he praised his own courage in “standing up for what you believe”. If he now stands up for the free-trade-area destination he believes in for Britain in Europe and says he will vote No in a referendum if he does not get it, he will show that courage on a much bigger scale.
He will also put himself in the right position for the general election. Until yesterday, his policy was essentially a holding one – promising a vital decision but postponing it. Today, that policy is putting him in electoral limbo, with Labour saying he has pointlessly made enemies in Europe and Ukip that he is bringing nothing home. Now he needs to show that he has made up his mind, and will act accordingly.
The great Cameron/George Osborne electoral anxiety is that such a policy loses sight of “the main enemy” – Labour – and obsesses over the Ukip challenge. But the opposite approach has enabled the main enemy to have no policy on Europe and make the whole subject a Tory problem. There certainly was a Tory problem for many, many years, born of hesitation, and therefore internal struggle. That has changed. Today the Tory split on Europe consists pretty much of the venerable and Right Honourable Kenneth Clarke on one side of the argument and virtually everyone else on the other. What is Mr Cameron waiting for?