Pakistan's third largest party led by Imran Khan to quit parliament to force PM Nawaz Sharif resignation
Pakistani opposition leader Imran Khan has called on his supporters to march on a heavily fortified area of the capital on Tuesday.
The call comes after his party announced it would resign from parliament to try to force the government to hold new elections.
The moves are part of a high-stakes showdown following four days of protests in the capital.
The demonstrations have been led by the former international cricketer and cleric Tahir ul-Qadri, who controls a network of Islamic schools and charities.
The government has said Mr Khan and Mr ul-Qadri are free to demonstrate peacefully but will not be permitted to enter Islamabad's 'Red Zone', which is home to many Western embassies and government offices.
Any attempt by protesters to force their way into the Red Zone could lead to a violent confrontation.
The area has been sealed off with shipping containers and barbed wire, and is guarded by thousands of riot police, the army and the paramilitary Rangers. Mr Khan has appealed to police not to oppose the march.
"I will lead you and you will follow me," he told thousands of supporters at a rally on Monday in Islamabad.
"I am inviting all families ... there will be women and children with us."
Mr Khan has accused Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of rigging last year's election. Mr Sharif won in a landslide victory.
Mr ul-Qadri also says Mr Sharif is corrupt. Both have rejected negotiations offered by the government.
Mr Khan's party, Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaaf (PTI) says it will resign from parliament to try to force the prime minister to step down.
The party is Pakistan's third largest and controls 34 out of 342 seats in the National Assembly.
Top party official Shah Mehmood Qureshi told local television channels on Monday that the party would resign all its seats in the parliament and from three out of four provincial assemblies.
The fourth province is under PTI control and officials there will not resign, he said.
Many Pakistani analysts believe Mr Khan and Mr ul-Qadri mounted their parallel protest campaigns because they sensed Mr Sharif's fraught relationship with his generals had nosedived in recent months.