Suu Kyi victory could bring Myanmar in from cold
"This is not our triumph, this is a triumph of the people," Suu Kyi said as she arrived at the party's headquarters in Yangon to meet with fellow candidates and other party members.
While control of parliament will not change even if the opposition wins all 44 seats, the vote itself marks an important step forward for many in the country who have lived under military rule for 50 years.
"This election is an important step in Burma's democratic transformation, and we hope it is an indication that the government of Burma intends to continue along the path of greater openness, transparency, and reform," the White House statement said.
The NLD prediction was based on the party's own estimates, according to party member Thae Da Win Aung. It was still unclear whether the NLD had won the 44th seat, she said.
"I was very touched by the visit that I made and the commitments I received from members of the government who were quite sincere in their desire to move their country forward," she said, even as she underlined that the United States wanted to see "continuing progress."
The NLD fielded a candidate for every one of the 45 seats up for grabs. But the election commission rejected one candidate, apparently because his parents had foreign residency. The NLD has said it plans to challenge his exclusion.
In front of hundreds of supporters and journalists gathered at the NLD headquarters Monday, Suu Kyi said she planned to push for more emphasis on the role of the people in governing the country. She said she would happily work with anybody who wanted national reconciliation.
Daw Tin May Oo, 77, insisted Monday that the country was happy with the results. "The country has only just survived the past 20 years or so ... with its poverty, lack of food and broken lives," she said. "The situation has now turned around."
There have been hints, too, that a successful vote Sunday would lead to the relatively swift unraveling of sanctions that have long choked the country's economy.
Thousands of Burmese living in exile around the world were watching the election for a clear sign that it is safe to return home.
As a member of parliament, Suu Kyi would be expected to be free to travel outside Myanmar -- and, more importantly, to return -- something that wasn't possible during her long years of repression and confinement.