Bulgaria's election
AFTER 18 months of political turbulence, which saw four governments fall, the last thing Bulgaria needed was another inconclusive election. And yet yesterday’s snap parliamentary poll produced a highly fragmented parliament that will do little to address the myriad problems of the European Union’s poorest member state.
There was one clear winner: the centre-right GERB party won about 33% of the vote, according to preliminary results, more than twice as many as the Socialists, their main opponents. The Turkish minority party, DPS, which has become a fixture in Bulgaria’s post-communist political life, followed a close third, with some 15% of the votes. But for GERB, the party of the former prime minister, Boiko Borisov (pictured), its victory may prove bitter-sweet. Voters sent a record eight parties to parliament making the formation of a stable governing coalition a nearly impossible feat.
The election underscored the widespread disillusionment of Bulgarians with their political establishment. Voter turnout at about 50% was the lowest in the quarter of a century since the former Soviet satellite country embraced democracy. The vote took place after nearly two years of political instability, which began with anti-poverty protests toppling GERB’s previous government in February 2013.
The cabinet that followed early last year, an uneasy coalition between the Socialist party and DPS, managed to stay in power barely a year, accompanied by even larger protests against its policies. A controversy around South Stream, a planned Balkan pipeline to bring Russian gas to Western Europe, also played a big part in the government's collapse. The country is currently run by a caretaker administration.
GERB will have a hard time forming a coalition. Its preferred partner on the right, the Reformist Bloc, mustered about 9% of the vote. This means that a third party will be needed for a stable coalition. It could be the nationalistic Patriotic Front, with about 7% of the votes, or the populist “Bulgaria without Censorship” of Nikolay Barekov, a journalist-turned-politician, which received 6%.
Mr Borisov, a burly former firefighter, isn’t used to sharing the stage. As prime minister he ruled alone between 2009 and 2013 with his minority government relying on the ad-hoc support of other parties. On Sunday, underlining his all-or-nothing mentality, Mr Borisov’s first reaction to the election results was to say that “under this configuration, I do not see how a government can be formed”. Signaling that concessions are possible, however, he pledged to do "everything necessary" to avoid another election.
That would be disastrous for Bulgaria, a country of 7.3m, where the average monthly salary is just over €400 ($500). Seven years after the country joined the EU, one-fifth of its households still live below the poverty line. Its growth outlook is gloomy: due to the domestic political uncertainty, poor harvest this summer and the crisis in Ukraine, which has hurt exports, Bulgaria’s economy is expected to grow only 1.5% this year. Making a bad situation worse is the collapse of the country’s fourth-largest bank, the Corporate Commercial Bank, which has been closed since June leaving some 200,000 depositors and companies stranded without access to their funds.
These pressing problems make the establishment of a stable Bulgarian government so urgent. But, according to Nikolay Staykov, member of the “Protest Network” movement, “the only option is a three-party coalition that will find it hard to push unpopular decisions and will be very unstable”. According to Mr Staykov, the election didn’t bring the change he was protesting for in the past two years. On the contrary, it will only deepen the political turmoil and “will make the coming winter very, very difficult”.