Final election results in: National loses majority
The National Party can no longer govern alone as the final election results left them with one fewer seat than on election night.
That seat will instead go to the Green Party, who will increase their total number of seats to 14. List MP Steffan Browning will return to Parliament.
Labour's Andrew Little, who was the MP most at risk of losing his seat in the final count, will remain in Parliament. Mr Little is considered a leadership contender for the party, and was waiting on the final result before revealing whether he would join the leadership race.
The Electoral Commission this afternoon confirmed the final election result after counting 330,985 special votes and recounting all votes from election night.
The commission confirmed that National's share of the party vote had fallen from 48.06 per cent in the preliminary results to 47.04 in the final count.
This meant National lost one seat compared to election night. In a 121-seat Parliament, it would have 60 seats in total and lose its outright majority.
National's West Coast-based candidate Maureen Pugh will no longer make it into Parliament.
Greens' share of the party vote increased from 10.02 per cent to 10.7 per cent, allowing the party to gain another seat. Mr Browning is the party's 14th-ranked MP.
There were no changes to the number of seats held by any other party.
All electorate candidates who had the most votes on election night held on to their seats. The most marginal seat was Auckland Central, where National's Nikki Kaye beat Labour's Jacinda Ardern by 600 votes.
Labour's vote increased slightly from 24.69 per cent to 25.13 per cent.
Voter turnout increased from the 2011 election. Turnout as a percentage of enrolled electors rose from 74.2 per cent three years ago to 77.9 per cent.
The final enrolment rate was 92.6 per cent, compared to 93.7 per cent in 2011.
The number of advance votes massively increased from 334,558 (14.7 per cent of voters) in 2011 to 717,579 (29.33 per cent of voters) in 2014.
National's failure to win an outright majority means it will have to depend on either the Act Party, United Future or the Maori Party to get its bills and budgets passed.
It has already confirmed confidence and supply agreements with Act and United Future.
Those minor parties were given relatively small concessions because National had an outright majority at the time.
A National-Maori Party agreement was expected to be confirmed soon.
Green Party co-leader Russell Norman said retaining 14 MPs in an election which swung towards National was a positive result.
He welcomed Mr Browning's return to Parliament, saying he was a strong advocate for sustainable agriculture and organics.
Dr Norman was asked whether Mr Browning or other MPs had considered stepping aside to allow younger candidates such as Marama Davidson to enter Parliament.
"Steffan's only a one-term MP, so I think it's a bit early for that," he said.
Dr Norman said half of the Green MPs who were elected in 2011 were new to Parliament so it might be too soon to talk about party regeneration.
Act Party leader David Seymour said the final election result placed his party in a "marginally more powerful position" than on election night.
But he would not be seeking greater policy promises from National as a result.
"Our mandate hasn't changed," he said, noting that National still only required one of three support parties to get a majority.
He did not regret seeking more for his party in post-election negotiations with National. "The priorities that we have this afternoon are the same we had yesterday."
United Future leader Peter Dunne said National's support partners would now have more bargaining power.
"Previously we were surplus to requirements. Now we're very much part of the equation."
He said National's loss of its majority did not mean United Future's confidence and supply agreement was signed too quickly and cheaply.
"We're not obliged to support the National Party on anything bar confidence and supply. That means everything is negotiable.
"And in an environment where the government now doesn't have an outright majority, then obviously that leverage increases exponentially."