European Union reaches landmark climate deal, agrees to cut emissions by 40 per cent by 2030
European Union leaders have struck a deal on a new target to cut carbon emissions by 40 per cent by 2030, calling it a new global standard in the fight against climate change.
The agreement also includes 27 per cent targets for the amount of renewable energy to be in place by 2030 and for energy efficiency gains.
Herman Van Rompuy, who chairs the European Council, the gathering of EU leaders, said the deal was the "world's most ambitious, cost-effective, fair climate energy policy agreed".
The accord is "good news for climate, citizens' health, international climate talks, sustainable jobs, energy security and competitiveness", Mr Van Rompuy said in another Twitter message.
Talks in Brussels stretched into the small hours of Friday as Poland battled to spare its coal industry and other states tweaked the guideline text on global warming to protect varied economic interests.
In the end, an overall target was agreed for the 28-nation bloc to cut its emissions of carbon in 2030 by at least 40 per cent from levels in the benchmark year of 1990.
An existing goal of a 20 per cent cut by 2020 has already been nearly met, in part due to the collapse of communist-era industry in the east.
European Commission head Jose Manuel Barroso said the agreement puts the EU "in the driving seat" ahead of next year's United Nations climate summit in France.
But environmentalists have said it could still leave the EU struggling to make the 80 per cent cut by 2050 that its own experts say is needed to limit the rise in global average temperatures to two degrees Celsius.
They were further disappointed by a softening in the final agreement of goals for increasing the use of solar, wind and other renewable energy sources and for improving efficiency through insulation, cleaner engines and the like.
Concerns in Britain and some smaller states about additional EU regulation that might especially crimp a new expansion of climate-friendly but controversial nuclear power saw targets for increased renewable use and energy efficiency softened, diplomats said.
Mr Van Rompuy said the two targets would be for improvements of 27 per cent, compared to originally proposed goals of 30 per cent.
Portugal and Spain succeeded in getting a harder target for the level of cross-border connections, something they had been pushing France to accept so that they could export more of their spare energy north into the rest of the continent.
Climate advocates say Australia is slipping behind the world even further with its pledge to cut emissions by at least 5 per cent by 2020.
Deputy chief executive of the Climate Institute, Erwin Jackson, said independent analysis to date shows the 5 per cent target is not credible internationally.
"It's weaker than many other major economies and if you look at the actions that other countries are taking and the commitments that they're making, we should be moving to at least a 19 per cent target as the Climate Change Authority recommended," he said.
Mr Jackson said Australia needs to decide what role its domestic actions will play.
"Are we going to be constructive, are we going to be advancing a target in our national interest, or are we going to be obstructive and advance a target which is based solely on the interests of a few selective industries," he said.
He also said Australia needs to move beyond myopic emission targets.
"Because we've had a conversation in Australia for the last few years about 2020, the world is increasingly having a conversation about action post-2020, and under any reasonable metric, a target of the scale that the EU have proposed would require Australia to reduce emissions in the order of 40 to 50 per cent by 2030.
"And that's a long way from the current minimum commitment that we currently have at 5 per cent," he said.