Moldova Vote Gives Edge to Parties Looking West
Mr. Rogozin, commenting on Twitter, said pro-Russian parties would have secured control of Parliament if Patria had been allowed on the ballot, and if it had been easier for thousands of Moldovan migrant workers in Russia to vote.
According to preliminary results, with more than 97 percent of ballots counted, the pro-Russian Socialist Party was ahead with 20.7 percent, followed by the strongly pro-European Liberal Democratic Party, which is led by Prime Minister Iurie Leanca, with 20 percent.
The country’s Communist Party, perhaps the most resilient in the former Soviet Union, was in third place, with 17.8 percent, followed by two pro-Western parties: the Democratic Party, with 16 percent, and the Liberal Party, with 9.5 percent.
Taken together, the pro-Western parties had about 45 percent of the vote, while the pro-Russian parties secured about 39 percent. Because other parties are not expected to clear the 6 percent threshold to enter Parliament, the pro-Western parties are likely to emerge with a slim, controlling majority.
That said, forming a government is expected to be extremely difficult and to entail intense negotiations in the coming weeks. Although the Supreme Court of Justice upheld the ban on Patria in a ruling on Saturday, the late disqualification gave further ammunition to Russian officials who have complained of European meddling aimed at undercutting the Kremlin’s influence in the former Soviet Union.
Mr. Rogozin has forcefully conveyed Russia’s view. Last year, on a visit to Chisinau, the Moldovan capital, he noted the country’s reliance on Russian natural gas to heat homes in winter, and warned, “We hope that you will not freeze.”
On Monday, he said again that Moldovan officials should rethink their pro-Western stance given the election results.
“Add to this, the votes of supporters of the Patria party, withdrawn from the election on the eve of the vote, plus 700,000 Moldovan migrant workers in Russia whom the Chisinau authorities did not allow to vote, and you get the real weight of the Eurointegrators in this country,” he wrote in his commentary. “For Chisinau, it’s worth thinking about: Are you going on the correct path/road, comrades?”
Patria was created by Renato Usatii, a wealthy businessman with strong ties to Russia. Mr. Usatii is president of VPT-NN, a tool-and-die company that is an official supplier to Russian Railways, the national railroad. Russian Railways is controlled by one of President Vladimir V. Putin’s closest allies.
Since Russia’s annexation of Crimea this spring, some officials in Transnistria have called for Russia to annex their territory as well, reflecting the results of a referendum held in 2006 in which voters overwhelmingly expressed support for joining Russia.