U.N. Seeks $16.4 Billion to Address 2015 Crises
For Syria alone, heading toward a fifth year of civil war, the United Nations is seeking $7.2 billion in 2015, including $2.8 billion for those displaced by fighting inside the country and $4.4 billion for the 3.2 million Syrian refugees sheltering in neighboring countries. The total includes about $1 billion to fund infrastructure and humanitarian projects in countries surrounding Syria that are straining to cope with the influx of refugees.
Ms. Amos also served notice that the amount of funding requested from donors in 2015 will rise further. In 2014, supplementary appeals to deal with crises that erupted in Iraq, South Sudan and Ukraine helped to inflate the $7.9 billion requested initially to a total of $17.9 billion. The appeal launched on Monday, Ms. Amos pointed out, did not include aid that will be required for countries of the sub-Saharan region and the Horn of Africa.
“Every year we ask our donors to do more — and they do,” Ms. Amos said in a statement. “But as crises become more complex and go on longer, the gap between needs and resources grows.”
The funding challenge created a stir last week when theWorld Food Program of the United Nations stopped food aid to more than 1.7 million Syrian refugees after failing to raise the $64 million needed to keep the program going in December.
Ms. Amos reported that an emergency appeal started last week for that particular program had raised about $80 million. “It means we are fine for December but we are not fine for the months going forward,” she said, and without more support would “lurch from month to month.”
In addition to funding, the United Nations and aid agencies will on Tuesday try to persuade countries at a ministerial-level conference convened by the United Nations refugee agency in Geneva to increase the number of Syrians accepted for resettlement.
The United Nations estimates that about one-third of the refugees meet the criteria for resettlement, but since the start of Syria’s crisis only 191,000 Syrians have found asylum overseas. European Union member countries, mainly Germany and Sweden, accepted around 156,200, and the United States and Canada together accepted around 5,350.