Joseph Dunford, Joint Chiefs Nominee, Known to Maneuver Between Roles
When General Dunford was commanding American and NATO forces in Afghanistan, he impressed Mr. Obama during hundreds of hours of secure video conferences, and an easy rapport developed between the two men — the president seated in the White House Situation Room in Washington and the commander in Kabul. Mr. Obama appreciated the general’s quiet, matter-of-fact manner while he handled numerous crises, administration and defense officials said.
On Tuesday, Mr. Obama alluded to those sessions, saying he had been “extraordinarily impressed by Joe — from the Situation Room, where he helped to shape our enduring commitment to Afghanistan, to my visit last year to Bagram, where I saw his leadership firsthand.”
The president also admired how General Dunford delicately made the case to keep as large a force as possible in Afghanistan for as long as possible without antagonizing the president or his team.
General Dunford was not the first commander to push back against skeptics in the administration who thought, as one defense official put it, the United States was “throwing good money after bad” in Afghanistan. “But he’s probably the only guy who did it and managed to leave everyone with the impression that he respected the president, and that it was up to the president and that this wasn’t the military trying to push around the civilians,” the official said.
The general also has strong support within the military ranks. Nicknamed “Fighting Joe” for his leadership of the Marine regiment that was the first to cross into Iraq and press toward Baghdad during the 2003 United States invasion, General Dunford rose quickly from a one-star general to a four-star.
Just weeks after taking over as Marine Corps commandant, he was photographed in December at Washington’s Navy Yard, taking the arduous physical fitness test Marines are subjected to before they are sent into combat. This included hoisting 30-pound ammunition cans and carrying another soldier on his shoulders.
At the same time, General Dunford rose to the top of the adrenaline-fueled service while maintaining a low-key demeanor that seems to match Mr. Obama’s.
“In this administration, a no-drama commander gets very high marks,” said Lt. Gen. David W. Barno, who commanded United States forces in Afghanistan from 2003 to 2005 and is now a distinguished practitioner in residence at American University’s School of International Service. “He is a very, very aggressive commander, and at the same time, he can effectively communicate very complex military choices and options from the military parlance into options and context that can be understood by the political leadership.”
General Dunford is regarded as a straight talker who managed security around last year’s Afghan presidential elections as the United States was ending its combat mission.
“He just impressed everybody tremendously with his demeanor, confidence, and his combination of military and diplomatic skills,” said James F. Dobbins, the director of the RAND International Security and Defense Policy Center, who served as Mr. Obama’s special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan during General Dunford’s tour in Kabul.
“He was able to clearly express his views in a way that commanded respect and, at the same time, also foster the view that he was a loyal soldier operating within a system and was quite capable of interacting effectively with not just the president but the rest of the National Security Council as a team player,” Mr. Dobbins said in an interview.
General Dunford also managed to cultivate a relationship with former President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan at a time when Mr. Karzai was becoming increasingly hostile to the United States. The general broke with precedent and traded his camouflage fatigues for a formal dress uniform when he met with Mr. Karzai, a gesture of respect.
General Dunford would succeed Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, who is retiring after four years as the nation’s top general. General Dempsey was a favorite of the president’s and the go-to person at the Pentagon for White House officials who grew disenchanted with Chuck Hagel as defense secretary. Mr. Hagel has since been replaced by Ashton B. Carter.
A Boston native who graduated from Saint Michael’s College and was commissioned in 1977, General Dunford took the unusual step of going outside the military staff colleges where senior leaders typically pursue academic honors and earned master’s degrees from Georgetown University and the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University.
The grandson of a World War I veteran whose four uncles served in World War II, General Dunford has the added credibility that comes with being the son of an enlisted man; his father, a retired Boston police officer, fought with the Marines in the Korean War.
He is a devoted Red Sox fan, and a camouflage-printed Red Sox baseball cap had pride of place on the shelf in his office in Kabul.