Gulf allies show more muscle with U.S.
Washington (CNN)When President Barack Obama welcomes America's Persian Gulf allies to the White House and Camp David this week, he will be confronting a group of countries that are assertively strengthening their own alliance as a counterweight to Iran and staking out a new status quo with the United States.
Obama invited the heads of the Gulf Cooperation Council -- a union of the oil-rich monarchies of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates -- for a summit beginning Wednesday night after reaching a nuclear framework deal in April curbing Iran's nuclear program.
A formal U.S.-GCC gathering to discuss security is long overdue, and reflects the level of concern the gulf nations have over Iran's growing influence in the region. The gulf states, along with Israel, worry that the deal with Tehran will pave the way for a nuclear bomb rather than prevent one, and unlock billions of dollars that Iran will use to wreak havoc in the region.
That fear has forced the six nations to overcome a host of internal differences, heal long-standing rifts and show a level of unity that has been lacking. It has also led the bloc to show less deference to the United States, even as the countries are eager for heightened U.S. security guarantees given the growing threats in the region.
"There is a determination among us now that if there are security issues, we have to take action and we will," one senior Arab diplomat said. "We don't have to ask America's permission. We of course will collaborate with the U.S., but we won't wait for America to tell us what to do."
"You don't ask for our help and then say: 'Regardless of what you do or say, we are going to take action,'" one senior administration official said. "That would be hard to accept intellectually and would just not work in terms of U.S. interests because what they do impacts our own vital stake in this revision."
The Obama administration is reluctant to provide a full-fledged security treaty akin to the ones the United States has with Japan and South Korea that ensure America will come to their defense. Such a legally binding pact would be too complicated for the United States to take on, and would in any case have to be ratified by Congress, which it is likely to resist doing out of concern for Israel's security.
This changes the nature of the conversation, as heads of state can deliver to the President certain commitments that their deputies cannot. However, both Obama administration officials and diplomats from the region said they expect a strategy for long-term cooperation between the United States and its gulf allies to begin to emerge from the consultations.
"I don't think the White House shares the same threat perception of Iran that countries in the region do," said Adam Ereli, a former U.S. ambassador to Bahrain. "Until the time that they share that threat perception and are willing to match Iran's power with power by confronting them in the region, I think the gulf states will remain unsatisfied."