Thaçi and Rama made honorary citizens of Ulqin
Ulqin, 4 April 2015 - The municipality of Ulqin, on its day, declared Kosovo\'s Deputy Prime Minister, Hashim Thaci, and Prime Minister of Albania, Edi Rama, honorary citizens of Ulqin. The ceremony was preceded by a quadrilateral meeting between Deputy Prime Minister Thaci, Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic, Albanian Prime Minister Rama and the Mayor of Ulqin, Fatmir Gjeka.
The host of the ceremony, the Mayor of Ulqin, Fatmir Gjeka, said that the presence of two prominent figures of Kosovo and Albania is making the day of Ulqin even more glorious, which marks the end of the collection of olives, the emergence of seafarers in the sea and the beginning of the tourist season. \"As a token of appreciation and reverence for the historic role in promoting peace and dialogue among the peoples of the Balkans, close neighborly relations between Kosovo and Montenegro, the Euro-Atlantic integration and the important role in advancing the position of the Albanians in the Balkans and especially in Montenegro\" was the motivation with which Mayor Gjeka declared Deputy Prime Minister Thaci an honorary citizen of the municipality of Ulqin. Deputy Prime Minister Thaci, addressing the audience, said that Kosovo recognizes Montenegro and Montenegro recognizes Kosovo through Ulqin. He stressed that the establishment of the University of Prishtina opened a window for Ulqin, while Kosovo\'s children said to have been raised with Hajro Ulqinaku\'s poetry verses in primary schools. \"The Kosovars of Ulqin and the Ulqin people of Kosovo voted hundred percent for the sovereign Republic of Montenegro and that the independence of Kosovo and the independence of Montenegro were similar processes, a common struggle for freedom and equality, a special chapter in the contemporary history of Europe,\" Thaci said. Meanwhile, the Prime Minister of Albania, Edi Rama, said that the Balkans are making steps to set a new time of peace and that belongs to us all together, in this new time of peace to be protagonists as well as increase incentives to strengthen the connections of peace between each other. \"For a year we have increased cooperation with the government of Kosovo, with whom we have made steps towards joining forces of ideas and programs in many areas. This is based on our new dream that all Albanians be united, but also on the new model of unity, that of the European Union. Without doubt, we will move forward towards national unity, but without forgetting that the idea of national unity today, in the 21st century, is the idea of uniting all Albanians in the big family of the EU,\" Rama said. The First Deputy Prime Minister of Kosovo, Hashim Thaci, and the Prime Minister of Albania, Edi Rama, were greeted by many citizens in Ulqin.  