South China Sea dispute: Japan to participate in Australia-US Talisman Sabre military drill for first time
Japanese troops will take part in a major US-Australian military exercise for the first time in July, as Washington looks to bolster links among its allies in the face of an increasingly assertive China.
Japan's Ground Self-Defence Force (JGSDF) — its army — will send 40 personnel to participate in Talisman Sabre, a two-yearly drill that begins on July 7 which will involve around 27,000 servicemen, a spokesman told AFP.
"We will participate in joint exercises with the US Marines rather than operating directly with the Australian military," he said.
But the participation was seen as part of efforts to strengthen defence ties between Japan and Australia, he added.
The drill, which takes place in Australia, is intended to "improve tactical expertise in amphibian operations and to strengthen Japan-US interoperability", an army statement said.
News of Japan's participation came as tensions remain high in the region, with increasing criticism of China's behaviour in the South China Sea, where it has accelerated building artificial islands in disputed waters.
The Chinese military last week ordered a US Navy P-8 Poseidon surveillance plane away from airspace above the disputed Spratly Islands.
The United States is weighing sending warships and surveillance aircraft within 12 nautical miles — the normal territorial zone around natural land — of the reclaimed reefs.
Such a deployment could lead to a standoff in a stretch of water traversed by vital global shipping lanes.
Beijing regards almost the whole of the South China Sea as its own, and satellite images show it is rapidly building an airstrip on an artificial island in the Spratly archipelago, which is also claimed in whole or part by US ally the Philippines and Vietnam, among others.
China has a separate territorial dispute with Japan over the Tokyo-controlled Senkaku islands, which it knows as the Diaoyus, in the East China Sea.
Washington and Tokyo have been working to cement security ties with other like-minded countries in the region.
In July last year the United States, India and Japan held week-long war games in the Pacific.
Known as the Malabar Exercise, the annual event usually involves India and the US, but the participation by Japan's navy was its third since 2007.
This article includes interactive enhancements which are not supported on this platform. For the full interactive experience in this article, you will need a modern web browser with JavaScript enabled. Find out more about browser support at ABC News Online. Vietnam, China, Malaysia have eyes on the prize Rich in resources and traversed by a quarter of global shipping, the South China Sea is the stage for several territorial disputes that threaten to escalate tensions in the region.At the heart of these disputes are a series of barren islands in two groups - the Spratly Islands, off the coast of the Philippines, and the Paracel Islands, off the coasts of Vietnam and China.Both chains are essentially uninhabitable, but are claimed by no fewer than seven countries, eager to gain control of the vast oil and gas fields below them, as well as some of the region's best fishing grounds.Indonesia, Malaysia and Brunei have made claims to part of the Spratlys based on the internationally recognised Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), which extends 200 nautical miles from a country's coastline.Based on the EEZ, the Philippines has the strongest claim on the Spratlys and their resources, with its EEZ covering much of the area. However the lure of resources, and prospect of exerting greater control over shipping in the region, means that greater powers are contesting the Philippines' claims.China has made extensive sovereignty claims on both the Spratlys and the Paracels to the north, based largely on historic claims outlined in a map from the middle part of the 20th Century known as the 'Nine Dash Map'.Taiwan also makes claims based on the same map, as it was created by the nationalist Kuomintang government, which fled to Taiwan after the communists seized power in China.Vietnam also claims the Spratlys and the Paracels as sovereign territory, extending Vietnam's EEZ across much of the region and bringing it into direct conflict with China.There have been deadly protests in Vietnam over China's decision to build an oil rig off the Paracels.One Chinese worker in Vietnam was killed and a dozen injured in riots targeting Chinese and Taiwanese owned factories, prompting 3,000 Chinese nationals to flee the country.EEZ can only be imposed based on boundaries of inhabitable land, and this has prompted all the countries making claims on the region to station personnel, and in some cases build military bases out of the water, to bolster their claim.Building and protecting these structures has resulted in a series of stand-offs between countries in the region, each with the potential to escalate.China has been leading the charge with these installations, and has deployed vessels to the region to protect their interests. Chinese coast guard vessels have used a water cannon on Vietnamese vessels, as well as blockading an island where the Philippines has deployed military personnel.