Jeb Bush launches 2016 presidential bid
Miami (CNN)Jeb Bush, a scion of the most recognizable family in Republican politics who fashioned an image as a sober-minded conservative truth-teller while governor of Florida, is running for president.
Bush made his formal announcement Monday afternoon here in his adopted hometown during an appearance at Miami Dade College. His candidacy comes after a week-long European tour and months of intensive behind-the-scenes political maneuvering that erased long-standing doubts about his White House ambitions.
Arguing that the country is on "a very bad course," Bush told supporters in Miami that the nation had a decision to make.
"The question for me is what am I going to do about it," he said Monday afternoon. "And I've decided: I'm a candidate for president of the United States of America."
Bush, standing calmly in front of a podium without a blazer, was at one point interrupted by protestors wearing yellow shirts with letters that read, "Legal Status Is Not Enough," who calling for immigration reform. Departing from his prepared remarks, Bush shot back that as president, he would pass "meaningful immigration reform" rather than solving the problem via an executive order.
While traveling this spring to raise support for his forthcoming campaign, Bush struggled to address basic questions about George W. Bush's policy legacy, particularly the war in Iraq. In May, when asked by Fox News if he would have invaded Iraq "knowing what we know now," Bush said he "would have." He later said he misheard the question. But when Fox gave him another opportunity to address the question, he declined to provide an answer: "I don't know what that decision would have been -- that's a hypothetical."
"Jeb can argue he had a more conservative record as governor, but that just may not count much with an electorate that remembers his father for a tax hike and his brother for two wars," Domenech said. "Jeb will have to battle those ghosts in order to get the nomination. He'll also have to navigate a field with multiple candidates who have every incentive to turn him into a creature of the past and brand themselves as the way of the future, to attack him as a Common Core-pushing technocrat, as soft on gay marriage, or as a lover of amnesty."