Donald Trump says he’s more worthy of NBC support than ‘lying Brian Williams.’ Fair?
NBC today severed its relationship with Donald Trump over the overtly racist comments made by the 2016 Republican presidential candidate in his June 16 kickoff speech in New York. The action follows a similar move by Univision. Both companies cited these awful remarks by Trump:
In its statement announcing the move, NBCUniversal made clear its disapproval: “At NBC, respect and dignity for all people are cornerstones of our values. Due to the recent derogatory statements by Donald Trump regarding immigrants, NBCUniversal is ending its business relationship with Mr. Trump.”
Never one to be out-statemented, Trump is slashing back. Via Deadline:
As of today, Donald J. Trump is no longer affiliated with NBC. Mr. Trump stands by his statements on illegal immigration, which are accurate. NBC is weak, and like everybody else is trying to be politically correct— that is why our country is in serious trouble. Mr. Trump says, “We must have strong borders and not let illegal immigrants enter the United States. As has been stated continuously in the press, people are pouring across our borders unabated. Public reports routinely state great amounts of crime are being committed by illegal immigrants. This must be stopped and it must be stopped now. Long ago I told NBC that I would not being doing The Apprentice because I am running for President in order to Make our Country Great Again.” Mr. Trump continued, “If NBC is so weak and so foolish to not understand the serious illegal immigration problem in the United States, coupled with the horrendous and unfair trade deals we are making with Mexico, then their contract violating closure of Miss Universe/Miss USA will be determined in court. Furthermore, they will stand behind lying Brian Williams, but won’t stand behind people that tell it like it is, as unpleasant as that may be.”
Bold text added to highlight a comparison barely worth analyzing, but what the heck:
*Point No. 1: Did NBC really “stand by” Williams? After they found him guilty of various embellishments and falsehoods regarding his reportorial past — many folks just call them “lies” — NBC executives bounced him from his perch as anchor of “NBC Nightly News” and dropped him to a flimsy-sounding position doing breaking-news coverage at MSNBC. They also slapped Williams with a six-month suspension. Suppose that all amounts to “standing by,” at least in Trump’s version of reality.
*Point No. 2: Trump is arguing that NBC is sticking with liars while jettisoning truth-tellers, such as himself. What’s truth to Trump, though, is a slander to the Mexican people. Let’s run those words again:
Some folks call those remarks “incendiary“; some call them “offensive“; some call them what they are:
So there’s a choice: On the one hand, a guy who has trouble with the truth; on the other, a guy who engages in racial stereotyping. Executives at the top of NBCUniversal will have earned their summer vacation this year.
*Point No. 3: Brian Williams apologized at great length for his misdeeds. In an interview with NBC News colleague Matt Lauer, he appeared troubled by all the developments, though he could have come a bit cleaner.
And here’s where the contrast gets deep: When confronted with his own misdeeds regarding his depiction of Mexican Americans, Trump continues with his shameless bumptiousness. As he rattles off his insistence that there’s nothing to amend, he proves that he’s way below the level of even one of journalism’s most damaged names.