Confederate flag's half-century at S.C. Capitol ends
(CNN)It took just a few minutes, simultaneously somber and festive, to put a bookend on the Confederate flag's 54-year run at the South Carolina Capitol grounds.
A crowd of hundreds erupted in cheers, and sang a farewell refrain more associated with sports arenas, as uniformed highway patrol officers lowered the flag from a pole next to a soldiers' monument shortly after 10 a.m. ET Friday.
It was a move stemming from years of deep-rooted controversy over the banner that gained steam after last month's massacre of nine black churchgoers in Charleston.
"Finally we can breathe, we can sigh, we can cheer," said former state Rep. Bakari Sellers, one of the onlookers. "This is why Rosa sat and Martin marched, so that we can have events like this."
Cabinet-level officials Hundreds encircled the monument to witness a flag-lowering ceremony that was both choreographed and quick. The patrol officers handed the flag to one of the state's two black Cabinet-level officials , Department of Public Safety Director Leroy Smith.
to a state military museum In a fate decided by lawmakers this week after hours of passionate debate, the flag was taken to a state military museum about a mile down the road, where it will be exhibited.
The removal comes only a day after the state legislature passed a bill ordering it, buoyed by arguments that a flag that some see as a symbol of support for of racism and white supremacy couldn't remain on the Capitol grounds after the Charleston massacre.
A white man from Greenwood, South Carolina, held a U.S. flag as he looked on. He said it was time for the Confederate flag to come down.
"I have respect for the people that honor that as their heritage, but it's been used in other ways," the man, who didn't give his name, told CNN. "It's symbolic of a lot of things that are negative and a lot of things that are part of the dark part of our country's history."
"(But) taking down the flag, or even doing more with gun control, isn't enough to change the hearts of man," she told CNN's "New Day" on Friday morning from Williamsburg, Virginia.
In April 1961, South Carolina hoisted the Confederate battle flag over the Capitol dome in Columbia to honor the 100th anniversary of the start of the Civil War. And it kept it there, flying under the U.S. flag and the state's palmetto flag.
For years, African-Americans and others demanded the flag come down, saying it is a racist symbol that represents a war to uphold slavery and, later, a battle to oppose civil rights advances.
The tenacity behind the fight to delay the flag's removal had been fanned outside the House chamber before Thursday's vote.
Confederate flag The State newspaper reported that pro- Confederate flag robocalls urged voters last week to call their representatives and to tell them to "not stand with leftist fanatics who want to destroy the South we love."
"What's next? This attack on our values is sick and un-American, and it has to stop right here and right now in South Carolina," the call said.