Tensions ease as Koreas reach deal
Seoul, South Korea (CNN)North and South Korea have steered military tensions away from the threat of imminent confrontation, announcing an agreement over a series of recent flashpoints.
Landmine blasts, loudspeakers blaring propaganda, an exchange of artillery fire and threats of more hostilities had put both sides on edge along the Demilitarized Zone, the world's most heavily fortified border.
But after marathon talks between high-level officials, the two bitter foes said in the early hours of Tuesday that they had found enough common ground to dial back the situation.
North Korean leader Kim Jong Un meets with North Korea's first female fighter jet pilots in this undated photo released by the country's state media on Monday, June 22. He called the women "heroes of Korea" and "flowers of the sky."
Kim stands on the snow-covered top of Mount Paektu in North Korea in a photo taken by North Korean newspaper Rodong Sinmun on April 18 and released the next day by South Korean news agency Yonhap. Kim scaled the country's highest mountain, North Korean state-run media reported, arriving at the summit to tell soldiers that the hike provides mental energy more powerful than nuclear weapons.
Kim Jong Un, center, poses with soldiers on the snow-covered top of Mount Paektu in an April 18 photo released by South Korean news agency Yonhap.
Kim visits the Kumsusan Palace of the Sun in Pyongyang, North Korea, on April 15 to celebrate the 103rd birth anniversary of his grandfather, North Korean founder Kim Il Sung.
Kim inspects a drill for seizing an island at an undisclosed location in North Korea in an undated picture released by North Korea's official Korean Central News Agency on February 21.
Kim speaks during a meeting of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea in Pyongyang, North Korea, in this photo released February 19 by the state-run Korean Central News Agency.
A picture released by the North Korean Central News Agency shows North Korean leader Kim Jong Un appearing without his cane at an event with military commanders in Pyongyang on Tuesday, November 4. Kim, who recently disappeared from public view for about six weeks, had a cyst removed from his right ankle, a lawmaker told CNN.
Kim is seen walking with a cane in this image released Thursday, October 30, by the state-run Korean Central News Agency.
Kim sits in the pilot's seat of a fighter jet during the inspection.
This undated photo, released Tuesday, October 14, by the KCNA, shows Kim inspecting a housing complex in Pyongyang, North Korea. International speculation about Kim went into overdrive after he failed to attend events on Friday, October 10, the 65th anniversary of the Workers' Party. He hadn't been seen in public since he reportedly attended a concert with his wife on September 3.
A picture released by the KCNA shows Kim and his wife watching a performance by the Moranbong Band on Wednesday, September 3, in Pyongyang.
A North Korean soldier patrols the bank of the Yalu River, which separates the North Korean town of Sinuiju from the Chinese border town of Dandong, on Saturday, April 26.
In this photo released Thursday, April 24, by the Korean Central News Agency, Kim smiles with female soldiers after inspecting a rocket-launching drill at an undisclosed location.
A North Korean soldier uses binoculars on Thursday, February 6, to look at South Korea from the border village of Panmunjom, which has separated the two Koreas since the Korean War.
A North Korean soldier kicks a pole along the banks of the Yalu River on Tuesday, February 4.
A photo released by the KCNA on Thursday, January 23, shows the North Korean leader inspecting an army unit during a winter drill.
Kim inspects the command of an army unit in this undated photo released Sunday, January 12, by the KCNA.
Kim inspects a military factory in this undated picture released by the KCNA in May 2013.
Kim visits the Ministry of People's Security in 2013 as part of the country's May Day celebrations.
Kim is briefed by his generals in this undated photo. On the wall is a map titled "Plan for the strategic forces to target mainland U.S."
In this KCNA photo, Kim inspects naval drills at an undisclosed location on North Korea's east coast in March 2013.
Kim, with North Korean soldiers, makes his way to an observation post in March 2013.
Kim uses a pair of binoculars to look south from the Jangjae Islet Defense Detachment, near South Korea's Taeyonphyong Island, in March 2013.
Kim is greeted by a soldier's family as he inspects the Jangjae Islet Defense Detachment in March 2013.
Kim is surrounded by soldiers during a visit to the Mu Islet Hero Defense Detachment, also near Taeyonphyong Island, in March 2013.
Kim arrives at Jangjae Islet by boat to meet with soldiers of the Jangjae Islet Defense Detachment in March 2013.
Soldiers in the North Korean army train at an undisclosed location in March 2013.
In a photo released by the official North Korean news agency in December 2012, Kim celebrates a rocket's launch with staff from the satellite control center in Pyongyang.
Kim, center, poses in this undated picture released by North Korea's official news agency in November 2012.
Kim visits the Rungna People's Pleasure Ground, under construction in Pyongyang, in a photo released in July 2012 by the KCNA.
A crowd watches as statues of North Korean founder Kim Il Sung and his son Kim Jong Il are unveiled during a ceremony in Pyongyang in April 2012.
A North Korean soldier stands guard in front of an UNHA III rocket at the Tangachai-ri Space Center in April 2012.
In April 2012, Pyongyang launched a long-range rocket that broke apart and fell into the sea. Here, the UNHA III rocket is pictured on its launch pad in Tang Chung Ri, North Korea.
A closer look at the UNHA III rocket on its launch pad in Tang Chung Ri, North Korea.
North Korean soldiers relax at the end of an official ceremony attended by leader Kim Jong Un at a stadium in Pyongyang in April 2012.
North Korean soldiers listen to a speech during an official ceremony attended by leader Kim Jong Un at a stadium in Pyongyang in April 2012.
Members of a North Korean military band gather following an official ceremony at the Kim Il Sung stadium in Pyongyang in April 2012.
A North Korean controller is seen along the railway line between the Pyongyang and North Pyongan provinces in April 2012.
Pyongyang expressed regret over the serious injuries suffered by two South Korean soldiers in landmine blasts in the DMZ, and Seoul agreed to switch off the loudspeakers pumping propaganda broadcasts over the border Tuesday, both sides said.
Korea watchers expressed relief that the deal had defused the risk of confrontation for the time being after a period in which North Korea had doubled its artillery forces on the front lines and sent most of its submarines out from their bases.
The agreement "reduces the risk of a miscalculation with so many forces on the ground there and room for an error," said Philip Yun, executive director of the Ploughshares Fund, a group that advocates nuclear disarmament. "This is really good news over the short term."
Kim Jong Un But the sudden escalation of military tensions in a region where tens of thousands of U.S. troops are based was as a reminder of the opacity and unpredictability of North Korea under its young leader, Kim Jong Un
"We don't have a sense of what the edge of his envelope is -- and clearly North Korea's trying to push the edge of the envelope," Yun told CNN.
U.S. officials told CNN The North Korean troop movements last week were significant enough to prompt top American commanders to review the war plan for defending South Korea in case there was a sudden indication that North Korea was going to begin a war, U.S. officials told CNN
"We support President Park's tireless efforts to improve inter-Korean relations, which support peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula," he said, referring to South Korean President Park Geun-hye.
North Korea's expression of regret in the text of the deal appeared to have been enough to satisfy Park, who had demanded an apology for the landmine blasts.
Kim Kwan-jin, the South Korean national security chief who participated in the talks, said it was "very meaningful" that "the North apologized over the landmine incident and that they agreed on making efforts to prevent such incidents from reoccurring and easing tension."
"In the next 10 years, we have the threat of North Korea with a substantial nuclear arsenal -- if we don't figure out a way to deal with them -- and a leader we don't know a lot about," said Yun, who was part of U.S. teams that negotiated with North Korea under former President Bill Clinton.
Analysts say the recent tensions have followed a familiar pattern of previous North Korea crises.
"I think the North had planned this out very specifically, planting these mines," Yun said. "They knew there was going to be a response from the South, therefore they could ratchet up or deescalate as they wished."
North Korea hasn't publicly acknowledged laying the mines in the DMZ and had previously rejected the accusations from South Korea and the United States that it did so.
the thin-skinned regime in the North The South's response of resuming of loudspeaker broadcasts across the border -- which included news broadcasts and Korean pop music -- infuriated the thin-skinned regime in the North . Seoul hadn't used the tactic in more than a decade.