Thousands of migrants enter Croatia, president readies army to respond
Zagreb: Croatia lost control of its border with Serbia on Thursday, unable to deny the sheer force of will of thousands of asylum seekers pressing west and north into Europe, and unable to cope with their needs or numbers.
The country put its army on alert in response, with Croatia's President Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic saying they would "protect the national borders from the illegal migration" – setting up a potentially dangerous stand-off once they are deployed.
Interior Minister Ranko Ostojic said earlier on Thursday that Croatia could not receive more migrants. More than 7000 refugees have arrived since Wednesday, police said, with many more expected now Hungary has closed its border.
There were chaotic, angry scenes in the tiny Croatian border town of Tovarnik, as police tried to keep the massing refugees contained behind a fence. Children screamed in the crush, and men, women and children fainted in the 35-degree Celsius heat.
Finally the barrier gave way and hundreds of refugees sprinted aimlessly into Croatia, too many for the handful of buses that had been waiting to take them north.
In nearby Serbia, coach after coach deposited refugees within a kilometre from the border.
They trudged in the heat through dusty corn fields, carrying children and luggage, towards a Croatian police car that directed them toward train tracks.
After another 45-minute walk they arrived at the train station in the usually-quiet town of Tovarnik.
Some had slept at the station overnight, waiting for a train that never came. As numbers grew, the temperature rose and tempers shortened and there was a push by hundreds of refugees to get past the police line.
At first the line held, police choosing families with children to haul over the fence and take to the buses which would shuttle them to Zagreb.
In the confusion, families were separated, women crying as they pleaded with police to let their husbands through.
The refugees continued to press at the flimsy fences around the station, which eventually gave way, allowing them to stream forward.
One man, furious at his treatment by police, shouted "Croatia, expect a riot" as he marched into the country.
But the Iraqi man, who said his name was "Ahmed", then apologised to Fairfax for his outburst, saying he had had hardly any sleep at the station after a long trek.
He did not know if Croatia should really expect a riot, he said.
"I don't know, I don't know we are a peace people, we go to find peace in Europe - but we don't know what's happening to us," he said.
On the weekend, Hungary shut its borders to refugees, barring their way with razor wire and attacking a group who tried to press through with tear gas, pepper spray and water cannon.
The next barrier for the stream of migrants is the step from Croatia to Slovenia.
Slovenia has ruled out creating a "corridor" for migrants, saying asylum seekers will be accommodated but other migrants turned back.
On Thursday, Croatian Prime Minister Zoran Milanovic met Austrian Chancellor Werner Faymann, who was also due to meet his Slovenian counterpart Miro Cerar in Ljubljana.
"We agreed on certain things," Milanovic told a government session. "Austria is a bigger country, but they also have their limitations to cope," he said. "If the number of migrants continues increasing, I'm not sure we will be able register them all."
The BBC reported that large groups of migrants also pushed through police lines at Bezdan, the northernmost border crossing between Serbia and Croatia.
And Hungarian media reported more migrants were crossing from Croatia into Hungary at Illocska, 50km from Bezdan - avoiding the fence on Hungary's border with Serbia.