Greek elections live: Tsipras promises to sweep away 'old politics' after resounding triumph
• Syriza on course to win 35pc of vote; form coalition with nationalist ANEL • Voter turnout lowest ever recorded at just 55pc • Opposition leader Meimarakis concedes defeat • Neo-Nazi Golden Dawn emerge as third largest party • Alexis Tsipras emerges as clear winner in shock result • Jittery Greek creditors welcome Tsipras triumph
That's where we'll end tonight's coverage. On Monday, Mr Tsipras will be sworn into office for the second time this year by the Greek president. His coalition partner is all but a done deal but will be announced by Wednesday at the latest we expect. Meanwhile the official votes are still tricking in.
Thanks for joining. Here's a summary of the best of the day:
Greece's international lenders welcomed the resounding re-election for former prime minister Alexis Tsipras on Sunday night amid fears that the Leftist premier would fail to stick by his promises to stay in the euro.
Mr Tsipras's much moderated Syriza party was on course to gain around 35pc of the national vote - making them clear victors in a closely fought campaign with the conservative New Democracy party.
The continued presence of the popular prime minister will cheer investors who had been braced for a period of prolonged political uncertainty and fractious coalition talks after polls predicted a deadheat.
Eurozone officials welcomed the re-election of Mr Tsipras as the man to oversee the country's third bail-out deal in five years, rather than undermining attempts at reform in opposition.
President of the European parliament, German Martin Schulz congratulated the Leftist premier, tweeting: "Now a solid government ready to deliver is needed quickly".
The EU's economics chief Pierre Moscovici said he was confident that any new coalition would abide by the reform package.
"From Monday, we are ready to collaborate to implement the programme to reform the Greek economy," he told Italy's La Stampa before the results came in.
Brussels however has repeated there will be no flexibility for the government to renegotiate the punishing terms of its €86bn rescue.
EU spokeswoman Olga Gerovassili said the result was still "the beginning of a battle" for the country which faces three more years of draconian budget targets and a root-and-branch overhaul of its tax and pension system.
Mujtaba Rahman, head of Europe practice at the Eurasia Group, said the prospect of another Mr Tsipras-led government would not enthuse creditors.
"Given how challenging the bail-out agenda is between now and year-end, a return of the previous coalition isn't great news," he said.
"It was spectacularly incompetent last time around. Tonight's result will worry creditors."
Ahead of the election, analysts had warned that a weak minority government and even the threat of fresh elections could prove devastating for the ravaged economy.
Greeks bonds and equities have rallied since a snap vote was called on August 20, in the hope that the country's eurozone future would be secured under a consolidated Syriza shorn of its radical Leftist MPs.
But investor relief at some semblance of political stability in the country is set to be short-lived.
Despite Mr Tsipras promising to stick to the grueling terms of the new "Memorandum of Understanding", there is still a high risk that his party will begin to slide on the implementation when in office, warned analysts.
He has also allied up with his old junior coalition partner, the Independent Greeks, who have promised to over-turn creditor demands to cut defence spending and abolish tax privileges for the country's islands.
"A weak government could put at risk the €86bn programme execution, further disbursement of official funds, official debt relief and, ultimately, could re-ignite exit risks", said Antonio Garcia Pascual at Barclays.
Well sort of. Still the same two men in government tonight
“In Europe today, Greece and the Greek people are synonymous with resistance and dignity, and this struggle will be continued together for another four years...
We have difficulties ahead, but we are also on firm ground.
We won’t recover from the struggle by magic,but it can happen with hard work.
The new PM is appearing with his coalition partner and former defence minister, Panos Kammenos of ANEL.
The Syriza leader is addressing the crowds right now and making promises for a new future.
Meanwhile, his long-time Spanish comrade, Pablo Iglesias of Podemos has tweeted his congratulation, courtesy of James Badcock in Madrid.
Mujtaba Rahman, head of Europe practice at the Eurasia Group, has been speaking to our Europe editor Peter Foster in Klathmonos square. He thinks the prospect of another Mr Tsipras-led government will not inspire many of Greece's creditors.
"Given how challenging the bail-out agenda is between now and year-end, a return of the previous coalition isn't great news," he said.
"It was spectacularly incompetent last time around. Tonight's result will worry creditors."
"There is no space for any renegotiation or concessions from creditors, especially with Angela Merkel distracted and struggling with refugees. Out of all of the plausible coalition scenarios, this is by far the worst."
EU spokeswoman Olga Gerovassili is under no pretensions over today's shock trimph for Syriza. She told Reuters today:
"This will be a four-year term government with a strong parliamentary majority, which will implement the programme it promised."
"It will continue the tough negotiations with the lenders, realising that this is the beginning of a battle."
Peter Foster is out in Syntagma Square tonight waiting for Mr Tsipras and his new coalition partner Pannos Kammenos of the Independent Greeks to address supporters.
Terence Quick, a spokesman for the nationalist junior coalition partner has told Peter his party would form a coalition with Mr Tsipras.
"Tsipras will be the PM and we will be the guarantee of stability," he said on the sidelines of a victory rally in Klafomonos Square in Athens.
The Syriza leader is expected to be sworn in tomorrow as PM with the formal coalition announced by Wednesday at the latest.
Just over half the votes counted, and its a sea of pink. Syriza are just shy of the 38pc needed for an outright majority, currently at 36.5pc.
The result of the Greek election represented a "significant" success for re-elected premier, said Mr Hollande on a trip to Morrocco and vowed to visit Athens soon.
"Greece will have a period of stability with a solid majority," he told reporters.
With nearly 55pc of the votes counted, here's where we're at tonight:
With just over 50pc of the vote counted, it looks like the rump Syriza rebels will not get enough support to pass the 3pc parliamentary threshold.
Relief all round among eurocrats today. German social democrat and European parliament leader Martin Schulz is the first to congratulate Mr Tsipras
More of the same. Former deputy of nationalists Anel, Terens Quick has told Greek media that his party will be in parliament and also participate in the next government.
The paradox of today's results, where Greeks seem to have voted for the same government but with an entirely different set of policies, from Yale professor Stathakis Kalyvas.
A quarter of the votes have been counted and Syriza (in pink) have a 7-8pc lead over New Democracy (blue) at around 35pc.
Here's how the smaller parties look: To Potami 3.8pc; Independent Greeks 3.7; Centists Union 3.5pc and Popular Unity 2.8pc
Leader Evangelos Meimarakis is speaking and has congratulated Alexis Tsipras, conceding defeat to the former PM.
Speaking outside his party headquarters, Mr Meimarakis said: “ND has not been destroyed, it is not finished, it is a pillar of stability."
If exit polls are to be believed, Syriza will just be 7-9 seats short of an 151 seat-majority. That might be enough for them to team up with their previous coalition partners, ANEL, in a repeat of January's election results.
Shorn of his radical Leftist MPs, Mr Tsipras now cuts a much more palatable figure for Greece's creditors in Brussels, Frankfurt, and Washington.
In fact, they're probably secretly rooting for the former PM to head up a new government, rather than cause a headache to any new leader, while in opposition. Mr Tsipras has publicy disavowed the bail-out terms he signed up to and may well begin to backslide on its implementation if he gets back into the Maximos Mansion.
But for the country's lenders at least, it might be a case of better the devil they know.
More good news for Tsipras. The latest exit poll out of Greece is now showing a slightly more comfortable win or up to 35pc of the vote.
Greece was heading for the uncertainty of a coalition government on Sunday night after the country’s radical former prime minister Alexis Tsipras failed to win an outright mandate to govern.
After a tepid campaign that saw Mr Tsipras’s personal popularity fall sharply, preliminary exit polls showed the 41-year-old’s far-left Syriza party would have to find coalition partners in order to return to power.
The snap-polls showed Syriza narrowly beating conservative rivals New Democracy to become Greece's largest party, but falling far short of the 38 per cent of the vote needed to form a majority government.
Having ruled out forming a national unity coalition with New Democracy, Mr Tsipras will need to govern with other, centrist parties.
Whatever coalition is formed, the government will be faced with the daunting challenge of implementing the stringent reforms demanded by the €86bn bail-out package agreed to in July.
The programme has already split Syriza and in recent weeks cracks have begun to appear even among those MPs who remained loyal Mr Tsipras.
“This is a fragile party, although one third of the members broke off there are still radical elements left who can create problems for Tsipras,” said Marco Vicenzino, a Greece expert at the Global Strategy Project, a risk consultancy.
The disappointing result for Mr Tsipras came at the end of a month-long campaign that failed to engage weary Greek voters who were making their third trip to the polling booths for a major vote in just nine months.
Nikos Pappas, close aide of Alexis Tsipras, has told Greek media the party will not form a coalition with New Democracy. That maintains the line they've held throughout the campaign, despite ND's insistence they can work with the Leftist party.
A gathering of Syriza supporters have cheered this evening's exit poll. It's not quite a mad raucous affair by the looks of things.
Pasok are in line to be one of the kingmakers in this election. The social democrat party could well get into bed with both Syriza and New Democracy. But following that tight exit poll, they seem to be favouring a 'Grand coalition' of Left and Right, which would likely mean they are excluded from government.
Greece has a 3pc threshold for parliamentary representation, and of the 19 parties that contested this election, nine could well make the grade. This would be the highest number since post-war elections 65 years ago.
Should Mr Tsipras be declared tonight's winner, Syriza would gain a bonus 50 seats in parliament and be handed three days to find some coalition partners.
If you were a follower of the referendum coverage, this will be a familiar sight.
Todays' official election website is up and running. The results will be dropping from constituencies around the country in a few hours. You can follow them all here.
Syriza rebels have failed to make much headway with the electorate on their promises to tear up the new Memorandum. They're set to gain just 2-3pc of the vote.
Still, they have one outspoken supporter in the form of Yanis Varoufakis (as we reported earlier today).
Channel 4's Paul Mason reports on a subdued atmosphere among the party faithful after that exit poll
Here's the breakdown of the various exit polls combined. Syriza's lead is still skirting the margin of error and is below the 38pc that would translate into a majority.
Leftist party are on course to gain around 30-34pc of the vote, say exit polls.
We'll be getting a raft of exit polls from the main Greek media outlets in just under 10 minutes.
There's still 20 mins to go before voting closes, but the leaders of Greece's two main pro-bail-out parties have already started griping on social media.
The dispute was kicked off when a New Democracy party official called on voters to turn their back on the centrist party of To Potami and vote for ND, on Facebook.
The leader of To Potami Stavros Theodorakis called has now responded, calling the intervention "aviolation of electoral law". "It's a shame for a party that claims to be democratic,” he wrote on his Facebook page.
Here's a rough guide to what the eventual outcome could look like (based on polling last week) and the possible coalition permutations that could emerge.
The biggest party will get a bonus of 50 seats in the parliament, but that is still unlikely to be enough to gain the 151 majority needed. In which case, the country's president will hand a mandate to form a majority government to the winners.
Should they fail to do so, this is then handed to the second largest party, and so on until we get a viable coalition.
A reminder that exit polls are due out at 5pm. Low turnout could well skew the reliability of the polls however
Looks like the theme of this election will be voter disillusion
One hour before polls close and there have been plenty of scenes of sleepy polling booths in Greece today. If the pictures are anything to go by, most of the voters have been elderly Greeks.
Around 100,000 members of the electorate are aged between 18-19 years old and are a key electoral battle-ground for Syriza. This morning, Mr Tsipras appealed to the country's youth to back him to secure a fresh future for the ravaged country. But it looks like they may well have switched off to his more moderate message, in what would be a significant blow for his re-election hopes.
Today's election could see less than half the electorate turning up to the polls. Anything under 50pc would mark one of the lowest ever participation rates for a general election. By contrast, June's referendum and January's previous vote saw a healthy 62-64pc turnout.
Low voting levels could also skew the results, but in whose favour we do not yet know. It could also jeopardise the process of compiling exit polls which are expected at 5pm, reports Helena Smith of the Guardian.
It's been a good few years since scenes of mass rioting and violent demonstrations filled the streets of Athens.
The country's anarchists are now a more subdued force as widespread public anger of their treatment at the hands of lenders has given way to weary resignation, nearly six years on from the start of the crisis.
But pockets of anarchists are still happily fighting their fight in Greece. Back in April, former finance minister Yanis Varoufakis was attacked by a group of hooded youths at a restaurant in Athens. More recently, there have been reports of groups attacking the offices run by bail-out forces.
Our Europe editor Peter Foster has been speaking to one self-confessed anarchist in Athens
Talking of fringe groups, I've also been chatting with Greece's anarchists this week after 15 of them reportedly smashed up the offices of the Asset Development Fund in Athens - the body responsible for running the controversial privatisation programme required under the terms of the EU bail-out.
I tracked down one of the anarchists from the so-called "Rubicon" group who has been charged in the Development Fund case, at a cafe-squat in a bohemian quarter of Athens.
In between serving espressos, 35-year-old Thanassis (who will neither confirm nor deny the charges against him) railed against the state and the capitalist banking system that he blamed for creating a "fake money" bubble in Greece that ultimately sold the country into its current debt-slavery.
Smashing stuff up was not mindless, he said, but necessary to "radicalise" society. Syriza's mistake, in his view, was straying from the path of true radicalism by going into government.
"Their error was to think that parliamentarism can change anything. It cannot," he said.
Curiously shaven-headed Thanassis - who wouldn't submit to a picture - spent four years studying history at the University of Central Lancashire between 1998-2002.
Authorities there might be relieved to know that he attributes his radicalisation to the EU and international finance, not a spell living in Preston.
More seriously, Greece has a long history of anarchism, and while they may be a fringe group, the coming difficulty of enacting the reforms required by the EU bail-out may yet provide them fertile ground.
Polls in the run up to today's election have put Greece's neo-nazi party, Golden Dawn, on course to become the third largest party in the country. But, with parliament set to be divided, our Europe editor, Peter Foster stresses its important to keep the party's "ascent" in perspective.
Aside from the main Syriza-New Democracy horse-race there will also be attention on the battle for third place which polls suggest could be won by Golden Dawn, the neo-fascist party.
That's one good reason why Syriza don't want a Grand Coalition with New Democracy since it could afford Golden Dawn the status of official opposition - something which neither side wants to see.
The 'rise' of Golden Dawn is a favourite subject for non-Greek newspapers, but it should be kept firmly in perspective.
Even if they come in third, Golden Dawn still only accounts for 6 or 7 per cent of the popular vote, when between them ND and Syriza account for over 70 per cent. The fascists aren't coming back any time soon.
Here's a quick summary of the day so far:
Nearly 40pc of the near 10 million electorate has chosen to stay at home today, report pollsters Alco.
Our man in Athens, Peter Foster reports on the eery absence of any electioneering in the capital.
It has become a commonplace to say this is a lack-lustre election, but the lack of buzz in Athens today is really remarkable.
If you had landed in Athens this morning on your holidays, there is almost nothing to give away the fact that an election is taking place today - no flags, no signs, no cars decked out in party colours tooting their horns in the streets.
Earlier this week I visited the Syriza tent near Syntagma Square where youth activists were supposed to be dishing out literature to voters but instead were sitting round a table writing their essays. And they were the only ones there.
Vicky Tsefala, a 23-year-old Syriza volunteer who has worked for the party since 2008 admitted it was "the quietist campaign I’ve ever seen”, which is why Mr Tsipras has been banging the drum for the youth vote.
We'll find out at in three or four hoursif he's been successful.
Greece's conservative leaning opposition have dominated the country's politics over the last four decades. New Democracy oversaw the early "boom" years of life in the single currency, and it was their eventual deposition from power in 2009 which uncovered years of hidden financial mismanagement that triggered the current debt crisis.
The party's former leader and PM Antonis Samaras also oversaw the second bail-out agreement before the electorate turfed out ND in January. Mr Samaras resigned from office after Greeks chose to say 'Oxi' to bail-out terms laid out by Brussels in June.
But ND could be on course for a remarkable turnaround if polls are to be believed. They are only a few points behind Syriza and may head up a new pro-bail-out coalition government if the result ends in a dead heat.
Nobel prize-winning economist Paul Krugman has been a vocal critic of the eurozone's handling of the Greek crisis. The American has also attracted opprobrium in parts of the Greek press for supporting the 'No' campaign in June's referendum.
In an interview given to Greece's Skai TV, Mr Krugman says the third Memorandum is "designed to fail", arguing that its insistence on ever increasing surplus targets will be impossible to achieve for any new government.
You can watch the interview in full below.
Greek journalist Niki Kitsantonis sums up much of the prevailing mood at polling booths around the country today:
Greece's new three-year rescue is set to provide €86bn to help the country repay the debts it already owes its creditors.
The programme has been designed as a "front-ended" package, which means most of the reforms need to be passed within the first six months of it coming into force.
After that, Athens will be subject to regular "reviews" from Brussels, where monitors ensure the government is making enough progress in order to qualify for more tranches of cash.
Crucial to making it all add up will be Greece's requirement to hit annual primary budget targets (that's revenues, minus expenditure and excluding debt repayments). Over the medium-term, the Troika want Greece to hit a 3.5pc surplus, which will require more stringent austerity on an economy that has been in a state of perma-recession for the last five years, warn many economists.
Any new Greek government will face the task of implementing a radical programme of reforms and spending cuts including 60 'prior action' laws to be passed this year.
But plenty of the details remain unresolved. Here's a run down of two immediate challenges facing the government
The biggest elephant in the room is the IMF. The Fund is still insisting on a bold programme of debt relief for Greece before it formally commits to providing any more of its shareholder money to keep the economy afloat. But the Europeans are delaying the debt the question until Athens has made enough progress in carrying out the reform package.
This first "bail-out review" was due to be carried out in October, but is likely to be set back should the elections give way to a prolonged period of coalition talks.
However, there is no guarantee that the IMF will get the concessions it's looking for. Their prescriptions for the debt mountain, which stands at 200pc of GDP this year, are far more radical than those countenanced by Europe's leaders.
Extending payment deadlines and reducing interest rate costs on Greece's debt means Europe's taxpayers will not be paid back in full.
The other major question hanging over the country and its creditors is the banking system.
The ECB calculates that€25bn will needed to recapitalise lenders. Greece's banks have suffered from unprecedented levels of deposit flight and have worryingly high levels of "bad loans" on their balance sheets.
The deadline for recapitalisation is the end of the year. After that, new EU-wide laws could change the picture entirely and force the private bank bondholders and depositors to face the costs of the recapitalisation.
Although the latest polls have given Tsipras a slender lead of between 0.5 and 3 per cent, Greek polling is notoriously unreliable in the era of mobile phones and fractured politics. Remember, no-one forecast the overwhelming 60-40 'no' vote in July's referendum on the eurozone bail-out.
This morning the Greek paper Ethnos is comparing this election to that of 2000, when 12-13 per cent were "undecided" on polling day. Thiselection "undecideds" could be as high as 15pc.
That leaves plenty of margin for error. Analysts' predictions that Mr Tsipras will win - and the balance seem to think he will, just - is based more on the belief that disgruntled Syriza votes will turn out for him one more time.
But given that none of these voters will ever vote for the Right, the real worry for Tsipras is that they stay home...a low turnout could help New Democracy.
Meanwhile, Henry Foy of the FT has been speaking to some young voters who are begrudgingly opting for the youthful Mr Tsipras, despite his volte-face on the radical election promises that swept him to power in January.
He's not standing for re-election today, but ex-finance minister Yanis Varoufakis has still got plenty to say. The economist has told The Press Project that the aim of today's vote is to nullify Greece's momentous "No" to creditors and to "legalise" a humiliating new bail-out.
He's also come out in favour of the country's anti-bail-out parties and confirmed he will vote for the rebel breakaway party, Popular Unity (LAE). That's quite a departure for a man who is a close friend of Mr Tsipras and spoke about how much it pained him to vote against the government earlier this summer.
An excerpt of his statement today:
It is important that we support parties which (with the exception of the misanthropic and pseudo anti-systemic Golden Dawn) reject the rationale that claims that the only way for Greece in Europe is via the "optimum" realization of the 3rd bailout program.
Given that the leadership of Syriza has accepted the T.I.N.A. (There Is No Alternative) dogma which has been used since 2010 as the reason for the acceptance of all the bail-out programs and memoranda; those of us who consider that dogma completely fallacious (as well as its continuation for the sixth year destructive for the country and the society) are left with the following choices: The Communist Party of Greece (KKE), The Popular Unity (LAE), or parties which have no hope in entering the parliament".
It all seems a while ago when the former PM took to parliament to defend his former finance minister and his choice of shirts.
Today's general election will be the eighth time Greeks have elected a government in its 14 years in the euro. The home of democracy it may be, but millions of vote-weary Greeks are set to stay at home this time round.
Peter Foster takes this cartoon snap from today's Kathimerini newspaper: "The over-burdened donkey is created from a map of Greece and is being dragged reluctantly down a road signposted "elections"."
Peter Foster is in sunny Athens where opposition leader Vangelis Meimarakis cut a far more relaxed figure than his rival, Mr Tsipras, when voting this morning.
The former defence minister stopped to gladhand supporters who clapped and cheered him into the polling booth. New Democracy win the choreography contest this morning.
He said the vote was to "kick out the misery and lies" and bring the "authentic ones" back - a contrast he hopes with Mr Tsipras's hard-left Syriza party who he has accused throughout the campaign of perpetrating a "disastrous experiment" on Greece.
"We're going to celebrate a new Greece rising tomorrow with a smile".
Nothing like a politician for optimism.
Alexis Tsipras was at the ballot box around an hour ago in a southen Athens district.
He told voters that "tomorrow a new day starts", and he was "optimistic" he would be back at Maximos Mansion next week.
He called on Greeks to give the next government a strong mandate that will allow it to govern for a full four-year term and to "continue with the same decisiveness, the same self-denial to fight the battles for the defense of our people's rights, not only in Europe but this time within the country too."
There are nearly 10 million Greeks eligible to vote today, with around 100,000 young voters aged 18 to 19 years of age, casting their ballot for the first time.
But this lacklustre campaign has failed to energise the hopes of a beleaguered nation, says Athens-based journalist, Omaira Gill this morning.
Greece's president, 65-year-old Prokopis Pavlopoulos has cast his vote this morning. The presidint, who holds a largely symbolic office, said the following:
"I am sure that the whole electoral process and will be completed in a way that fits our democratic tradition and quality of our democracy.
I wish and hope that the election results will justify the enormous sacrifices of our people and especially our youth in a Europe that finally realizes."
Popular Unity head Panagiotis Lafazanis was the first main political figure to vote this morning. His campaign has been based on Greeks reviving the desire to give "the big No" to creditors new demands - as nearly two-thirds did back in June.
This morning, Lafazanis urged young Greeks to get out to the ballot boxes and say 'No' to apathy:
"In this election, the priority is the youth of our country", he said.
The youth should say a big no to abstention from the polls, to frustration, and to the idea that all politicians are the same. These are the three factors that bring new memoranda and austerity.
We vote to stop our youth leaving the country, to enable them to find work here in Greece.
Mr Tsipras is back in the Athens classroom where in June, he called on the nation to vote 'No' and reject creditors' punishing conditions to stay in the euro.
Today, the former PM has been delivering some muted and measured comments to the world's press.
"Greece will take its destiny in its hands" he said this morning, calling on voters to appoint a "strong government with a four-year horizon".
Peter Foster is in Athens where Alexis Tsipras, who is asking Greeks for a second chance, is casting his ballot. Here is he on his way to vote in a local school:
Hugo Dixon, journalist and Greek-watcher, has penned an op-ed in today's Financial Times, urging any new Greek prime minister to quickly form a stable coalition and make competent ministerial appointments that will get the country back on course to carry out its bail-out.
He thinks ND's Meimarakis is probably in a stronger position than Mr Tsipras to bring stabilty back to the country. Here's a snippet(read in full here)
The prize for forming a stable coalition and a strong cabinet is big. Greece’s creditors would lighten the load of its humungous debt; capital controls would be lifted; and the European Central Bank would include the government’s debt in its quantitative easing programme, driving down bond yields. All this could happen by early next year — restoring business confidence, taking the edge off the recession and giving a boost to whichever government was in power.
By contrast, if the new government drags its heels in implementing the deal, the creditors will drag their heels on debt relief. Capital controls won’t be lifted quickly, the ECB won’t rush to buy Greek bonds, investors will stay glum and the recession will go on and on. The government’s political troubles will mount. In the worst-case scenario, the creditors would refuse to hand over bailout money, bank depositors would run for their money, the state would go bust and Greece would be driven out of the euro.
Polls have been open for just over half an hour. Turnout is expected to be much lower than that of this year's previous two votes (an election and referendum), as many vote-weary Greeks are expected to stay away.
But, some have been up bright and early this morning at the ballot box:
Panagiotis Lafazanis, Greece's newest political party leader and head of a Syriza breakaway faction, has cast his vote this morning.
A former energy minister under the last government, he has been one of the most vocal critics of Greece's treatment at the hands of its creditors. Following the decision to hold an election, 25 MPs from Syriza protested at the deal, defecting from the party to form the rump Syriza group known as Popular Unity.
PU advocate a return to the drachma but have failed to make many waves among the electorate, if polls are to be believed. They're on course to gain around 5pc of the vote.
Here's a brief guide to the party
The result of this election is not expected to have a major impact on Greece's new €86bn bail-out deal struck with creditors in July.
Mr Tsipras, who signed up to the terms, has publicly disavowed the spending cuts and tax increases the country will need to carry out for at least another three years, but has also promised to keep Greece in the euro.
The main opposition New Democracy have attacked the Leftists for running the country to the ground in their failed attempts to negotiate a new deal. ND however, like 70pc of the population, want to stay in the single currency, seemingly at all costs.
Our Europe editor Peter Foster has been in Athens talking to small business owners who, like many, are indifferent to the choices on offer in this campaign.
Read his dispatch in full here.
As Greece’s latest election campaign was reaching its rowdy climax in Athens, a few streets away Katerina Katsanou was working in her boutique clothing store putting the finishing touches to a closing down sale.
“I’m closing down now because I think things will only get worse,” said the 54-year-old former bank employee, still fussing over her mannequins even as she applied the discount pricetags that she hopes will shift the remainder of her stock.
Like many Greeks, Mrs Katsanou, who has two daughters aged 28 and 32 who have never worked, is exhausted – tired of the paralysis and empty promises, tired of the corruption and tired of voting for politicians that don’t deliver.
“Whoever comes to power will not be able to change much,” she said, “It is too late for that now; we have reached a very bad place.”
Hello and welcome to today's live coverage of Greece's snap general election. The nation of 11 million is heading back to the polls nearly eight months to the day after they elected the Leftist Syriza party into power on the promise of tearing up the country's austerity contract.
The ensuing eight months have ended in humiliating fashion for leader Alexis Tsipras. He has signed the country up to the most punishing bail-out in five years of dealings with creditors, and has lost a third of his party membership along the way.
This morning we're expecting the former prime minister to cast his ballot in Athens. The election campaign has been a much subdued affair compared to June's referendum and the January national election.
Mr Tsipras has jettisoned his hardline anti-austerity rhetoric and instead, is asking Greeks to back him over the main opposition New Democracy, who he claims represent the oligarchic, clientelistic politics that bought the economy to its knees.
In the last few days, polls have begun to show a very slim lead emerging for Syriza. One poll conducted for Vima, gave Syriza a slim three point lead over New Democracy at 31.2pc. But that still won't be enough to get them above the 36pc voting threshold for a majority government.
A coalition of some hue is all but a certainty. Mr Tsipras has promised not to ally with ND, but the latter's leader, Evangelos Meimarakis is keeping his options open.
We'll be bringing you the best of the coverage throughout the day. Polls have just opened and are set to close at 5pm BST. The first exit polls are expected at 6pm and results will being to come in thick and fast from then. A final result could well be announced by 9pm.
Stay tuned for the best of it.