Europe migrant crisis: Croatia and Serbia escalate border dispute, restrict traffic flow
Croatia and Serbia have escalated a border dispute triggered by Europe's asylum seeker crisis with each side further restricting cross-frontier traffic.
Belgrade closed the main Bajakovo-Batrovci crossing at midnight to all trucks with Croatian plates, or those transporting goods made in Croatia, Serbian interior minister Nebojsa Stefanovic said, reported by the Tanjug news agency.
In retaliation, Croatia closed the crossing to cars with Serbian plates, the agency said.
Bajakovo-Batrovci was the last of eight crossing points that had remained open to both trucks and cars after the dispute flared last week.
On Monday, Croatia blocked trucks coming from Serbia at Bajakovo-Batrovici in a further attempt to pressure Belgrade to redirect the migrant flow towards Hungary and Romania.
It later relented somewhat, letting in trucks with perishable goods — a move that prompted a protest blockade by other freight drivers.
According to Croatia's national traffic organisation, the nearby Tovarnik-Sid border crossing remains open for cars.
Serbian citizens can still enter Croatia, but Serbian-registered vehicles cannot under a ban imposed in retaliation for a Serbian embargo on Croatian goods, Croatian interior minister Ranko Ostojic said.
But Serbian TV showed its citizens being turned back at the border overnight.
Mr Ostojic, however, said there had been "a problem with passports."
"As far as people are concerned, they can enter Croatia," he said.
"Our border is ready and open for any other car without Serbian registration."
More than 44,000 asylum seekers fleeing conflicts and poverty in their countries in Middle East and Africa entered the Balkan country from Serbia over the past week, with a record 9,000 on Tuesday alone.
On Thursday, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said a deal to relocate 120,000 asylum seekers among EU countries was far from what was needed to resolve the continent's biggest migration crisis since World War II.
"I am deeply convinced that what Europe needs is not just selective relocation of this kind, but a much more durable process for fairly distributing refugees among member states," Ms Merkel told parliament.
"A first step has been taken, but we are still far from where we should be."
Ms Merkel's remarks came two days after EU interior ministers forced through a deal to relocate 120,000 asylum seekers in the face of strong opposition from eastern states Hungary, the Czech Republic, Romania and Slovakia.
In what appeared to be criticism targeted against Hungary, Ms Merkel recalled "minimum standards in Europe for the accommodation and care of refugees, and in the asylum-seeking process", and noted that such standards "are not always met at EU borders."
Hungary alarmed both human rights activists and the United Nations alike with its army's use of rubber bullets, tear gas and net guns to repel people seeking to enter its territory.
Besides sealing off its southern border with Serbia last week, Budapest also passed a raft of anti-migrant measures, including a law that allows it to jail anyone caught crossing the border illegally.
Meanwhile the European Commission warned that at least 19 EU member states, including France and Germany, faced possible sanctions for failing to implement rules on handling asylum seekers coming to Europe.
A young African was killed by a freight train near the entrance to the Channel Tunnel in France early Thursday in the latest death of an asylum seeker trying to reach Britain, a local official said.
An official said the victim was probably from Eritrea or Sudan.
At least 10 migrants have died in or near the tunnel since late June.
Around 3,000 asylum seekers, mostly from Africa, Afghanistan and Syria, are camped in the French town of Calais near the Channel Tunnel entrance.
They have made repeated attempts to reach England, often by trying to enter the tunnel or climbing onto lorries.
In July, Eurotunnel said 2,000 attempts a night were being made to get into the tunnel, but new fences erected around the tracks, as well as a beefed-up police presence, have greatly reduced the number of intrusions.