EU 'is weeks away from falling apart' as countries cope with influx of migrants
The EU will ‘start falling apart’ within weeks if the migrant crisis continues unchecked, the Prime Minister of Slovenia has warned.
Miro Cerar made the dire prediction as the continued influx of migrants sparked fresh conflict between eastern European nations.
Slovenia, a tiny country with a population of just two million, has been swamped by more than 60,000 migrants in only a few days.
Meanwhile Romania, Bulgaria and Serbia have warned they could close their borders if Germany and Austria stop accepting migrants from the Middle East.
It came as European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker highlighted the need for leaders to reach a consensus on the crisis by invoking the plight of migrants as the winter months approach.
He told a German newspaper yesterday that ‘every day counts’, adding: ‘Otherwise we will soon see families in cold rivers in the Balkans perish miserably.’
The crisis which has engulfed the Continent this year has been compounded by Hungary’s decision to seal its borders. 
As a result, migrants switched to Croatia, which also imposed border controls, pushing them into Slovenia.
Now the domino effect is threatening to destroy the Schengen Agreement for passport-free travel within the EU.
As EU leaders met at a Brussels summit, Mr Cerar said: ‘If we do not deliver some immediate and concrete actions on the ground in the next few days and weeks I believe the EU and Europe as a whole will start falling apart.’
Bulgarian Prime Minister Boiko Borisov warned that if Germany and Austria closed their borders with his country, Romania and Serbia would respond in kind.
‘The three countries, we are standing ready, if Germany and Austria close their borders, not to allow our countries to become buffer zones,’ Mr Borisov said.
‘We will not expose our countries to the devastating pressure of millions that would come.’
The comments expose the huge divisions between EU states over how to deal with the influx of hundreds of thousands of migrants.
Romanian Prime Minister Victor Ponta said his country had the ‘right to defend’ itself against countries which build fences.
‘We carry out our obligations, we are in solidarity with all of Europe,’ he said. ‘But the responsibility cannot be put with just some countries.’
After Hungary built a fence to keep out migrants and closed its border with Croatia, Slovenia said it was considering following suit. Serbia, which is not in the EU, also said it was struggling to cope.
Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucic said: ‘It is important for the people to know that it is not a problem to register (migrants), or build bigger centres, nothing of this is a problem for Serbia.
‘But if someone thinks that we can be the place for two or three million refugees, this is unrealistic.’
Nearly 250,000 migrants have passed through the Balkans since mid-September and the colder weather is not expected to halt the surge.
A total of 11,500 crossed into Croatia on Saturday, the highest in a single day since mid-September.