China warns U.S. warship in South China Sea
(CNN)Chinese ships and aircraft warned and tracked a U.S. Navy warship Tuesday as it came close to reefs claimed by China in contested waters in the South China Sea.
Cui Tiankai, the Chinese ambassador to the United States, told CNN's Christiane Amanpour in an exclusive interview that the U.S. operation is "a very serious provocation, politically and militarily" and the country's foreign ministry summoned Max Baucus, the U.S. ambassador to China, to express its "strong discontent" over the patrol.
Cui said it was a clear attempt by Washington to militarize the region.
"It is a very absurd and even hypocritical position to ask others not to militarize the region while one's self is sending military vessels there so frequently," he said.
A U.S. defense official told CNN that the destroyer USS Lassen "conducted a transit" within 12 nautical miles of five reefs claimed by Beijing, including Subi Reef, in the Spratly Islands on Tuesday morning.
The operation put the ship within an area that would be considered Chinese sovereign territory if the United States recognized the man-made islands as being Chinese territory, the official said.
"If any country thinks that, through some gimmicks, they will be able to interfere with or even prevent China from engaging in reasonable, legitimate and legal activities in its own territories, I want to suggest those countries give up such fantasy," ministry spokesman Lu Kang said.
"In fact, if relevant parties insist on creating tensions in the region and making trouble out of nothing, it may force China to draw the conclusion that we need to strengthen and hasten the buildup of our relevant capabilities. I advise the U.S. not to create such a self-fulfilling prophecy."
"(The U.S. action) threatened China's territorial rights and security, endangered the safety of personnel and facilities on the artificial island as well as that of fishery workers, and harmed regional peace and stability," Yang said.
airstrips thought to be capable of handling bombers In little more than 18 months, China has reclaimed more than 2,000 acres at three main locations in the Spratly Islands -- Subi, Mischief and Fiery Cross reefs, where it's building airstrips thought to be capable of handling bombers
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs reiterated that its activity in the South China Sea didn't affect freedom of navigation by sea or air but said it held "indisputable sovereignty over the Spratly Islands and its nearby waters."
retired Adm. Dennis Blair told Amanpour "Both China and the United States recognize that this is not a reason for getting into higher levels of conflict with each other," retired Adm. Dennis Blair told Amanpour . "So I'm relatively sure that neither side will escalate, but that both sides will record what's being done and stake their positions accordingly."
Before China's recent land reclamation, both Subi and Mischief reefs were submerged at high tide, while a sandbar was visible at high tide at Fiery Cross Reef, which could make its legal status more ambiguous.
"So if Beijing objects by saying to the U.S. you're in our territorial sea, then the U.S. can respond by saying there's no such thing as a territorial sea for an artificial island," Poling said.
He said the decision to go ahead with the mission follows months of discussion in Washington and likely followed Chinese President Xi Jinping's trip there last month, which made little headway on the issue of the South China Sea.