Appealing for Clean Slate as Speaker Gavel Changes Hands
Mr. Ryan won his first election to the House at 28 and is now in many respects the titular leader of Republicans in Washington seeking a message and ballast going into the 2016 election.
In his remarks, Mr. Ryan used accommodative language not just for those in his own party with whom he will no doubt sometimes disagree, by offering them a greater voice in the process, but for Democrats as well. “Open up the process,” Mr. Ryan said. “Let people participate. And they might change their tune. A neglected minority will gum up the works. A respected minority will work in good faith.”
Building any bipartisan coalition will be difficult. After praising Mr. Ryan vaguely, Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the minority leader, said in a statement, “Make no mistake — my Democratic colleagues and I will continue to have deep policy differences with Speaker Ryan on the vast majority of issues.”
Yet Mr. Ryan’s problems in many ways lie less with Democrats, who have deeply opposed his policy ideas for years, than with his own party, which controls 247 seats but is divided over tactics and to some degree ideology, with a sizable number of members often embracing government dysfunction over political compromise.
Although it is an unusual time for his party and the House, Mr. Ryan’s situation has a few historical echoes. Put another way: Things could be worse.
In 1856, Nathaniel P. Banks of Massachusetts found himself in the speaker’s chair after nearly two months of voting and 133 ballots cast. At that time, there were numerous factions, like the waning Whig Party, an anemic group of Democrats, a small nativist bloc called the American Party (also called the Know Nothings), and a fledgling Republican Party. The chaos was a precursor to the Civil War and to the modern two-party system.
Insurgents have bedeviled other speakers as well. Joseph G. Cannon of Illinois, who was speaker from 1903 to 1911, and Frederick Gillett of Massachusetts, who struggled through nine ballots to win a third term in the 1920s, faced anger over the sharing of power with rank-and-file members, which members of the House Freedom Caucus now seek.
But before his young successor readied himself to ascend to his post, Mr. Boehner delivered Mr. Ryan from his most vexing conflicts by negotiating a bipartisan budget agreement that buys two years of relative peace.
That gives Mr. Ryan time to get his leadership legs before his control is tested. But the relief may be short-lived. The budget deal creates room for the House and Senate appropriations committees to draft a huge spending bill for the current fiscal year that can increase spending on the military as well as on politically popular programs like medical research, federal law enforcement and wildfire suppression.
The spending bills already drafted are replete with conservative policy prescriptions, from crippling Mr. Obama’s signature health care law to blocking his climate change and financial regulations. Mr. Ryan will have to decide how far to push that clash with the president, knowing a government shutdown just before Christmas could be at stake.
In the meantime, his right flank is itching to move forward with efforts sure to stoke the party’s conservative base but possibly provoke a backlash. Moves are already afoot to impeach the Internal Revenue Service commissioner, John Koskinen, and the Special Select Committee on Benghazi has signaled it is not about to give up its pursuit of former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton.
On Thursday, Capitol Hill seemed set for festivities in a way that seemed oddly out of season, like a Thanksgiving table set in July.
It was a change of guard both peaceful and at times humorous, as members, who voted orally from their desks, a method reserved for special events, sometimes added a little note of praise for Mr. Ryan.
Mr. Boehner’s departure was a reminder to even his critics of his endearing ways. Before beginning a brief farewell speech, the prone-to-tears speaker hoisted a box of tissues, leading to laughter and a standing ovation in the chamber. “I leave with no regrets, no burdens,” he said. “If anything, I leave the way I started: just a regular guy, humbled by the chance to do a big job.”
Mr. Ryan made his way into the chamber after he was formally elected and greeted his colleagues as he proceeded to the rostrum, taking extra time to shake hands with Democrats.
After Mr. Ryan gave him a final shoutout, Mr. Boehner, who had made his way through a mob of hugs, saluted Mr. Ryan, gave a final tearful wave, and slipped into the cloakroom.