UN demands North Korea cease 'deeply troubling' nuclear activities
The United Nations has demanded that North Korea cease any further nuclear activities, after its claim that it has successfully tested a hydrogen bomb.
Speaking in New York ahead of a meeting of the UN Security Council, secretary-general Ban Ki-moon described the claimed underground test as "deeply troubling" and "profoundly destabilising for regional security".
North Korea's claim that it has conducted a successful test could take days to verify and may never be fully confirmed.
Experts remain sceptical that an H-bomb test did actually take place.
The announcement came on state television after a 5.1-magnitude earthquake was measured near the Punggye-ri nuclear test site.
It comes within a month of a claim by North Korean leader Kim Jong-un that an H-bomb had been successfully developed.
"We have perfectly succeeded in testing our first hydrogen bomb," he said during a state TV broadcast.
"It was 100 per cent capable from our own wisdom, technology and power. We have now scientifically test-proved a miniaturised hydrogen bomb."
If verified this would be the fourth nuclear test conducted at the same test site.
Tests conducted within the regime's secretive nuclear program in 2006, 2009 and 2013 are believed to have used plutonium- and uranium-based devices, but that has never been fully confirmed.
Mr Ban described the incident as "a grave contravention of the international norm against nuclear testing".
"I demand the DPRK [North Korea] cease any further nuclear activities and meet its obligations for verifiable de-nuclearisation," he said.
The secretary-general has not yet addressed calls for further sanctions against North Korea as governments across the world condemned the claimed test, but said the United Nations was "monitoring and assessing developments".
In the United States, concern revolves around the missile capacity that may be coupled with such a weapon and whether it could hit the US west coast.
This concern has been compounded by a number of long-range missile tests by North Korea in recent years.
The US State Department condemned "any violation of UN Security Council Resolutions".
"We call on North Korea to abide by its international obligations and commitments," he said.
Foreign Minister Julie Bishop said China would need to play a key role in persuading North Korea to stop pursuing nuclear weapons.
Ms Bishop said the type of weapon used was yet to be confirmed, noting that the country's government had previously "exaggerated its technological prowess".
She told the ABC that it would be some days before testing could take place, but said that the incident was significant, no matter what the device was.
"The fact is that a significant device was detonated, comparable to an earthquake of about five on the Richter scale," she said.
She said there was agreement during emergency council meetings that the actions were in violation of previous resolutions, and while further sanctions were being debated, the involvement of North Korea's "only friend" — China — would be essential.
"It will have an impact if all nations impose the sanctions, and the relationship with China can't be an excuse for North Korea's behaviour to continue," she said.
"I believe that China will be a key to ensuring that the sanction is imposed … China is clearly frustrated with North Korea's behaviour."
The incident has instantly become a domestic political issue in the United States where Republican presidential hopefuls have blamed President Barack Obama and Democrat party policies.
"If this test is confirmed, it will be just the latest example of the failed Obama-Clinton foreign policy," Republican Marco Rubio said in a statement.
"I have been warning throughout this campaign that North Korea is run by a lunatic who has been expanding his nuclear arsenal while Mr Obama has stood idly by."