Sanders 1st Jewish candidate to win presidential primary
His victory Tuesday night in New Hampshire broke a barrier as old as the republic: The Vermont senator became the first Jewish candidate to win a presidential nominating contest.
But even as that path-breaking feat was in touching distance in the days before the primary, and attention increasingly focused on his surging campaign for the Democratic nomination, the Brooklyn-born politician's religion received little mention on the national stage until CNN's Anderson Cooper noted it while moderating a town hall with the Democratic presidential candidates last week.
In part, that's because Sanders, a self-identified democratic socialist, has repeatedly described himself as a secular Jew without strong ties to organized religion. But Jewish political activists, students of history and pollsters say the candidate's minority faith has also been overlooked because attitudes toward Jews in America have evolved to the point where there's no stigma attached to his background.
"In some ways, it's a non-story," said Sandy Maisel, a Colby College professor who tracks the status of Jews in America. "And that it's a non-story is a pretty interesting story."
"What we see is that the vast majority of the American public, 80%, say (a candidate being Jewish) would not make a difference in their vote, one way or the other," said Greg Smith, the associate director of research at Pew Research Center, referring to a survey published on Wednesday. "The remainder are pretty much evenly divided between those who say they would be more likely to vote for a Jewish candidate and those who say they would be less likely to vote for a Jewish candidate."
"We are at the point where a Jew running for office is entirely no big deal," Rabinowitz told CNN. "Nationally, we're there. We're so much there that for a lot of Jews the fact that Bernie Sanders does not more embrace his Jewish identity is an issue rather than the idea that he might do better if he hid it more."
According to Pew, the question of religion versus religiosity yields a more instructive answer than any related to a specific faith. While 8 in 10 said their votes wouldn't be influenced, for better or worse, upon finding out a candidate is Jewish, more than half, 51%, said they would be less likely to support one who "does not believe in God."
Despite their different styles, the fortunes of both Lieberman -- an Orthodox Jew who does not work on the Sabbath -- and Sanders, who hews more closely to the cultural and ethnic Judaism that has become a staple of American popular culture, represent a wholesale departure from the era of restricted clubs and hotels that banned Jewish men and women, and from the time when a young senator from Massachusetts had to give a speech reassuring voters that he wouldn't be taking orders from the Catholic Church.
"It's akin to the fact that there are now three Jewish justices on the Supreme Court whereas decades ago, people would have said there's one Jewish seat on the Supreme Court," Nathan Diament, executive director of the Orthodox Union's Advocacy Center, said of Sanders and the changed environment for Jews in politics. "Thankfully, Jews and Judaism are much more accepted as part of American society today than decades ago, where a Jew reaching high levels of leadership is accepted."
It remains to be seen how Sanders would fare in a general election race where the spotlight only glares more strongly on every aspect of a candidate's background, and how his religion would be perceived by a Republican Party that tends to be more focused on faith and receptive to Christian references than Democrats.
"If it came right down to it and it was a choice between a Republican, Mitt Romney, who was Mormon, or the Democratic incumbent Barack Obama, the choice was going to clear for them: They may have reservations about Mormonism, but that wasn't going to stop them from voting for Mitt Romney," he said.