Carly Fiorina suspends GOP presidential bid
Former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina dropped out of the Republican presidential race on Wednesday following a disappointing finish in the New Hampshire primary.
"While I suspend my candidacy today, I will continue to travel this country and fight for those Americans who refuse to settle for the way things are and a status quo that no longer works for them," Fiorina said in a statement.
Fiorina's long-shot hopes of breaking through in the Granite State weren't helped when she failed to qualify for Saturday night's debate in Manchester. She protested the criteria used by ABC News in a letter to the Republican National Committee after the network announced its decision, saying "our debate process is broken."
The only woman in the GOP field, Fiorina addressed feminism and politics in the statement announcing her withdrawal from the race.
"To young girls and women across the country, I say:  do not let others define you," she said. "Do not listen to anyone who says you have to vote a certain way or for a certain candidate because you're a woman. That is not feminism."
The businesswoman finished a distant seventh in Tuesday's primary, getting just 4% of the vote.
Her exclusion from the most recent debate marked an unwelcome bookend for Fiorina, who briefly surged to the top of the GOP field in September following strong early debate performances.
She was widely praised for her performance in the prime-time debate on Sept. 16, 2015, at the Reagan Library in Simi Valley, Calif., particularly when she took on Republican front-runner Donald Trump, who had recently made disparaging remarks about her looks in a magazine interview.
"I think women all over this country heard very clearly what Mr. Trump said," she said.
Fiorina rocketed up GOP polls, pulling in the support of 15% of Republican voters nationally in a CNN poll taken shortly after the Reagan LIbrary debate, good for second place behind Trump.
But that was in many ways the high-water mark for her campaign. In the same CNN poll a month later, her support had dipped to 4%. By the Jan. 14, 2016, debate in South Carolina, she was back in the undercard debate where she'd started in August, and by Saturday, she was without a debate stage at all.
In last Monday's Iowa caucuses, Fiorina finished in seventh place with less than 2% support, though, as she noted in protesting her exclusion from Saturday's debate, she finished slightly ahead of Ohio Gov. John Kasich and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, who both qualified.
Kasich praised Fiorina following her announcement Wednesday. "Thanks for being an inspiration to all Americans who want to make a difference. I wish you the best," he tweeted.