N.C. legislators complete voting map redraw; congressional primaries pushed back
Legislators met a Friday deadline to complete a court-ordered rewrite of North Carolina's illegally gerrymandered congressional voting map, all the while looking ahead to further legal challenges.
One legal decision quickly went against the Republican lawmakers, who still defend the previous boundaries as fair and legal. The U.S. Supreme Court late Friday refused the state's request to keep using district lines from the 2012 and 2014 elections while the lower-court order is appealed.
The denial means the state is on track to hold congressional primaries June 7 under the new map. Had the Supreme Court sided with the state, the congressional primary would have remained March 15 as previously scheduled.
The state House gave final approval to the new map dividing the state's 13 U.S. House seats after federal judges earlier this month declared the old map was illegally gerrymandered by race. Challengers had complained that legislative Republicans drew the previous congressional lines to pack black voters in two districts, leaving the rest more white and more favorable to the GOP.
The rewrite did not consider the race of voters; instead, it focused on keeping the Republicans' 10-3 advantage in U.S. House seats, protecting congressional incumbents, keeping districts compact and keeping counties within those districts as whole as possible, said Rep. David Lewis, the chief redistricting leader in the state House.
"Race was not among the criteria we considered when we drew these maps," said Lewis, R-Harnett.
The new map replaces the snakelike contours of the 12th District criticized for two decades for connecting pockets of Democrats in Charlotte with others in Greensboro and Winston-Salem via Interstate 85. The simplified district now includes most of Mecklenburg County, excluding the Greensboro home of first-term Democratic U.S. Rep. Alma Adams.
Lawmakers of both parties looked ahead to further court challenges: A court reporter recorded the House debate leading up to a vote, and Democrats sought details about when and who drew the new district lines. The Democrats argued that the new lines still don't fully protect black voting power guaranteed by the U.S. Voting Rights Act.
Failing to count black voters included in the districts means Republican map-makers don't know if minority voting power is being diluted, said Rep. Mickey Michaux, D-Durham.
"Race is a factor again because you've left it out," he told Lewis. He wouldn't say whether legislative Democrats have an alternate map ready to offer judges overseeing the case.
In striking down the state's 1st and 12th Congressional Districts, the federal judges noted more voting-age blacks were grouped in the two districts during the 2011 redistricting. Both districts went from having black voting-age populations below 50 percent before the 2011 redrawing to majority-black afterward.
Data posted on the General Assembly's website show the concentration of black voters in the two districts shrank with the latest rewrite. The new map shows the 1st District's black voting-age population is now 44 percent and the 12th District falls to 35 percent, according to the legislative document.
Republican legislators acted while waiting for the Supreme Court to weigh on their request to proceed under the previous map. GOP lawmakers argued that redrawing the map less than a month before the primary contest would create voter confusion.
An accompanying election calendar lawmakers also approved Friday postponed the U.S. House primary, while keeping all other primaries on March 15. The legislation eliminates primary runoffs this year in all elections. Runoffs usually take place if no primary candidate gets more than 40 percent of the vote.
The election calendar bill goes to Gov. Pat McCrory's desk for his signature. The redistricting map becomes law automatically.
Even without the Supreme Court's stay, the maps could get another review from the federal court in Greensboro that issued the Feb. 5 decision striking down the districts. The state's lawyers filed the legislation late Friday. The suing voters or someone else could formally ask the three-judge panel that ruled against the two districts to scrutinize the new boundaries, or the judges could call their own hearing.