2016 Primary Schedule – Election Central
Click here for the 2020 Primary Schedule
The 2016 Presidential primary schedule is finally set. Some of the dates below may be subject to change as states and parties make their final decisions regarding which day to hold their primary or caucus contests. Please use our contact form if you see incorrect information and can provide a link to accurate information. This page will be updated as the calendar is finalized. For total delegate count of each candidate, see the 2016 Delegate Count.
Note: All dates are primaries unless otherwise noted as a caucus. Primaries and caucuses which are only being held by one party on that date are noted as (R) or (D). The delegate counts represent the total delegates from that state for each respective party. Primary and caucus results will be updated regularly.
– All Democratic primary/caucus delegates are proportionally allocated. Republican primaries/caucuses are listed as Proportional (P), Winner-Take-All (WTA), or Winner-Take-Most (WTM). Proportional – Delegates are awarded based on the percentage of the vote received by candidates, or some formulation of dividing up the delegates Winner Take All – All delegates are given to the winner of the contest Winner Take Most – Some delegates are reserved for the winner, some may be divided proportionally Unbound – Delegates are not bound to a specific candidate and can support any candidate of their choosing, varies by state party
Open– Voters may vote in either party primary but can choose only one Closed – Only voters registered in their respective party may vote in the party primary Mixed – A semi-open or semi-closed environment, unaffiliated voters can choose to vote in either primary or can switch registration the day of voting
*Note on Washington State: The Washington State GOP holds a caucus on February 20 but presidential primary delegates will be awarded based on the results of the Washington State primary on May 24. The Washington State Democratic Party does not allocate any delegates from the primary, but rather holds its own caucus on March 26. As a result, Democrats may vote in the primary on May 24 but the vote is considered a “beauty contest” as it holds no bearing on delegates.
If you find any errors or omissions, please use the contact page or tweet me: @PresElectNews
Click here for the 2020 Primary Schedule