S. Korea announces unilateral sanctions on Pyongyang
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
South Korea on Tuesday announced unilateral sanctions against North Korea, blacklisting dozens of individuals and organizations it said were involved in the North’s missile and nuclear programs.
The announcement came after Pyongyang threatened to launch nuclear strikes on the United States and South Korea, as the two countries started their annual joint military drills Monday.
The South’s sanctions include blacklisting 38 North Korean officials and two foreigners and 30 organizations, 24 of them based in Pyongyang, the South’s Yonhap news agency reported.
It said the blacklisted people and organizations will be barred from financial dealings with South Korean banks and their assets in the South will be frozen. Ships that have traveled to North Korea in the past 180 days will also be barred from entering South Korean waters, Yonhap reported.
The news agency also reported Tuesday that the North stole information from the smartphones of South Korean officials in the latest in a series of cyberattacks.
The South’s National Intelligence Service said North Korean hackers sent text messages to top South Korean officials to try and get them to click on links to malicious software. It said a number of smartphones were infected with malware, giving hackers access to text messages and phone conversations, Yonhap reported. The information couldn’t be independently verified by USA TODAY.
The South’s sanctions came after the U.N. Security Council last week approved the toughest sanctions in decades against the North in response to its recent nuclear and missile tests. They include prohibiting sales of aviation and rocket fuel to the North, and requiring countries to expel North Koreans in their nations under diplomatic visas who are involved in its nuclear and missile programs.
North Korea fired several short-range projectiles into the sea hours after the U.N. resolution passed, the South Korean defense ministry said.
North Korea conducted its fourth nuclear weapons test in January, claiming it tested a hydrogen bomb, and fired a long-range rocket over Japanese airspace on Feb. 7 in what was widely condemned as a test of missile technology banned by previous U.N. resolutions.