Htin Kyaw elected as Myanmar's first civilian leader in decades after parliamentary ballot
Htin Kyaw, a close ally of Aung San Suu Kyi, has been elected Myanmar's first civilian leader in decades after a parliamentary ballot.
A respected writer and longtime close friend of Ms Suu Kyi, Htin Kyaw is virtually guaranteed to sweep the board, with both legislative houses dominated by the Nobel laureate's National League for Democracy thanks to its election landslide in November.
Ms Suu Kyi was the first to cast her vote.
Myanmar is in the grip of a stunning transformation from an isolated and repressed pariah state to a rapidly opening aspiring democracy.
The military remains a powerful force in the South-East Asian nation and has refused to change a clause in the junta-era constitution that bars Ms Suu Kyi from top political office.
The veteran activist has instead vowed to rule "above" the next leader.
Her choice of Htin Kyaw to act in her place is seen as a testament to her absolute faith in his loyalty.
Htin Kyaw will replace incumbent Thein Sein at the end of the month following five years of army-backed quasi-civilian leadership that has been lauded for steering the nation out from the shadow of outright military rule.
The vote saw 652 legislators chose from three candidates, one put forward by each of the two legislative chambers and a third proposed by the military, who are reserved a quarter of seats in parliament.
The two other candidates were ethnic Chin MP Henry Van Hti Yu, an ally of Ms Suu Kyi put forward by the upper house, and the military's nominee Myint Swe, a retired army general still blacklisted by the United States.
Ms Suu Kyi, 70, has unrivalled popularity both as the daughter of the country's independence hero and as a central figure in the decades-long democracy struggle.
Her party's huge election victory was seen as a further endorsement of her political star power, as millions were swept to polling stations by the NLD's simple message of change.
Months of negotiations with army chief Min Aung Hlaing failed to remove the obstacles blocking her from power.
Ms Suu Kyi is barred from the presidency by a clause in the charter because she married and had children with a foreigner.
It is not yet clear what role she plans to take or how she will manage the relationship with the country's new president.