China condemns North Korean 'sabre-rattling' after failed missile launch
Beijing issues sharp commentary after US and South Korea say regime carried out unsuccessful test-firing of Musudan missile for Kim Il-sung’s birthday
China has condemned as “sabre-rattling” the latest weapons test by North Korea after the launch of a medium-range Musudan missile to mark the birthday of Kim Il-sung apparently ended in failure.
North Korea tried and failed to test fire the missile on Friday to honour its founding leader, South Korean and US military officials said.
The test followed widespread reports that the North was preparing for the first-ever flight of its mobile medium-range Musudan missile, believed to be capable of striking US bases in the Pacific island of Guam.
“The North appears to have attempted a missile test near its east coast early Friday morning but it appears to have failed,” South Korea’s joint chiefs of staff said in a statement.
The statement did not identify the missile type, but the South’s Yonhap news agency quoted an unnamed military official as saying it was a Musudan. A senior US defence official said it had detected and tracked what officials assessed as a failed North Korean missile launch.
On Friday, China, which has backed new sanctions against North Korea over its weapons programmes, directed sharp language at the neighbouring state, which has counted Beijing as one of few allies.
“The firing of a mid-range ballistic missile on Friday by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK), though failed, marks the latest in a string of sabre-rattling that, if unchecked, will lead the country to nowhere,” China’s official Xinhua news agency said in an English language commentary.
“Nuclear weapons will not make Pyongyang safer. On the contrary, its costly military endeavours will keep on suffocating its economy.”
According to the North American Aerospace Defense Command, the missile launched from North Korea did not pose any threat to North America.
On 15 April, the North lavishly celebrates the birthday of Kim Il-sung – the grandfather of current ruler Kim Jong-un – often with massive military parades featuring its latest weaponry or with missile launches.
Tension has been high on the divided Korean peninsula since Pyongyang conducted its fourth nuclear test in January and a rocket launch a month later widely seen as a disguised ballistic missile test.
The UN security council responded with its toughest sanctions to date, angering the North, which has since made repeated threats of attacks targeting the South and the US.
The nuclear-armed state has staged several short- and mid-range missile launches but has yet to test the Musudan, which has an estimated range of anywhere between 2,500km and 4,000km (1,550 miles to 2,500 miles).
The lower range covers the whole of South Korea and Japan, while the upper range would include US military bases on Guam.
The Musudan was unveiled at a military parade in Pyongyang in October 2010.
Analysis by security consultants IHS Jane suggests it is an intermediate-range, road-mobile, liquid-propellant, single warhead missile based on the Russian R-27 and using adapted Soviet Scud technology.
Mounted on a wheeled transport-erector-launcher vehicle, it could be fired within 15 minutes of the launcher being positioned and has a potential payload of up to 1.25 tonnes.