John Kasich drops out of presidential race
Kasich's decision to suspend his efforts came after he improbably became the last challenger to Donald Trump, who emerged as the presumptive GOP nominee Tuesday night when Ted Cruz dropped out.
"I have always said that the Lord has a purpose for me as he has for everyone," Kasich told reporters in Columbus, Ohio. "And as I suspend my campaign today, I have renewed faith, deeper faith, that the Lord will show me the way forward, and fulfill the purpose of my life."
Even before winning his home state of Ohio in March, Kasich was facing pressure to get out of the race, with no clear path to victory. His campaign never became more than a spoiler run, designed to keep Trump from getting the 1,237 delegates needed to win the nomination before a contested convention.
But he was not yet ready to quit. Kasich had fundraisers scheduled in the Washington area Wednesday, and was on a plane at the Columbus airport when he had a change of heart.
After having the plane taxi back from the runway, according to one source close to Kasich, he then called four of his closest friends, and said, "My heart is not in this." The source said that his friends then told Kasich that if his heart is not in it, he ought to do what he needs to do.
But whether it was his plan to use a New Hampshire win to vault himself into contention in the states that followed (he finished second), or a big win in Michigan to vault him into his Midwest swing (he finished third), or the clear advantage he claimed to hold in the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic (second or third in all), nothing Kasich and his team predicted ever came to pass. Even as he swept to victory in Ohio, confetti and all, donors and top party officials appeared keenly aware of this.
Aides acknowledged the confetti at Kasich's victory rally that night -- a high-level professional effort reporters would still find remnants of in their computer bags weeks later -- was a bit of a gamble. Not because they didn't think Kasich would win -- by primary day, they'd grown increasingly confident in their chances. But instead because Kasich was constantly harping on expenses. A proper confetti drop isn't cheap, one aide acknowledged. It was another element of a campaign that seemed to lurch to and fro, depending on the day, the state or, more likely, the mood of the candidate.
Kasich himself was changed by the campaign process -- something he admitted regularly on the trail. Gone was the governor who reportedly warned potential opponents back home: "If you're not on the bus, we'll run over you with the bus." Gone was the congressman who used to infuriate Capitol Hill colleagues for his general reluctance to be agreeable on, well, anything.
But there was a constant struggle, one that often played out in public view during his abnormally candid town halls, over how he personally saw his campaign. A struggle about who he was as a candidate, his message and his strategy -- one that could at times move from announcing that the campaign was the most fulfilling thing he'd ever done, to undercutting strategic efforts of his own advisers, to wondering why he was still running... on the same day.
He said repeatedly he was having the time of his life (and based on his eating tour through New York, there were moments where he clearly was), yet he often appeared troubled -- troubled by the state of the race he found himself in, frustrated by the lack of media attention or outside support his team could secure, flat-out perplexed by the GOP front-runner.
The next day he started to talk about Trump, easing his way into criticizing the candidate who by that point had become the clear front-runner. It was something Kasich had avoided even as top advisers argued it was time to pull the trigger on attacks. It was possible to continue to take the high road while also sharply jabbing at a candidate whose tone fell so far below it, aides told him.
In fact, a unifying speech of sorts could be perfectly timed after a big Ohio win -- one that laid out Kasich's vision and path forward. More importantly, one that laid out why the anti-Trump establishment should coalesce around him. Marco Rubio, Jeb Bush, Chris Christie, Scott Walker -- all the likely GOP standard-bearers and future stars were gone. Kasich, at least in his team's eyes, was the logical candidate for top Republicans -- and more importantly, top Republican donors -- to get behind. Yet after teasing the speech for a few days leading up to his big Ohio win, pledging repeatedly he'd "have more to say" about Trump at an event in the future, Kasich suddenly veered away from it, not to return for nearly a month.
The Ohio win did provide a boost, fundraising for a campaign that had run a lean operation from the very beginning, ticked up and a few big donors cut solid six figure checks to the super PAC supporting Kasich. But the coalescing that seemed only natural never happened. As one top donor told CNN, one thing kept getting in the way: "Tell me what his path is? Tell me how he wins?" In the end, Kasich never really could.