PressTV-Iran inaugurates Tenth Parliament
Iran inaugurates its Tenth Majlis (Parliament), with senior government and military officials in attendance and amid heavy media coverage.
On Saturday, the legislature hosted the aspirants, who secured the nation’s trust during two rounds of general elections on February 26 and April 29.
Reformists swept the polls, winning close to 42 percent of the ballots, followed by Principlists (near 29 percent), and independents (22.41 percent). The elected lawmakers are to serve from today through May 27, 2020. the remaining 7 percent includes the religious minorities and candidates endorsed by both Reformists and Principlists. 
Majlis, also known as the Islamic Consultative Assembly, is made up of 290 parliamentarians, elected in 207 constituencies.
The first round of the parliamentary elections sent 222 candidates to the Majlis. The run-off was held to fill 68 remaining seats.
Leader of the Islamic Revolution Ayatollah Seyyed Ali Khamenei issued a message on the occasion of the inauguration of the new Parliament.
The Parliament’s current two major priorities, the message included, “are to realize a resistant economy, with all its certain concomitants, and also perseverant endeavor at development and enrichment of the Islamic culture.”
“There are other priorities in different sections, which pertain to national authority, reinforcement of security and the country’s impregnability, which guarantee the establishment of social justice, and the country’s independence and advancement.” The Leader also urged the legislators to turn the Parliament into a strong bastion against the global arrogance’s ploys and excessive demands.
Today’s session is presided over by a symbolic Presiding Board, composed of its most senior members.
The heads of the country’s Executive Branch, President Hassan Rouhani, Judicial Branch, Ayatollah Sadeq Amoli Larijani, and Legislative Branch, Ali Larijani joined today’s ceremony.
More than 300 members of Iranian and international press crews cover the ceremony.