Schedule of speakers for final night of Democratic National Convention released
PHILADELPHIA– The schedule for the final night of the Democratic National Convention has been released.
The evening ends with Hillary Clinton’s acceptance of the Democratic Party’s nomination.
**Continuing coverage of the DNC** Our LIVE coverage continues with reports from Tracy McCool tonight, along with LIVE speeches**
**SEE the entire schedule below:
Remarks Hillary for America Director of States and Political Engagement Marlon Marshall
Remarks U.S. Senator Barbara Mikulski and the Democratic Women of the Senate
Remarks New York Governor Andrew Cuomo Stronger Together: An Economy That Works For All
Remarks Henrietta Ivey Henrietta is a home care worker Hillary met while campaigning in Michigan who is helping to lead the Fight for $15.
Remarks Dave Wills Dave is an 8th grade social studies teacher in Guilford County, NC and has over $35,000 in student debt.
Remarks Beth Mathias Beth works two jobs and her husband works the nightshift at a factory in Ohio. Hillary met Beth at a roundtable in Marion.
Remarks Jensen Walcott & Jake Reed Jensen was fired from her job at a pizza restaurant for asking her boss why she was paid 25 cents less than her male co-worker and friend, Jake. After Jensen and Jake’s story came to light, Hillary tweeted “Good for you, Jensen. Every woman deserves equal pay, no matter what her age. Keep up the hard work—and courage!”
Remarks Former Michigan Governor Jennifer Granholm Stronger Together: Americans for Hillary
Remarks Jennifer Pierotti Lim Director of Health Policy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce & Co-Founder of Republican Women for Hillary Stronger Together: Tribute to Fallen Law Enforcement Officers
Remarks Khizr Khan Khizr Khan’s son, Humayun S. M. Khan was a University of Virginia graduate and enlisted in the U.S. Army. Khan was one of 14 American Muslims who died serving the United States in the ten years after the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks.
Remarks Florent Groberg Retired U.S. Army Captain Florent “Flo” Groberg was awarded the Medal of Honor, the nation’s top award for valor in combat, by President Obama after serving in Afghanistan.