Zambia Votes Amid Economic Slowdown and Political Violence
His rival, Mr. Hichilema, who is seeking the presidency for the fifth time, said that he was better equipped to revive the economy.
“We are business people,” he said. “We understand the economy; this economy is broken.”
The economy appeared to be on the minds of many voters, including at a polling station in Kamanga, an area of lower- and middle-class residents east of the capital.
Mike Banda, 40, a businessman who supports the president, said it was unfair to blame Mr. Lungu for the poor economy.
“It’s a global problem,” he said, raising a clenched fist, the sign of the president’s party.
Seeing the fist, a jobless man, Isaac Chikopa, 23, interjected. He said that Mr. Lungu and his party, which took over the presidency five years ago, had mismanaged the economy.
“Five years ago, I used to have three meals a day, and now I have one,” said Mr. Chikopa, adding that he was voting for Mr. Hichilema.
In a region known for presidents brutally clinging to office for decades, Zambia had smooth elections and transfers of power since 1991, long before multiparty democracies emerged elsewhere on the continent. But a handful of people have been killed and many others injured in recent political violence.
Observers have attributed the violence to the two main parties, the Patriotic Front of Mr. Lungu and the United Party for National Development of Mr. Hichilema. On Tuesday, Esau E. Chulu, the chairman of the Electoral Commission, said that the violence was “unprecedented and has marred Zambia’s historic record of peaceful elections.”
But some observers said that the Patriotic Front, as the governing party, bore greater responsibility for the violence. The police have often acted in favor of the party, and tax authorities shut down The Post, the country’s only independent newspaper, in the middle of the campaign.
Catherine Musuva, the Zambia director for the Electoral Institute for Sustainable Democracy in Africa, a nonprofit organization based in South Africa, said that the authorities had failed to sufficiently use the police to ensure security and a level playing field during the campaign.
“If anything, it has used it to intimidate the opposition or to fuel violence,” Ms. Musuva said.
The violence, Ms. Musuva said, was exacerbated by the closeness of the race and by a worsening economy, in which the state controls even more of Zambia’s resources than during periods of plenty.
“It’s an all-or-nothing or zero-sum game,” she said, “because the state is the largest source of employment and Zambia has a very small private sector.”
Zambia’s economy remains highly dependent on a single commodity, copper, which makes up more than 70 percent of the country’s exports. But plunging prices and decreasing demand from China, Zambia’s main export market, have led to the closing of mines and the loss of thousands of jobs. An acute power shortage, resulting from an El Niño-induced drought and mismanagement of its water resources, deepened the country’s economic woes.
Zambia is now in talks with the International Monetary Fund for a bailout. Mr. Lungu’s government has agreed on measures to control spending, including cutting back on fuel and electricity subsidies — though only after the elections.
Despite such economic problems, the main presidential contenders campaigned on promises to increase spending on infrastructure, health and education.
“It’s really a sad situation for Zambians, because, postelection, what will happen is that whether it is the ruling party or the opposition that wins, there will be no money to spend on any of those promises,” said Kryticous P. Nshindano, executive director of the Civil Society for Poverty Reduction Zambia, an advocacy network in Lusaka.
None of the presidential contenders, Mr. Nshindano said, offered substantial proposals to diversify Zambia’s economy and make it less dependent on a single commodity or market.
“What we should have heard is hard truths,” he said, “but unfortunately, in politics, hard truths don’t work.”
Ballots are expected to be counted in a few days. But if no presidential candidate earns more than half the votes, a runoff will be held within 37 days.