Turkey Seeks Extradition Of US-Based Cleric Fethullah Gulen
Turkey has formally requested the extradition of a US-based Turkish cleric it blames for an attempted coup in July.
The US State Department said it was now considering the merits of the request, which is not said to be related to the abortive putsch that claimed at least 270 lives.
"We can confirm now that Turkey has requested the extradition of Gulen," State Department spokesman Mark Toner told a briefing.
Mr Gulen, who lives in the US state of Pennsylvania, has denied any connection to the coup plot and condemned it "in the strongest terms".
:: Who Is The Man Blamed For Turkey's Coup?
The matter is likely to come up when US Vice President Joe Biden travels to Ankara for an official trip on Wednesday.
But he will offer no assurances that the US will agree to Turkey's demand.
On the eve of his visit, Turkish and US justice officials met in the Turkish capital to discuss the extradition request.
Turkish Justice Ministry officials said in a statement they would share with the visiting US Justice Department and State Department officials "evidence and testimonies" relating to Mr Gulen's alleged involvement in the coup.
The Turkish ministry said officials have sent four files of evidence, amounting to a total of 6,382 pages.
Washington's ties with Ankara have been so frayed that the key NATO ally has been engaging in diplomatic flirtations with US foes Russia and Iran.
Earlier this month, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan travelled to Moscow to discuss possible collaboration on ending Syria's civil war.
US leaders were outraged when Mr Erdogan accused Washington of backing the coup.
Mr Gulen is the leader of the Hizmet (Service) movement, which has a powerful presence in areas of Turkish society, including the military, police and media.
The 75-year-old Muslim cleric moved to the United States in 1999 and now lives in a gated home in a small town in the Pocono Mountains.
He has been charged with treason in his native country.
Turkey has been shaken this year by a string of attacks from Islamic State jihadists and Kurdish militants, as well as the botched 15 July coup.
Since the attempt to overthrow President Erdogan, more than 17,000 people have been formally arrested to face trial, including soldiers, police, judges and journalists.
Tens of thousands more people with alleged links to Mr Gulen have been suspended or dismissed from their jobs.