North Korea fires three ballistic missiles into sea, South Korea says
North Korea has fired three ballistic missiles into the sea off its east coast, says South Korea, as the leaders of the Group of 20 major economies held a summit in China, the North's main diplomatic ally.
The missiles were fired from a western region south of the capital Pyongyang, just after noon local time, South Korea's Office of the Joint Chiefs of Staff said in a statement.
The missiles were launched from a region called Hwangju and came just hours after the leaders of South Korea and China met on the sidelines of the Group of 20 leaders' meeting in Hangzhou, China.
No other details about the launch were immediately available.
The missile launches were the latest in a series of launches by the isolated North this year in violation of UN Security Council resolutions.
These latest tests have sparked strong protests from senior Japanese and US officials.
The launches "are a grave security provocation and can never be permitted", Japanese Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida said.
"We have lodged a strong protest against North Korea."
A senior US administration official at the G20 in Hangzhou also condemned the launches as a threat to its allies and to civilian air travel, and vowed diplomatic action against the Pyongyang regime.
"Today's reckless launches by North Korea pose threats to civil aviation and maritime commerce in the region," the official said.
Washington would try to "bolster international resolve to hold the DPRK (North Korea) accountable for its provocative actions".
The South's military was trying to determine the type of missiles launched, a military official said.
China's Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said Beijing hoped relevant parties avoid taking any actions that may escalate tensions.
South Korean President Park Geun-hye told Chinese President Xi Jinping that the North's fourth nuclear test and its ballistic missile launches this year threatened regional peace and posed a challenge to South Korea's ties with China, Yonhap news agency reported earlier.
During the meeting, Mr Xi reaffirmed China's commitment to realising the denuclearisation of the Korean peninsula, China's state news agency Xinhua reported on Monday.
Ms Xi also told Ms Park that Beijing opposed the proposed deployment of a THAAD anti-missile system in South Korea, which Seoul and the United States have said is designed to counter an increasing threat from North Korea.
Ms Park said that a THAAD deployment would not threaten any other country's security interests and would not be needed if the North's nuclear issue was resolved, Yonhap news agency said.
In July, the North launched three missiles in a single day from the western region that flew across the country and into the sea off its east coast, flying up to 600 kilometres.
In 2014, the North fired two Rodong medium-range missiles just as Ms Park and Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe were sitting down with US President Barack Obama at the Hague to discuss responding to the North's arms programme.