Obama nominates ambassador to Cuba
President Obama on Tuesday nominated the first U.S. ambassador to Cuba in more than 55 years, setting up a battle with Republicans in Congress who oppose renewed relations with the communist island.
Obama picked Jeffrey DeLaurentis, who already is the chief diplomat in Havana, a job he's held since 2014. But now that diplomatic relations have been re-established, DeLaurentis can be promoted to full ambassador. The new post requires confirmation by the Republican-controlled Senate, which could produce a partisan fight.
Cuban-American Sens. Marco Rubio of Florida and Ted Cruz of Texas, both Republicans, tried to limit funding for the U.S. Embassy in Havana and said they would oppose any ambassador named by Obama.
DeLaurentis, a career diplomat, has served in Havana during the major transition of one-time Cold War foes to a new relationship that includes re-opening embassies in Washington and Havana and resuming travel and trade on a limited basis so far.
"Jeff's leadership has been vital throughout the normalization of relations between the United States and Cuba, and the appointment of an ambassador is a common-sense step forward toward a more normal and productive relationship between our two countries," Obama said in a statement.
The choice of DeLaurentis is the latest move by the Obama administration to increase ties between the two countries. Obama and Cuban President Raúl Castro announced in December 2014 that they would end the 50-year diplomatic freeze.
Obama said DeLaurentis is perfectly positioned to continue overseeing that transition.
"He is exactly the type of person we want to represent the United States in Cuba, and we only hurt ourselves by not being represented by an ambassador," Obama said. "If confirmed by the Senate, I know Jeff will build on the changes he helped bring about to better support the Cuban people and advance America's interests."
Rubio has said the U.S. shouldn't "reward" Cuba with an ambassador until Havana makes significant political reforms, improves human rights, returns U.S. fugitives living in Cuba and compensates U.S. citizens and businesses for property seized when Fidel Castro rose to power.
"President' Obama's appeasement of the region's only totalitarian regime has been a complete disaster," Rubio said Tuesday. "A U.S. ambassador is not going to influence the Cuban government, which is a dictatorial and closed regime. This nomination should go nowhere."
Ambassadors need a simple majority to win Senate confirmation. But senators have traditionally been allowed to impose a “hold” that can end the confirmation process, or Republican leadership can refuse to schedule a vote. Obama currently faces a similar battle to fill a Supreme Court vacancy with Merrick Garland, chief judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
Sen. Patrick  Leahy, D-Vt., who attended last year's opening of the U.S. Embassy in Havana, said DeLaurentis is "universally respected" by members of both political parties and is the "obvious choice" to become the next ambassador.
"We need an ambassador who knows Cuba, who is respected by the Cuban government, and who will stand up for U.S. interests and values. Jeff is that person," Leahy said Tuesday. "The Cuban people have their ambassador in Washington. The American people need their ambassador in Havana."