Nigel Farage confirms he is UKIP's leader after Diane James quits
Nigel Farage has told Sky News he is technically still UKIP leader after Diane James quit the job after just 18 days in charge.
The MEP ruled out re-applying on a permanent basis for what he called a "rotten job" - and later, Steven Woolfe, the party's migration officer, announced he would be standing.
Mr Farage said: "Diane James did not become officially, legally the leader of UKIP, so my name is still there, so I will continue as the acting leader of UKIP whilst we re-do the election process.
"I've done my bit. It's a pretty rotten job being leader of any political party and I think being leader of UKIP is probably more rotten than all the others."
He said he was sorry Ms James decided to stand down, adding she "had all the right qualities" to do the job. 
"I've watched her come into the party, grow through the party, I thought she was one of our better performers on television and radio platforms," he said.
Earlier, he told reporters: "No, I'm not coming back, I'm retired. Not for 10 million dollars."
Ms James became the party's first female leader on 16 September after a landslide victory in the leadership contest.
In a statement, she said it was with "great regret" and the decision was down to "personal and professional reasons".
The personal reasons are understood to be related to her husband being unwell, said Sky's Chief Political Correspondent Jon Craig.
Ms James said she would not be "formalising my recent nomination to become leader of the party with the Electoral Commission".
She added: "I have been in discussion with party officers about the role.
"It has become clear that I do not have sufficient authority, nor the full support of all my MEP colleagues and party officers to implement changes I believe necessary and upon which I based my campaign."
:: The full story behind the rise of Diane James
Ms James, MEP for South East England, was catapulted to front runner in the UKIP race after deputy leader Paul Nuttall refused to join the contest and Mr Woolfe, second favourite at the time, was disqualified after he submitted his nomination papers late.
Mr Woolfe is the first contender to announce he will be standing for the next contest.
It comes despite an admission that he considered defecting to the Conservatives after Theresa May became Prime Minister.
In a statement, Mr Woolfe said he had been "enthused" by Mrs May, but in the end felt that Brexit could only be reliably delivered by UKIP.
He said he truly believed they could replace Labour as the main opposition.
"We can build on our remarkable achievements, stand up for the ignored working class and secure a radically different political landscape in Britain for a generation," he said. "Under my leadership, that is what we will do."