Choi Soon-sil: South Korean prosecutors arrest woman at centre of political scandal
The woman at the centre of a political scandal that has cast the South Korean presidency into crisis has been detained, as locals continue to express their anger over the affair.
Prosecutors are investigating allegations that Choi Soon-sil used her friendship with President Park Geun-hye to influence state affairs by gaining access to classified documents, and benefited personally through non-profit foundations.
Worried that Ms Choi may be a flight risk and could destroy evidence, prosecutors placed her under emergency detention without a warrant, South Korea's Yonhap News Agency reported.
A prosecution official confirmed that she had been arrested and taken to a Seoul detention facility, declining to provide further details.
On Tuesday morning, Ms Choi arrived by prison bus at the prosecutors' office escorted by correctional officers, according to a live broadcast by Yonhap News TV.
Under South Korean law, a suspect can be held under emergency arrest without a warrant for up to 48 hours — a longer detention requires an arrest warrant issued by a court.
In an interview with South Korea's Segye Ilbo newspaper last week, Ms Choi said she received drafts of Ms Park's speeches after her election victory but denied she had access to other official material, or that she influenced state affairs or benefited financially.
Ms Park said last week she had given Ms Choi access to speech drafts early in her term and apologised for causing concern among the public.
Meanwhile, South Korean police detained a man who rammed a large excavator into a gate near the office where prosecutors questioned Ms Choi.
Ms Choi had earlier told media that she "committed a sin that deserves death" — a common expression of deep repentance — and the detained man said he "came here to help her die", according to police.
The attack with heavy construction equipment on a Government building is part of a frenzy of emotion in South Korea over the scandal.
Ms Choi, a cult leader's daughter with a decades-long connection to Ms Park, was nearly knocked off her feet several times yesterday as a crowd of protesters and reporters closed in on her.
Protesters screamed for her arrest and Ms Park's resignation, one angry person reportedly tried to enter the building with a bucket full of animal faeces, and Ms Choi lost her shoe in the scrum.
Social media is now awash with images of the discarded black footwear and the word "Soonderella", a combination of parts of Ms Choi's name and the fairy tale character Cinderella, who leaves behind a glass slipper at a ball.
The man detained for the excavator incident was identified as a 45-year-old with the surname Jeong.
It was not known if Ms Choi was at the Seoul office at the time of the ramming, which injured a security guard and damaged the gate and other facilities.