Theresa May: Parliament must accept referendum result and deliver Brexit
The prime minister says she is confident of overturning court ruling that parliamentary approval is required to leave EU
Parliament must accept that Britain’s vote to leave the European Union was legitimate and let the government get on with delivering Brexit, prime minister Theresa May said on Sunday.
May has said she is confident of overturning a British court ruling that the government needs parliamentary approval to start the process of leaving the EU.
The government, which has given little away about its plans for Britain’s future relationship with the EU, has said that having to set out a detailed negotiating strategy to parliament would put it at a disadvantage in talks with the bloc.
“While others seek to tie our negotiating hands, the government will get on with the job of delivering the decision of the British people,” May said in a statement ahead of her first trade trip to India on Sunday.
“It was MPs who overwhelmingly decided to put the decision in their hands. The result was clear. It was legitimate. MPs and peers who regret the referendum result need to accept what the people decided.”
May will use her first bilateral trade trip since taking office to try to boost ties with India before Britain leaves the EU and to pave the way for a free trade deal as soon as possible once Brexit is completed.
Parliament could in theory block Brexit as most members supported staying in the EU in June’s referendum, although it is unlikely to do so. The ruling could allow lawmakers to temper the government’s approach, however, making a “hard Brexit” – where tight controls on immigration are prioritised over remaining in the European single market – less likely.
A government appeal against the high court ruling is expected to be considered by Britain’s supreme court early next month. May has said she still plans to launch talks on the terms of Brexit by the end of March.
“We need to turn our minds to how we get the best outcome for our country,” she said.
“That means sticking to our plan and timetable, getting on with the work of developing our negotiating strategy and not putting all our cards on the table – that is not in our national interest and it won’t help us get the best deal for Britain.”