Center-Left Party Poised to Regain Power in Romania
Voter turnout on Sunday was less than 40 percent. Years of political scandals, including high-level corruption convictions, have left the electorate disillusioned.
Even with the result strongly favoring the Social Democratic Party, concerns about corruption created uncertainty about who would be prime minister in the new government.
The party’s previous prime minister, Victor Ponta, is being investigated on accusations of forgery, money laundering and being an accessory to tax evasion. Mr. Dragnea, the party’s leader, was given a two-year suspended sentence for electoral fraud in April 2016 and earlier ruled himself out of the running. So, too, did the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats’ joint leader, Calin Popescu-Tariceanu, who was prime minister from 2004 to 2008 and was charged with perjury in July. He has denied the accusations.
The country’s president, Klaus Iohannis, is pushing for a prime minister clear of criminal convictions and active investigations.
Romania has been governed for the last year by a cabinet of technocrats, with Sunday’s election a chance for the main political parties to reassert themselves.
The result was not wholly unexpected; polls had predicted a strong showing for the Social Democratic Party. But some had thought that the party’s main rival, the National Liberal Party, might have enough support to win a majority in coalition with a new party, the Union to Save Romania. That party campaigned on a platform of greater governmental accountability and transparency.
Both of those parties had supported keeping Dacian Ciolos, a technocrat in office since November 2015, as prime minister.
Now, some analysts see Vasile Dancu, a deputy prime minister, as the best bet to become prime minister, said Radu Delicote, a strategist at the political consulting group Smartlink Communications.
“Dancu is Western oriented and bourgeoisie in a good way, but he will need a strong team in place to get things done,” Mr. Delicote said, adding that negotiations between the parties over ministries mean that a full cabinet will not be in place until the new year.
Sergiu Miscoiu, a professor of political science at Babes-Bolyai University in Cluj, said Mr. Dragnea might still be an option, despite his legal troubles: He might try to get himself appointed, or if that fails, choose a close ally as prime minister. The former ministers Rovana Plumb and Bogdan Teodorovici are among the most probable candidates, Mr. Miscoiu said.
Unlike other votes that have taken place in Europe in 2016, Romania’s position in the European Union did not figure prominently in this campaign.
“People in Romania like Brussels and the European Union,” Mr. Delicote said. “In the next few years, the main theme in Romania is going to be the economy, not nationalism.”