To Be or Not to Be a Dictator - The New York Times
In many autocracies, the regime would have rigged the vote, preventing the growing dissent from metastasizing into a public defeat for the incumbent. Mr. Jammeh, however, did not rig elections, but he locked up rivals, shut down critical newspapers, and paid off supporters. The strategy shielded him from some international criticism — observers could declare an election “free and fair” — but his opponents had grown too confident for it to work this year.
Living in his bubble, Mr. Jammeh was probably surprised by the results on election night. Mr. Barrow’s surge had come late, and no public polls tracked the race. According to The New York Times, “As returns coming in from major regions clearly indicated that he was going to lose, Mr. Jammeh asked his key advisers to annul the votes.” But his security officials pointed out that refusing to accept the results would unleash enormous protests and perhaps violence. He made a concession call to Mr. Barrow.
Perhaps spooked by calls to prosecute him, Mr. Jammeh evidently changed his mind. The United Nations Security Council, the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States, the European Union, the United States government — all have condemned Mr. Jammeh’s rejection of the results. Gambian voters managed to get the international community to tell Mr. Jammeh something it never had before: leave.
If Mr. Jammeh stays in power, he will have to disfigure or remove the democratic window dressing that betrayed him. So even if the opposition does not manage to usher in a new democratic era and get Mr. Jammeh to step down, perhaps through a deal offering him immunity, it will have fully stripped him of legitimacy.
Last summer, I visited Mr. Darboe, the founder of the United Democratic Party, at his shabby office. Mr. Darboe, a soft-spoken lawyer, contested and lost presidential elections in 1996, 2001, 2006 and 2011. “I want to at least give Gambians a chance to express dissent through the ballot box,” he explained. Mr. Darboe had kept the flame of freedom burning, no matter how dim. Now it will either be fully extinguished or finally catch fire.