Trump advisers to begin tax talks with Speaker Ryan
One of the biggest Republican projects of the year — tax reform — will begin Monday evening at the Capitol, with several top advisers to President-elect Donald Trump scheduled to hold a lengthy meeting with House Speaker Paul D. Ryan and his team, according to two Trump associates familiar with the session.
The private discussions will convene in Ryan’s office suite shortly after 7 p.m. and will include a number of incoming White House officials: Reince Priebus, Stephen K. Bannon, Jared Kushner, Stephen Miller and Gary Cohn. The associates spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss the meeting.
According to a senior House Republican aide, Ryan plans to walk the Trump aides through the House Republican tax proposal that was included in the party’s “A Better Way” agenda last year.
The aide said that the House Ways and Means Committee will be the main driver of future tax legislation and that Ryan will work with the committee and the White House to shepherd that process in the coming months.
[Tax reform shaping up as one of first fights under Trump]
While Ryan (R-Wis.) and Trump both support tax cuts and simplifying the federal tax code, they do not share an ideological foundation on economic issues. Trump has fiercely supported trade protectionism and tariffs, and Ryan has been a proponent of free-trade agreements. Reconciling those views and finding consensus on how to organize a tax-reform package could be a challenge.
But allies of Trump and Ryan think their mutual desire to position the Republican Party as the party of tax cuts and growth will eventually lead to an agreement — and note that Trump has not been critical of the House’s tax plan.
Priebus, who has been named chief of staff, is a longtime friend of Ryan’s and is widely seen as a key liaison for Trump on Capitol Hill. Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law and confidant, will be a senior adviser in the White House.
Cohn, who until recently was president of Goldman Sachs, will be Trump’s director of the National Economic Council. Cohn is seen as one of the most influential economic voices in Trump’s orbit, alongside Stephen Mnuchin, Trump’s nominee for treasury secretary.
Bannon is another Goldman alumnus. He has clashed with Ryan in his past work as chairman of the incendiary website Breitbart News. But their relationship during the transition period has been amicable, the people said. Miller is the chief speechwriter and policy aide who is frequently at Trump’s side.