Perez wins DNC chairmanship
ATLANTA (CNN)Democrats selected former Labor Secretary Tom Perez over Minnesota Rep. Keith Ellison as their new chairman on Saturday, concluding a hotly contested race to lead a battered party as it tries to channel the anti-Donald Trump energy of its base into an electoral rebound.
It took two rounds of voting to select a winner after Perez found himself just one vote shy in the first ballot. The five other candidates, who had amassed 13.5 total votes, all exited the race before the second round began.
In a victory speech, Perez vowed that Democrats would wage an all-out battle to deny Trump a second term.
"We are at a 'where were you?' moment in American history: Where were you in 2017 when we had the worst President in US history?" he said.
The results brought a chaotic close to a race that stretched on for three months. In the waning days, former Vice President Joe Biden and several aides to former President Barack Obama -- including Valerie Jarrett and David Simas -- made calls to undecided members in an effort to sway them toward Perez.
The behind-the-scenes calls underscored why the race was broadly seen as a proxy battle between the Sanders-aligned progressive wing of the party, which supported Ellison, and those more closely connected with Hillary Clinton and Obama, who largely backed Perez.
In a statement congratulating Perez, Sanders said "it is imperative that Tom understands that the same-old, same-old is not working and that we must open the doors of the party to working people and young people in a way that has never been done before.
"Now, more than ever, the Democratic Party must make it clear that it is prepared to stand up to the 1% and lead this country forward in the fight for social, racial, economic and environmental justice," he said.
"That's a legacy the Democratic Party will always carry forward," Obama said. "I know that Tom Perez will unite us under that banner of opportunity, and lay the groundwork for a new generation of Democratic leadership for this big, bold, inclusive, dynamic America we love so much."
"Congratulations to Thomas Perez, who has just been named Chairman of the DNC," he wrote. "I could not be happier for him, or for the Republican Party!"
"Good leaders are great listeners. You will always have my ear, and I will always have your back," Perez told the crowd, promising to "plan strategy together, lift each other up together."
"You will not be underutilized," he said. "You are of import in everything we do. The most important question you will hear from me is, 'What do you think?'"
In a joint news conference late Saturday afternoon, Ellison said he sees his job as serving as a "bridge" for Democratic institutions, adding that he he did not plan to give up his House seat.
"We saw the potential of doing well on multiple ballots, but we can do the math," he said in what was supposed to be his nomination speech. "It is time for this process to move toward a solution that we can all get on board with."
Television analyst Jehmu Greene, Air Force veteran Sam Ronan and attorney Peter Peckarsky also ran. Greene received half a vote in the first round of balloting before dropping out. Ronan and Peckarsky received none before doing the same. And one voter backed Buttigieg in the first round despite his having already dropped out of the race.