Egypt remains on edge during wait for election results
As Egypt's generals warned of potential chaos, thousands of civilians jammed Tahrir Square late Friday, eager to learn results of last week's runoff election and see the country move away from military rule.
Shafik, the last prime minister under former Egyptian leader Hosni Mubarak, will be named the country's new president Sunday, Ahram reported on its English version Friday, citing several unnamed government sources.
There's been no official confirmation from the leadership in Cairo. Both Shafik and Morsi have claimed they've won the election.
"We will face anyone who will pose a challenge to the public and private sectors with an iron fist," the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces said.
Under an interim constitutional declaration, the military council retains the power to make laws and budget decisions until a new constitution is written and a new parliament elected.
The declaration said Supreme Council members "shall decide all matters related to military affairs, including the appointment of its leaders." The president has the power to declare war, it says, but only "after the approval" of the Supreme Council.
"All decrees issued by the judiciary system must be respected and implemented because they represent the people. It will be considered a crime if anyone objects to the ruling or attempts to block its implementation," the military said.
It said the constitutional declaration was a "necessity that the current situation posed in administrating the affairs of the nation during the critical current phase of our nation's history. Whatever is issued from SCAF is based on the high interests of the nation, nothing else."
The military council said it does not favor one political entity over another and respects everyone's "rights for peaceful demonstrations that keep in consideration the high interests of the nation." And it stresses the importance of self-restraint and respect for authority.
Egyptian reform leader Mohamed ElBaradei -- the former head of U.N. International Atomic Energy Agency and the winner of a Nobel Peace Prize -- said he's been in close contact with the military council and the intelligence services on the one hand and Morsi on the other and has urged them to avoid a showdown.
He said that if Shafik, seen as a candidate of the pro-Mubarak old guard, is declared the winner, "we are in for a lot of instability and violence ... a major uprising." He isn't as worried about a Morsi victory because Shafik supporters are unlikely to take their anger to the streets, he said.