Carrie Lam Wins Vote to Become Hong Kong’s Next Leader
“China promised that Hong Kong people would run Hong Kong,” said Mabel Yau, 52, one of hundreds of protesters outside the voting site. “Today, only 1,200 people are representing us in electing the chief executive. Is it fair?”
Such concerns are unlikely to be eased by the choice of Mrs. Lam, who was a loyal deputy to Leung Chun-ying, the unpopular departing chief executive.
In a speech after the vote, Mrs. Lam, who will be the first female chief executive in Hong Kong history, vowed to prioritize mending social rifts. “Hong Kong, our home, is suffering from quite a lot of divisiveness,” she said. During her campaign, she added, “I heard so much more from people’s hearts and learned and experienced many new things as well as different angles to things. I see my shortcomings and understand that I must put in more efforts.”
Mrs. Lam led the failed effort to overhaul the city’s election process according to Beijing’s wishes, which prompted the so-called Umbrella Movement protests that shut down parts of the city for months in 2014.
“When the No. 2 official becomes the No. 1, there isn’t going to be much change,” said Joshua Wong, one of the leaders of those protests. “ ‘One country, two systems’ is going down the drain, and our high degree of autonomy will exist in name only,” he said.
The protests in 2014 were a response to Beijing’s plan to let Hong Kong choose the chief executive this year by direct popular vote. Under that plan, China would have screened the candidates — a restriction that made the so-called reform a sham, in the view of the student-led protesters who occupied the streets for months.
The local legislature rejected the proposal, meaning that a small committee again chose the city’s leader this year. But pro-democracy politicians have said they have no regrets, arguing that the plan would have bolstered Beijing’s grip on Hong Kong by giving the chief executive a false public mandate.
Since the Umbrella Movement protests, young people in particular have become even more resentful of the Chinese government, calling in growing numbers for Hong Kong’s self-determination and even independence from China. In the first major legislative elections after the protests, voters turned out in record numbers and elected for the first time two young, openly pro-independence politicians.
But in November, Beijing took the extraordinary step of intervening in a Hong Kong court case to prevent them from taking their seats, after they pledged allegiance to the “Hong Kong nation” during their swearing-in ceremony and inserted an anti-China snub into their oaths of office.
Fears of increasing interference from Beijing were also worsened when a bookseller and, later, a billionaire businessman disappeared from Hong Kong, later to re-emerge in police custody in mainland China. Such developments have alarmed many residents, but others are loyal to China and regard pro-democracy activists as a disruptive force.
Mrs. Lam, who will take office on July 1, will have to manage not only the city’s political turmoil, but also a rapidly aging population, low social mobility, slowing economic growth and one of the largest wealth gaps in the world.
Hong Kong’s housing is routinely ranked as even more unaffordable than London’s and New York’s, in part because of relentless demand from wealthy buyers in mainland China. Despite cooling measures enacted by the current government, average housing prices are at a record high, having more than doubled from a decade ago and far outpaced income growth.
Such economic grievances have fed calls for greater public participation in elections, although no change in that area is likely to occur quickly under the new administration. Mrs. Lam has said she will not rush to restart talks on reforming the electoral process, citing a need to avoid confrontation.