Democrat Jon Ossoff Falls Short in Georgia Special Election, Race Goes to Runoff
Very high turnout — as many as 200,000 people may have cast ballots, roughly 45 percent of those registered — suggests voters in the longtime Republican district will be paying close attention to second round of the contest in two months to replace former Rep. Tom Price, who stepped down to join Trump’s Cabinet as Health and Human Services Secretary.
“Tomorrow, we start the campaign anew, and it is imperative that all of us as Republicans come together,” Handel said at her victory party.
Ossoff failure to win outright is a win for Trump, who had repeatedly attacked the Democrat.
Trump, who called Handel on Wednesday to congratulate her, made a last-minute intervention in the race this week, aware it was already being seen as a referendum on his political prowess. On Twitter, he had called Ossoff a “super liberal” who doesn't even live in the district, and on a robocall, he went further.
"Liberal Democrats from outside of Georgia are spending millions of dollars trying to take your Republican Congressional seat away from you. Don't let them do it," Trump said in the recorded message.
The president tweeted early Wednesday morning, "Despite major outside money, FAKE media support and eleven Republican candidates, BIG 'R' win with runoff in Georgia. Glad to be of help!"
While Handel kept her distance from Trump, Ossoff launched his bid with an email solicitation inviting liberals to "Make Trump Furious." That lead more than 8,000 to volunteer for his campaign and thousands more across the country to contribute money.
Operatives in both parties expected Ossoff to fall short of the 50 percent threshold, and Ossoff’s campaign spent Tuesday telling volunteers to prepare for a runoff.
But Democrats are keenly aware that the June election will present new challenges. Ossoff will have to face off against a Republican party united behind a single candidate, instead of split between 11 as was the case Tuesday.
Even with Ossoff’s unprecedented fundraising success, Republicans together outspent the Democrat by nearly two-to-one. Now, all of that firepower will be concentrated on Ossoff.
Nonetheless, Democrats are hailing Ossoff’s double-digit edge Tuesday night in a district that Price won reelection to by 24 percentage points in November.
“The mere fact that we’re even talking about a competitive race in a congressional district Democrats haven’t held in over 40 years, let alone Jon Ossoff’s sound victory tonight, is a testament to the growing strength of a nationwide, grassroots movement that’s looking for leaders ready to stand up to the Republicans empowering Donald Trump’s hate-fueled agenda,” said Jim Dean, leader of the liberal group Democracy for America.