Trump basks in electoral win before NRA crowd
ATLANTA — President Donald Trump, on the eve of the 100th day of his administration, reveled in his improbable November victory, telling an adoring crowd at the NRA’s leadership forum on Friday that he was sorely underestimated while also jabbing Sen. Elizabeth Warren for a possible run in 2020.
“It's truly wonderful to be back in Atlanta and back with my friends at the NRA. You're my friends,” Trump said, recalling his address at the same event last year. “It was in the middle of a historic year and in the middle of a truly historic election. What fun that was? November 8th. Wasn't that a great evening? Do you remember that evening?”
Prompting applause from the crowd, Trump ran through his surprise victories in states including Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin, claiming that “we ran up the East Coast,” even though he lost multiple states along the Atlantic.
He also recalled that polls and conventional wisdom leading up to the election predicted that he would struggle to get 270 electoral votes.
“Hundreds of times I heard, there is no — you know, there's no route. There is no route to 270 and we ended with 306,” he said. “So they were right. Not 270. 306. That was some evening.”
He also declared the election a victory for the gun rights movement, telling the crowd: “The eight year assault on your Second Amendment freedoms has come to a crashing end.”
The most tangible gain of that victory for Second Amendment absolutists has been the appointment of Neil Gorsuch to the Supreme Court, an accomplishment Trump touted during the speech to cheers from the crowd.
Trump’s remarks were in the vein of speeches he delivered on the campaign trail, complete with a raucous crowd that had been warmed up by NRA CEO Wayne LaPierre, who blamed the media, academic and political “elites” for America’s woes, and singer Lee Greenwood.
Much of the crowd in the darkened room remained on their feet throughout the president’s speech, phones held aloft.
Trump predicted that Democrats running against him in 2020 would seek to court the NRA and gun voters. One such candidate might be Warren (D-Mass.), Trump said, referring to her by "Pocahontas," the nickname he used during the campaign to mock her for claiming Native American heritage.
“I have a feeling that in the next election you're going to be swamped with candidates but you're not going to be wasting your time," Trump said. "You'll have plenty of those Democrats coming over and you're going to say, no, sir, no thank you. No, ma'am. Perhaps ma’am. It may be Pocahontas. Remember that. And she is not big for the NRA, that I can tell you.”
And, true to his free-wheeling style, Trump took a moment to shout-out his former primary opponent Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas), who joined Trump for the trip down. He described his relationship with Cruz as “like, dislike, like,” apparently referencing Cruz’s initial unwillingness to attack Trump, followed by his refusal to endorse and completed by his endorsement late in the campaign.
After the speech Trump stayed in Atlanta to attend a fundraiser for Karen Handel, the former Georgia Secretary of State who is running in a special election to fill Tom Price’s House seat against a young Democrat in a rapidly changing suburban district. Trump touted Handel in his NRA speech, and derided the Democrat, Jon Ossoff.
Trump is scheduled to return to Washington on Friday night before hitting the road again Saturday for a speech in Harrisburg, Penn., to mark his 100th day in office. The speech will coincide with the White House Correspondents Dinner which Trump, unlike his predecessors, will not be attending.