Zbigniew Brzezinski, top Carter adviser, dead at 89
Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national security adviser during the Carter administration who played a major role in the Iran hostage situation, died Friday. He was 89.
Mika Brzezinski, his daughter and a co-host of MSNBC’s “Morning Joe,” confirmed his death in an Instagram post.
The Polish-born Brzezinski was national security adviser during Carter’s four years in office, and was a foreign policy powerhouse both before and after his White House stint from 1977 to 1981.
During the Carter administration he had a hand in normalizing relations with China, helped negotiate the Camp David Accords between Israel and Egypt and was a strategist in the year-long Iranian hostage crisis.
Brzezinski was also hawkishly anti-Soviet and supported policies aimed at crippling the superpower.
He pushed for support to Islamic troops’ fight against the Soviet Union in Afghanistan, which it invaded in 1979.
Brzezinski’s staunch, confrontational position against the Soviet Union often led to clashes with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, Sr.
In November 1979 Iranian students overtook the U.S. embassy in Tehran, taking more than 50 Americans hostage for 444 days — becoming a campaign issue during the 1980 election.
Scarborough stayed on MSNBC after talk with cohost’s father 
Brzezinski backed a move in April 1980 to rescue the hostages, which ended in failure. Vance quit the state department as a result.
He remained a highly influential foreign policy figure even after Carter lost re-election in 1980.
The Democrat often returned to the White House to meet with Presidents of both parties including Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton.
Until his death, Brzezinski was a professor at Johns Hopkins University and a scholar at the Center for Strategic and International Studies think tank.
In his later years he was critical of President Trump’s candidacy, particularly what he called a lack of foreign policy knowledge.
Brzezinski was born in Warsaw, Poland, on March28, 1928. His father, Tadeusz Brzezinski, was a diplomat who traveled with his family to France and Germany.
The Brzezinskis settled in Canada before the outbreak of World War II, opting to stay there after when the Soviets invaded.
Brzezinski got a bachelor’s and master’s degree from McGill University before going on to receive his doctorate from Harvard University in 1953.
He lost out a professorship at the school in 1959 to Henry Kissinger — later his predecessor as national security adviser — and moved to New York City to teach at Columbia University.
Brzezinski later went to work in the State Department during the Johnson administration. He was a campaign adviser to Hubert Humphrey’s 1968 Presidential campaign.
In 1973 he co-founded the non-partisan Trilateral Commission with David Rockefeller, which sought to strengthen relations between North America, Western Europe and Japan.
He was also a prolific writer who penned dozens of books and essays on foreign policy.
Brzezinski is survived by his wife, sculptor Emilie Benes, a brother, his three children —including Mika — and five grandchildren.  