Brian Stelter, CNN deny network staged London anti-terror demonstration, rip 'far-right twitterers'
CNN and its “Reliable  Sources” host, Brian Stelter, are pushing back against claims the network staged an anti-terror demonstration in London after Saturday night’s attack.
At least seven people died and over 50 were injured this weekend after three men turned vehicles into weapons before stabbing additional victims near London Bridge. CNN correspondent Becky Anderson’s coverage of the aftermath on Sunday quickly spread on social media when a local man shared behind-the-scenes footage. Producers appeared to direct protesters and officers.
“CNN creating the narrative #FakeNews,” wrote Twitter user Mark Antro after uploading his video.
“CNN caught staging news!” added lawyer and filmmaker Mike Cernovich on Medium. “They even brought “peace group’ printed out papers and props.”
“Far-right twitterers are misleading folks about this video. Bloggers saying CNN was caught ‘staging fake news’ (1/2),” the host wrote Sunday. “Police allowed demonstrators thru cordon ‘so they could show their signs’ to media, @CNNPR says. CNN, BBC, AP ‘simply filmed them doing so.’ “
The network also told Mediaite on Monday that charges of “fake news” are “nonsense.”
“The group of demonstrators that was at the police cordon was being allowed through by officers so they could show their signs to the gathered media,” the network said. “The CNN crew along with other media present simply filmed them doing so.”
Mr. Antro also noted that two white officers walked out of camera range and were replaced by minority cops for the live shot.
“Note the white police officers leaving before the CNN shot & the Asian officers coming in. They then left after they went off air!” he said Sunday.
Comment Policy The Washington Times is switching its third-party commenting system from Disqus to Spot.IM. You will need to either create an account with Spot.im or if you wish to use your Disqus account look under the Conversation for the link "Have a Disqus Account?". Please read our Comment Policy before commenting.