CBO Finds Trump’s Budget Doesn’t Balance Like White House Said
President Donald Trump’s proposed budget wouldn’t balance within 10 years, contrary to the White House’s claim, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office said Thursday.
The CBO estimated the annual deficit in 2027 would be $720 billion under Trump’s plan. The president’s budget office had said its proposal would result in a $16 billion surplus that year, a key goal of conservatives in the Republican Party.
Still, the Trump budget would reduce the deficit well below current projections, the CBO said. It estimated that the policies in his proposal would reduce the deficit by $3.4 trillion from 2018 to 2027. That would result in a $6.7 trillion deficit over the decade instead of $10.1 trillion. Under current laws, the CBO said, the deficit for 2027 would be $1.5 trillion.
The main reason for the difference from Trump’s estimate, the CBO said, is that it sees much smaller revenue than the White House did due to slower economic growth.
Trump’s proposal said the economy could reach 3 percent annual real gross domestic product growth after two years under his policies. Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen earlier Thursday said that level of sustained growth would be difficult to achieve.
There were so few details in Trump’s proposal on elements such as his tax plan that it wasn’t possible to attribute any growth effects to them, the CBO said.
“Each year, CBO typically issues a quantitative analysis of the macroeconomic effects of the president’s policy proposals and the resulting feedback effects on the budget. However, CBO cannot provide a comprehensive analysis of the effects of the proposed policies in the president’s budget for fiscal year 2018 because many of them did not contain the details necessary to assess those effects,” the CBO report said.
The CBO estimated that wages and salaries would be about $6.9 trillion, or 6 percent, lower than the administration projected over 10 years. Economic profits would be about $3.2 trillion, or 15 percent, lower than the administration estimated.
The White House sought to pre-empt the CBO release Thursday by touting what it said are the economic growth effects of Trump’s policies and reasserting the projection of 3 percent real GDP growth.
“For most of our nation’s modern history, a healthy American economy meant one that grew at roughly 3.5%. That was the average growth rate between the late 1940s and 2007. Since then, it has hardly topped 2%,” Trump budget director Mick Mulvaney said in a Wall Street Journal op-ed. He called Trump’s tax-cutting approach to the economy “MAGAnomics,” a spin on Trump’s campaign slogan, “Make America Great again.”
Mulvaney has repeatedly attacked the CBO for its estimates on the impact of Republicans’ plans to repeal and replace Obamacare that projected millions of Americans would lose coverage. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell released a revised health plan Thursday.
The White House’s Office of Management and Budget is pleased with the CBO estimate, spokeswoman Meghan Burris said.
“We are thrilled that CBO confirms that the president’s proposed budget resulted in the largest deficit reduction they have ever scored. CBO agrees that this is the largest deficit reduction package in American history. This administration is committed to making the necessary investments to restore our military, secure our borders, and modernize our infrastructure,” she said.
The top Democrat on the House Budget Committee said the CBO estimate undercuts Trump’s case.
“The CBO report shows that the president built his budget on fantasy projections,” Representative John Yarmuth of Kentucky said.