Trump Says 'Two Sides' Share Blame for Charlottesville Rally Violence
The president assessed that race relations in American have gotten “better or the same” since he took office, noting that President Barack Obama also struggled at times to address the country’s racial divide. Trump said growing jobs and the country will have a “tremendous” impact on race relations.
He also defended senior strategist Steve Bannon, who has been tied to the “alt-right” movement and has come under fire for friction with other members of the West Wing.
“I like him, he’s a good man, he is not a racist, I can tell you that, he’s a good person. He actually gets very unfair press in that regard. But we’ll see what happens to him,” Trump said.
The rowdy question-and-answer session came after Trump announced a new executive action on infrastructure aimed at reducing the time it takes to review projects.
A senior White House official told NBC News Tuesday that President Trump wasn't supposed to answer any questions Monday. His team went into the event with the understanding that they would discuss infrastructure only and the president would take no questions.
But once in front of reporters, the president "went rogue," the official said, and members of the team were stunned by the president's actions.
After the chaotic presser, the White House put out a "talking points" memo for allies, which was obtained by NBC News. It led with the sentence, "The President was entirely correct," and included various references to violent acts "on the left," including the shooting at a Congressional baseball practice in June.
Some residents of Charlottesville were dismayed by Trump's comments.
"What's upsetting is there isn't two sides here," local Jay Lester told NBC News, adding that he was so shocked by the news of Trump's remarks that he had to leave work. "He's heading in a direction that is quite scary. The nation will be watching very closely."
Meanwhile, former KKK leader David Duke tweeted thanks to Trump for his comments.
"Thank you President Trump for your honesty & courage to tell the truth about #Charlottesville & condemn the leftist terrorists in BLM/Antifa," Duke wrote, referring to Black Lives Matter and the anti-fascist movement.
“From the beginning, President Trump has sheltered and encouraged the forces of bigotry and discrimination," Pelosi said. “There is only one side to be on when a white supremacist mob brutalizes and murders in America. The American people deserve a president who understands that.”
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer said in a statement that Trump's comments show he is not a "great and good" American president who seeks to unite.
"When David Duke and white supremacists cheer your remarks, you’re doing it very, very wrong," Schumer said.
Sen. John McCain, R-Arizona, said there was "no moral equivalency" between the two sides in Charlottesville.
"There's no moral equivalency between racists & Americans standing up to defy hate& bigotry," McCain said in a tweet. "The President of the United States should say so."
Former Attorney General Eric Holder said now is "a time to choose sides."
And even some members of the president's own party, like House Speaker Paul Ryan, took issue with Trump's remarks.
"We must be clear. White supremacy is repulsive. This bigotry is counter to all this country stands for. There can be no moral ambiguity," he tweeted.