Trump Bypasses Republicans to Strike Deal on Debt Limit and Harvey Aid
Republican leaders looked grim but resigned afterward and attributed Mr. Trump’s fiscal deal to a need for unity after Harvey struck Texas and as Hurricane Irma barreled towardFlorida. “Look, the president can speak for himself, but his feeling was that we needed to come together to not create a picture of divisiveness at a time of genuine national crisis, and that was the rationale,” said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader.
Democrats were grinning at their surprise victory and happy to rub it in. “It was a really good moment of some bipartisanship,” Mr. Schumer said. He added: “The bottom line is the president listened to the arguments. We think we made a very reasonable and strong argument. And to his credit, he went with the better argument.”
Until now, Mr. Trump has sought to govern through the strength of Republican majorities in Congress, an approach that has not secured top priorities like repealing Mr. Obama’s health care program. After castigating Democrats as obstructionists, Mr. Trump may now seek common cause on areas of mutual interest like infrastructure projects, immigration and taxes.
Soon after meeting with congressional leaders at the White House, the president boarded Air Force One to fly to North Dakota to push for a tax overhaul. Among the onboard guests was Senator Heidi Heitkamp, the first Democratic lawmaker to join Mr. Trump aboard Air Force One since he was inaugurated in January.
The flight gave Mr. Trump an extended opportunity to woo Ms. Heitkamp, who faces a tough re-election battle next year in a state that gave the president an overwhelming 36-point margin during last year’s election. As local lawmakers pointed out, Ms. Heitkamp may find it politically advantageous to cozy up to the most popular figure in the state.
At the event, at an oil refinery in Ms. Heitkamp’s hometown, Mandan, Mr. Trump called her onto the stage with her Republican colleagues.
“Everyone’s saying, ‘What’s she doing up here?’” Mr. Trump said as she joined him in front of an audience filled with Republicans. “But I’ll tell you what — good woman. And I think we’ll have your support. I hope we’ll have your support. And thank you very much, Senator.”
While Ms. Heitkamp can hardly afford to alienate Mr. Trump, she has been cagey about the tax issue. “It’s encouraging he committed to promoting American workers as key to any tax reform policy,” she said in a statement after the president’s visit on Wednesday. “But, as North Dakota’s former tax commissioner, I know the devil is in the details of any reform plan as tax codes are complex.”
Mr. Trump’s courtship of Democrats left conservatives miffed at a spending-and-debt deal they considered anathema to their principles. “The question of politics is, a deal to what end?” said Representative Mark Sanford, Republican of South Carolina. “I think all of us as taxpayers need to be very skeptical of deals for the sake of deals.”
Representative Mark Walker of North Carolina, the chairman of the Republican Study Committee, expressed surprise at Mr. Trump’s action. “I’m still processing this, but my first instinct is I’m not very happy about it,” he said.
Conservative groups like FreedomWorks and For America expressed indignation. “This is straight out of the swamp,” said Adam Brandon, president of FreedomWorks, “and I call on President Trump to say something publicly about how this is a swamp deal and will not be tolerated.”
The agreement came as the House overwhelmingly approved nearly $8 billion in disaster aid in response to Harvey, taking quick action to help victims of the devastating flooding in Texas. The aid measure passed 419 to 3. The “no” votes were Republican.
The House vote took place five days after the White House requested about $7.9 billion in emergency aid. The vast majority of that money would go to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and $450 million would go to the Small Business Administration’s disaster loan program. And with Irma barreling toward Puerto Rico and Florida, more disaster aid is likely to be needed quickly.
Mr. Schumer and Ms. Pelosi pressed for a three-month deal to keep the government running and raise the debt ceiling along with the hurricane aid to give Democrats leverage later this year when other matters, including a longer-term government funding deal, could be negotiated between the two parties. By ensuring that all the pending issues converge at the end of the year, Democrats hope a longer-term agreement on fiscal matters could include immigration, health care and any number of other issues.
Assuming that he had the support of Mr. Trump, Mr. Ryan responded Wednesday morning by calling the Democrats’ proposal “ridiculous and disgraceful,” saying “it could put in jeopardy the kind of hurricane response we need to have.”
“To play politics with the debt ceiling, like Schumer and Pelosi apparently are doing, I don’t think is a good idea,” Mr. Ryan said.
Once they arrived at the White House, however, Mr. Trump undercut Mr. Ryan. Congressional aides said privately that Republicans went into the meeting at the White House proposing an 18-month deal on government spending and the debt limit, only to run into resistance from the Democrats. They then proposed a six-month deal as a compromise, but Democrats insisted on a three-month agreement. Mr. Trump then surprised the Republicans by agreeing to the Democratic formulation.
“We essentially came to a deal, and I think the deal will be very good,” Mr. Trump said afterward. “We had a very, very cordial and professional meeting.”