Iain Duncan Smith in attack on BBC over jobless figures
Mr Duncan-Smith has singled out the corporation's economics editor, Stephanie Flanders, over her coverage of statistics that showed unemployment falling in spite of the recession.
He has made an official complaint with the BBC's head of news, Helen Boaden, over its coverage of his department's efforts to clamdown on sickness benefits.
In an interview he accused Miss Flanders of "pouring cold water" over figures showing a rise in the number of people in work ands "peeing all over" the efforts of British businesses.
Mr Duncan Smith accused the BBC of setting up an interview with a self-employed nurse, Jacqui Connell, who was made redundant last year. Miss Connell agreed with Miss Flanders's claim that she could be "some of the hidden unemployment figures."
The minister said that Miss Flanders had "popped those words into her mouth."
He claimed: "The BBC is locked to the reading of the economy that is run out of Ed Miliband and Ed Balls' office. They think if only you spend and borrow more money you can create growth everywhere.
"This is the general tenor of everything that comes out of the BBC. They expected the (employment) figures to be flatlining.
"They convinced themselves youth unemployment would continue to rise, but when it fell they were in a complete quandary.
"Stephanie Flanders poured cold water over the whole thing. She said: 'Of course this is good news, but it could be because we aren't productive enough'."
The jobless total fell by 46,000 in the quarter to June to 2.56 million, an unemployment rate of 8%, and the number of people claiming jobseeker's allowance last month was 1.59 million, down by 5,900 on June.
Mr Duncan Smith added: "If the unemployment figures had gone up, we would have been on the BBC TV News at Six and Ten and would have got the blame."
He added: "When the news is good, the BBC view is 'Get the Government out of the picture quickly, don't allow them to say anything about it'.
"When the news is bad, (it's) 'Let's all dump on the Government'.
"She was peeing all over British industry and the private sector. It was terrible. Our private industry is unbelievably robust compared to much of Europe."
A BBC spokeswoman said: "BBC News is confident our coverage of this story was impartial, fair and balanced, reflecting a wide range of views. Indeed Mr Duncan Smith expressed his position on several BBC outlets.
"Stephanie interrogated numerous aspects of the figures in her analysis. She echoed questions raised by many experts, including the Deputy Governor of the Bank of England as well as noting the rise in the number of people in work was good news."
A DWP spokeswoman said: "The department made a complaint regarding the coverage of the employment figures on the Six O'Clock News and News at 10. The Secretary of State has made his views clear."