Chicago teachers vote to return to work
The contract agreement with the school system still needs to be ratified by the more than 29,000 teachers and support staff who are members of the union. Karen Lewis, union president, said the rank and file will vote in "the next couple of weeks."
"Well, I think it is the best deal we could get at this moment in time," Lewis said before the meeting. Afterwards, she said there was no such thing as a perfect contract, and that not every member of the union would be pleased.
"I have two different feelings at the same time -- happy that we are so solid and we're a tight working unit," she said, "but at the same time I'm sad that we weren't able to make any progress on class sizes and the school closures. We have a lot of parents that were supporting us, and I feel like we let them down."
Emanuel highlighted the fact that the new school day would be longer for many students. He said that a child who enters kindergarten under the terms of the new agreement would receive 2 1/2 more years of instruction by the time he graduated.
"The mayor had an education agenda he wanted to ram down our throats," she said. "The fact is that we were still able to enjoin our members to move as one. And I think that powerful message (is) when you work together, you accomplish magnificent things. We still want to work with the board of education so we can accomplish what's really best for our kids."
"I'm just glad that everyone got what they wanted but I just wanted the children to be first," Lisa Russell, a parent, told CNN affiliate WLS. "And I believe they are first."
The school board posted a notice on its website: "Chicago Teachers Union leadership has chosen to end the strike. All Chicago Public Schools will re-open on Wednesday, September 19, and all CPS students are expected to be back in the classroom."
"You need to know that our engagement was totally professional, and while it was extremely hard work, the work was done with purpose and with intent, I believe, the get our kids back to school," he said.
Darren Tuggle, who has taught high school English for 13 years, said the strike wasn't about money, rather it was about classroom conditions. He said that teachers were frustrated with the board, whose members are appointed and most of whom came from business backgrounds.
"More people are going to stand up to that," he said, referring to the situation in Chicago and to what he called the movement toward "privatization nationwide."
"We need to really be looking at ways to make things better and doing it in a smart way," he said. "There was no discussion about quality (from the school board)."
The pay structure would change with a 3% pay increase for the first year of the contract, 2% for the second year and 2% for the third year. If a trigger extends the contract to four years, teachers will get a 3% pay increase. Union members would no longer be compensated for unused personal days, health insurance contribution rates would be frozen, and the "enhanced pension program" would be eliminated.