NEW YORK -- The Obama administration will seek to lift the U.S. ban on imported products from Myanmar, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton announced Wednesday at the beginning of a meeting with Myanmar President Thein Sein.
The step would wipe out the biggest remaining economic restrictions the U.S. maintains on the changing country, the latest in a series of incremental moves the U.S. has taken to reward Myanmar.
"In recognition of the continued progress toward reform and in response to requests from both the government and the opposition, the United States is taking the next step in normalizing our commercial relationship,” Clinton said.
There were no immediate details about how or when the restrictions would be lifted. Although Congress renewed the import ban in August, it also allowed for President Obama to waive the restrictions.
A senior administration official told reporters that the White House would consult Congress on how to lift the ban, including whether to end restrictions for all products at once or lift bans on categories one by one. Trade between the U.S. and Myanmar was not especially high in dollar value, the official said, and included hardwoods, gems and textiles.
The announced move would be an economic boon for Myanmar, also known as Burma, and gives its president “a major boost,” said Suzanne DiMaggio, vice president of global policy programs at the Asia Society. The U.S. action "will go a long way toward muffling critics and hard-liners at home.” 
As Myanmar has taken steps toward reform, freeing hundreds of political prisoners and allowing opposition candidates such as democracy icon Aung San Suu Kyi to stand for election, the U.S. has loosened its restrictions on the long-isolated nation, easing most economic sanctions and opening up investment.
The long-standing ban on products made in Myanmar, first put in place nine years ago, dealt a major blow to the Myanmar garment industry, which once sent nearly half of its products to the U.S. More than 100 garment factories were shuttered and at least 50,000 jobs lost, the State Department reported in 2004.
Suu Kyi had urged the U.S. to drop the ban, one in a host of sanctions she had once supported, saying her country should no longer depend on such pressure to maintain its momentum toward democracy. Experts said her supportive statements, made before Thein Sein visited this week, paved the way for the sensitive move.
“It’s a little weird to support sanctions when the people you were supposedly supporting,” Suu Kyi and others in the democracy movement, “don’t support them anymore,” said Joshua Kurlantzick, a Southeast Asia fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.
But other activists and ethnic minorities at odds with the government and have been loath to lose the leverage over Myanmar, which still faces serious obstacles on its road to reform.