Election Day Florida: Results of Election Day in Florida
President Barack Obama won re-election late Tuesday, but the results in Florida remained too close to call early today, even with 98 percent of the state's votes counted.
Obama was leading former Gov. Mitt Romney by less than 1 percent – 49.9 percent to 49.2 percent – in the state. By early today, almost 8 million votes had been counted. Statewide turnout, based on incomplete returns, was running about 67 percent.
Though Florida might face a recount, a process that triggers automatically if the margin of victory is less than a half-percent, that possibility would appear to have little outcome on the national election. Florida has 29 electoral votes up for grabs.
In Central Florida, Obama appeared headed for victory in Orange, Osceola and Volusia counties. Romney was projected to carry Seminole, Polk and Lake. Turnout was running above 70 percent in several jurisdictions.
In the Tampa Bay area – often considered a bellwether for the rest of the state – Romney won Pasco County while Obama captured Pinellas and Hillsborough.
Totals from around the state indicated Florida was following its traditional political script.
The early returns showed Obama posting big numbers in South Florida, a longtime stronghold of Democratic voters, many with roots in the nation's northeast.
Romney was winning in North Florida – home to old-school Southern Democrats and religious conservatives -- and performing well in Southwest Florida, a region filled with retirees and affluent Republicans.
Both campaigns dumped huge resources into the state, with the president's team opening more than 100 offices, about twice as Romney.
Both campaigns also built volunteer armies that numbered in the thousands and spent millions bombarding Floridians with political ads to turn out the vote. The campaigns – and the groups supporting them – ran more than 7,900 ads in the Orlando area during the first three weeks of October alone. They planned another 4,000 or so for the final 11 days of the campaign.
Orlando was the fifth most-heavily targeted metro area in the country, according to researchers at Wesleyan University in Connecticut.
In Central Florida, The election went well into overtime Tuesday night as some voters waited in long lines past the scheduled 7 p.m. closing of the polls. Elections officials said anyone already in line by 7 p.m. would be allowed to vote, no matter how long it took.
By 9 p.m., about 150 people still remained at the Lake Nona YMCA precinct. A poll worker said the wait would be at least 90 minutes and possibly as much as two hours.
The line included people sitting in lawn chairs and in wheelchairs, pushing strollers — and one woman wearing an Air Force uniform. Overhead, a news helicopter circled.