ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
China plans to boycott a new European Union tax on airline carbon emissions, becoming the latest in a line of countries to challenge the law.
China's largest carriers say the tax will cost them too much but the EU says fines for non-compliance will be even steeper.
As part of efforts to combat global warming the EU brought in a law this year to charge foreign airlines for carbon emissions.
Carriers that flout the law will be fined $125 for each tonne of carbon dioxide emitted above the airline's allowance and serial offenders could even be banned from entering the region.
Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Hong Lei says his is not the only country unhappy with the new law.
"We hope that Europe can take a cautious and realistic attitude and act carefully and properly consult related parties including China to resolve this issue," Mr Lei said.
Last month, in the European Court of Justice, the US argued the tax violates climate change and aviation pacts.
But it lost its bid to have the tax blocked.
He says the law does not breach any international laws nor the principle of sovereignty.
"If Chinese want to do business in Europe - like, let's say, open a restaurant or something - they have to comply with the health and safety requirements," Mr Valero-Ladron said.
"This is not that different. If you want to operate in Europe, you have to respect the law, you have to respect the environmental law."
Andrew Herdman, director-general of Asia Pacific Airlines, says Europe is riding roughshod over the international aviation market and there is now a real risk of a trade war.
"Many countries - America, China, India and others - have placed their objections on record," Mr Herdman said.
"This was discussed in the international civil aviation organisation, which is the arm of the United Nations responsible for aviation policy, and there were more than 140 foreign governments that took exception to the way in which Europe was approaching it.
"But Europe has gone ahead regardless, which is why we are now hearing threats of retaliation."
Mr Herdman says the aviation industry is committed to environmental sustainability, but he says no scheme should be imposed without the consent of foreign governments.