Egypt speeds new constitution amid Morsy protests
Fresh clashes broke out near Cairo's Tahrir Square on Wednesday, a day after a massive demonstration against Morsy's decrees that extended his powers last week. Dozens of police officers, backed by trucks firing tear gas, arrested numerous protesters, some of whom were beaten by officers as others continued to throw stones at police.
"What I can see now is, the Egyptians are free," he said. "They are raising their voices when they are opposing the president and when they are opposing what's going on. And this is very important. It's their right to express and to raise their voices and express their feelings and attitudes. But it's my responsibility. I see things more than they do."
Morsy issued an order November 22 preventing any court from overturning his decisions, essentially allowing him to run the country unchecked until a new constitution is drafted. In a surprise move after days of protests, the constituent assembly that has been drafting Egypt's new constitution said Wednesday it was on the verge of concluding its work.
Essam El-Erian, a senior Morsy adviser, said the council is expected to vote on a final draft Thursday and put it before the Egyptian people for a vote within 15 days. If it passes in that referendum, the controversial decrees would be lifted.
Muslim Brotherhood But the move provoked a walkout by a number of the council members. Sameh Ashour, head of the lawyers' syndicate and a former member of the council, said that only 55 of the 100 original members of the assembly remained, and all of them were from Islamist movements such as the Salafists or the Muslim Brotherhood , Morsy's political movement.
"Their brains and (all) their opinions are in the draft," he told CNN's "Amanpour." He denied the process was being rushed, saying the assembly had been at work for six months.
"All Egyptians are waiting for a new constitution reflecting the hopes of the people and dreams of Egyptians during the revolution and to end the suffering of Egyptians for more than 60 years under dictatorship and totalitarianism," he said.
Morsy and his backers described last week's decree as an attempt to preserve the fragile Arab Spring revolution that pushed longtime strongman Hosni Mubarak from power and led to the country's first free elections. But critics have called it an unprecedented power grab, and a Monday night statement declaring the edict applied only to "sovereign matters" did nothing to defuse their anger.
Egyptians packed Tahrir Square past midnight Tuesday in what observers said were the biggest protests since Mubarak's ouster in 2011, calling on Morsy to reverse his decree or resign. While that demonstration was largely peaceful, one man died from inhaling tear gas during a fight between demonstrators and police nearby, and more than 400 people were injured in protests across Cairo and around the country.
Brookings Institution analyst H. A. Hellyer said the sudden push could be an attempt to take some of the heat off of Morsy, Egypt's first freely elected leader. Hellyer, who is currently in Cairo, considers that Morsy has "put himself in a tricky position" by issuing the edict because it has made it very difficult for him to compromise.
Despite critics' concerns over its drafting, the constitution would likely pass in a referendum because many Egyptians crave stability after months of uncertainty, he said. Islamist groups may also cast the decision in a religious light. But Hellyer said the huge numbers that turned out Tuesday -- a workday -- show that significant numbers of Egyptians from all backgrounds are unhappy over the president's assumption of new powers.
"If the protesters can keep up the momentum for another couple of days, they hit Friday, a day off. If they can do something quite intense on Friday, then that may push the presidency in an awkward position," Hellyer said.