David Cameron talks of his pride in the British Empire but stops short of giving an apology for Amritsar massacre
David Cameron insisted he retains pride in the British Empire after visiting the site of what he called its most ‘monstrous’ atrocity today.
The Prime Minister echoed the words of Winston Churchill as he paid tribute to the 379 innocent Indians slaughtered in the Amritsar massacre.
Mr Cameron concluded his visit to India yesterday with a trip to the Golden Temple, the holiest site for Sikhs, and the Jallianwala Bagh gardens – where soldiers under Brigadier Reginald Dyer fired 1,650 shots into a crowd of 20,000 unarmed protesters in 1919.
Mr Cameron called the killings ‘deeply shameful’ but stopped short of giving an explicit apology for the massacre.
Speaking after his visit, he said: ‘I think there’s an enormous amount to be proud of in what the British Empire did and was responsible for.
‘But of course there were bad events as well as good ones.
‘The bad events we should learn from and the good events we should celebrate.’
He called Britain’s imperial rule in India a ‘net help’ for the UK forging new links with one of the world’s fastest growing economies because of the ‘shared history and culture’.
Mr Cameron was shown around the massacre site, including a well down which people threw themselves to their deaths as they sought to avoid the gunfire, and a wall studded with 28 bullet holes.
He then laid a wreath at the memorial to the dead before inscribing the book of condolence.
Treat: Mr Cameron is given a meal by a worker at the temple, the holiest site for Sikhs Cleansing: Mr Cameron and his hosts walk through a purifying water bath on the threshold of the temple Tourist: The Prime Minister, surrounded by a crowd of locals, sees the sights of the Golden Temple He wrote: ‘This was a deeply shameful event in British history, one that Winston Churchill rightly described at the time as “monstrous”. ‘We must never forget what happened here and in remembering we must ensure that the United Kingdom stands up for the right to peaceful protest around the world.’ Memorial site secretary Sukumar Mukherjee, whose grandfather survived the massacre, said: ‘He has come here, he has paid his tributes. It is more than an apology.’ But Sunil Kapoor, president of the Jallianwala Bagh Freedom Fighters Foundation and whose great-grandfather Wasoo Mal Kapoor was killed in the massacre, said he was ‘not satisfied’ that Mr Cameron did not meet relatives of those who died. Holy: The Golden Temple receives millions of pilgrims and other visitors each year Ornate: The Golden Temple is one of India's top tourist destinations owing to its extravagant decoration Friendly: Mr Cameron is hoping to build better relations between the UK and India on his visit to the country
Explaining why he had not apologised, Mr Cameron said: ‘We’re dealing with something here that happened a good 40 years before I was even born.
‘I don’t think the right thing is to reach back into history and seek out things to apologise for.
‘The right thing is to acknowledge what happened, to recall what happened, to show respect and understanding.’
Mr Cameron also said he would not hand back the Koh-i-Noor diamond, claimed by India, saying it would not be ‘the right approach’.
The visit to Amritsar – the first by a sitting prime minister – was also an attempt to drum up votes from Britain’s 800,000-strong Sikh community.
Before visiting the massacre site, Mr Cameron toured the Golden temple.
ATROCITY THAT PROVED TO BE THE BEGINNING OF THE END FOR RAJ   The Amritsar massacre is considered one of the low points in the history of the Empire - and it also helped to end British rule in India. Tens of thousands of Indians gathered in a square near the city's iconic Golden Temple on April 13, 1919 and started protesting against the power of the Raj. The protest was part of the growing independence movement, with strikes and demonstrations sweeping the country in the preceding months. It was this revolutionary background which made Bridgadier-General Reginald Dyer nervous about the protest, and which motivated his decision to order dozens of soldiers to open fire on the demonstrators. The troops, most of whom were themselves Indian, fired indiscriminately and without warning, killing hundreds - the official death toll was 379, but Indians claim that around 1,000 protesters died. Dyer had intended to suppress calls for independence, but instead the massacre ended up boosting them as previously pacific Indians rallied to the cause after hearing of the horrific slaughter. Reactions in Britain were mixed, but many - including Winston Churchill, then Secretary of State for War - were revolted by the killing. One man particularly inspired by the news was Mahatma Gandhi, who soon began a campaign of non-violence protest which would eventually lead to the country's independence in 1947.
He removed his shoes and socks and put on a blue bandana for his tour.
He was shown the kitchens, which feed many of the 100,000 pilgrims who visit the temple every day.
He posed for pictures with temple officials and tried his hand flipping chapatis, before visiting the inner sanctum in the temple complex.
He described it as ‘very moving, very serene and very spiritual’.
‘In coming here to Amritsar, we should also celebrate the immense contribution that people from the Punjab play in Britain, the role they play, what they give to our country,’ Mr Cameron added.