China’s New Leader, Xi Jinping, Takes Full Power
“I think that he’s attracted to the idea of a kind of enlightened dictatorship, or neo-authoritarianism,” said Li Weidong, a former magazine editor in Beijing who is a prominent commentator on politics. “He rejects fundamental political reform, but he wants a cleaner, more efficient government that is closer to the public.”
“I think in the end it will be difficult for them to avoid issues of political reform because otherwise it will be impossible to eradicate corruption,” Mr. Li said. “Relying on personal authority and party indoctrination and traditions won’t solve the problems they face.”
Meeting Parliament delegates this week and last, Mr. Xi repeated vows to counter slowing economic growth by encouraging consumer spending and pulling down barriers to farmers migrating to towns and cities. He told People’s Liberation Army delegates that a strong, loyal military was essential to his “China dream” of patriotic revival.
He has also shown a lighter public touch than his predecessor, the stiffly disciplined Mr. Hu. After an uproar this week over thousands of pig carcasses in a river near Shanghai, state news media highlighted Mr. Xi’s earlier comments on water pollution.
“The standard that Internet users apply for lake water quality is whether the mayor dares to jump in and swim,” Mr. Xi told officials from the area near the polluted Lake Tai in eastern China, according to a state media report.
Mr. Xi, 59, is the son of a Communist Party official who served under Mao Zedong and became a supporter of Deng Xiaoping’s reforms to curtail party controls and nurture markets. Vice President Li is also the “princeling” son of a senior cadre.
Many party insiders thought that Mr. Li was destined for a place on the elite, seven-member Politburo Standing Committee, but he was left out of the lineup announced in November. Mr. Li’s new post will keep him close to Mr. Xi, and he could still climb into the Standing Committee at a party congress in 2017.
Before Parliament ends its session on Sunday, it will appoint Li Keqiang as prime minister on Friday, succeeding Wen Jiabao, and install new deputy prime ministers, ministers and other senior officials.
“They are all the sons of the party,” said Yao Jianfu, a retired party official and a researcher in Beijing.
“For them, there’s no conflict between defending their own power and developing a capitalist economy in China,” he said, adding that Mr. Xi “will have to lean more to the left in politics than he can lean to right in economic policy, otherwise he won’t be able to stabilize his place on the emperor’s throne.”
Outwardly, at least, Mr. Xi has accumulated the levers of power more smoothly than his recent predecessors. After becoming party leader in late 2002, Mr. Hu waited almost two years to take the Central Military Commission chairmanship from Jiang Zemin, who remained a constraint on Mr. Hu. Mr. Jiang was long overshadowed by Mr. Deng, the aged patriarch who installed him and once threatened to remove him.
But analysts and former officials say Mr. Xi and his comrades face other, no less forbidding, obstacles to their vows of change: the array of powerful political families, state-owned conglomerates and ordinary urban residents who fear that change could threaten their interests.
“The talk of reform is genuine,” said Jennifer Richmond, who analyzes China for Stratfor, a company based in Austin, Tex., that offers advice on political and security affairs. “There is absolutely an understanding by the new leadership that they cannot carry on in the way that they have.
“But so many of those that got rich off the old system are a part of the system, and the changes they make will affect them,” Ms. Richmond said. “The ultimate fear is loss of party power, and that’s just unacceptable whether you’re a conservative or a reformer.”
Parliament offered signs of the obstacles that any ambitious change will face. A reorganization of government ministries and agencies approved by delegates turned out to be much less thorough than what political insiders and analysts said was proposed several months ago. The powers of the National Development and Reform Commission, which many pro-market economists see as a hurdle to real reform, remained untouched.
“When they start to diminish the power of the N.D.R.C., that’s when I think that this is genuine,” Ms. Richmond said.
Shi Zhihong, a senior adviser to the Chinese leadership, this week told a Hong Kong newspaper, Wen Wei Po, that Mr. Xi and his colleagues were working on a “blueprint” for economic and social policy changes that would be presented to a party meeting, probably late this year. But Mr. Xi has stressed that none of the changes he has in mind are intended to undermine the party’s hold on power.
In comments to officials that have not been openly published, Mr. Xi has warned against confusing his idea of reform with Western-inspired democratization.
“Some people define reform as reforming in the direction of Western universal values and a Western political system, otherwise it’s not reform,” Mr. Xi said in a copy of his comments that has circulated among officials. “This is stealthily switching one idea for another, and it distorts what reform is for us.”