WikiLeaks cables on the Gandhis: Scanner on Rajiv, Sanjay, Sonia
Fresh US diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks have claimed that Rajiv Gandhi was the "main Indian negotiator" for Swedish aircraft company Saab-Scania before entering politics.
The leaked secret cable was first reported by The Hindu on Monday and talked about Rajiv's "family connections", seen as valuable in connection with a huge fighter deal that was being negotiated for the IAF in the 1970s.
Responding to the report, the Congress accused WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange of spreading "lies and falsehoods" while the BJP demanded the government come clean on the controversy.
"Swedish embassy officials has informed us that main Indian negotiator with swedes on viggen at New Delhi end has been Ms Gandhi's older son, Rajiv Gandhi. Latter's only association with aircraft industry (to our knowledge) has been as pilot for Indian airlines and this is first time we have heard his name as entrepreneur," said a US diplomatic cable sent on October 21, 1975.
The cables went on to say that French aviation firm Dassault, which was also in the race with its Mirage aircraft, had the son-in-law of the then Air Chief, Air Marshal O P Mehra, as its chief negotiator.
"Ms Gandhi (according to Swedish information) has made personal decision not to purchase British jaguar because of her prejudices against British... decision would be between Mirage and Viggen. The Swedish diplomat said that Sweden's neutral position in world politics is offsetting Viggen's higher cost. He expressed irritation at the way Ms Gandhi is personally dominating negotiations, without involvement of Indian air force officers," the cables said.
A related cable says the Swedes also made it clear they "understood the importance of family influences" in the final decision. The cable adds: "Our colleague describes Ranjiv (sic) Gandhi in flattering terms, and contends his technical expertise is of a high level. This may or may not be. Offhand, we would have thought a transport pilot not the best expert to rely upon in evaluating a fighter plane, but then we are speaking of a transport pilot who has another and perhaps more relevant qualification."
Please read our before posting comments
indianexpress.comindianexpress.com TERMS OF USE: The views expressed in comments published on indianexpress.com are those of the comment writer's alone. They do not represent the views or opinions of The Indian Express Group or its staff. Comments are automatically posted live; however, indianexpress.com reserves the right to take it down at any time. We also reserve the right not to publish comments that are abusive, obscene, inflammatory, derogatory or defamatory.