North Korea: US 'ready to intercept up to THREE missiles'
South Korea's Foreign Minister Yun Byung-se confirmed today that North Korea has moved a mid-range Musudan ballistic missile to its east coast and Pyongyang is prepared to launch the missile "at any time."
"According to intelligence obtained by our side and the U.S., the possibility of a missile launch by North Korea is very high," Yun said, adding that North Korea can launch the missile "at any time from now."
The Foreign Minister said the Musudan missile has a range of 3,500 kilometers – which could hit the U.S. territory of Guam – and "it's up to North Korea how far it would fly."
South Korea fears Pyongyang could launch up to three missiles after weeks of threats, according to local reports.
One unnamed official told the Yonhap news agency: "There are clear signs that the North could simultaneously fire off Musudan, Scud and Nodong missiles."
Yun added that his government has asked China and Russia to help restrain North Korea from making military provocations as tensions on the Korean Peninsula mount over the expected mid-range missile launch by the North. "Throughout close coordination with China and Russia, the Korean government has been continuing to make efforts to persuade North Korea to change its attitude," Yun told a parliamentary committee meeting.
South Korea and the United States have meanwhile upgraded their surveillance status in preparation for the imminent missile launch.
The United States "is ready" to intercept a ballistic missile launched by the North, the top US military commander in the Pacific has said.
South Korean President Park Geun-hye said yesterday that she is exasperated by the "endless vicious cycle" of hostile behaviour from the North. The worrying appeal to Russia and China from the South came as speculation heightened that North Korea has pulled its ambassador out of the UK after a shipping container was pictured outside the London embassy yesterday. Boxes were seen being loaded onto a large lorry parked outside the pariah state's embassy - an ordinary home in Ealing, west London.
William Hague will today be discussing North Korea at meeting of G8 foreign ministers in London.
Mr Hague said: "This is about preventing conflict, resolving conflict, dealing with its consequences."