Report: Iran successfully tests three new missiles
The Iranian Army announced on Saturday the successful testing of three new missiles, the Iranian Fars News Agency reported. The army revealed no details about the weapons, but did say that they were different from the Naze'at 10 and Fajr missiles that Iran has in its arsenal. The report stated that the Fajr-5 has a range of 75 km. which is a longer range than the medium range Naze'at 10.
The three types of missile were developed by the Army and Defense Industries and were test fired in the ground forces recent war-games, Lieutenant Commander of the Iranian Army's Ground Force Gen. Kioumars Heydari told Fars on Saturday.The army's missile and rocket units test fired the missiles on the first day of the ground drills being held in Kashan in Isfahan Province "to display their latest achievements and defensive tactics," Fars reported.  The army will also unveil its new personnel carriers during parades to be held throughout Iran on the National Army Day on April 18, said Heydari according to Fars.The report referenced the past statements made by a high ranking Iranian military figure and by Iranian President Ahmadinejad that stressed the "deterrent purposes" of the Iranian army's military exercises and training. The Fars report referred to a statement made by the Iranian Army's Ground Force Commander Gen. Ahmad Reza Pourdastan in January who said, "When the enemy observes that our Armed Forces are constantly in war-game zones and their fingers are kept on the trigger, it will not dare to invade the Islamic Iran's borders." In February, when local media announced the unveiling of what Iran said was a new, domestically built fighter jet, the Qaher 313, Ahmadinejad said , "This project carries the message of brotherhood, peace, and security and it doesn't pose any threat to anyone. There is no intention to interfere in any other country's affairs."     In March, missiles were fired in Central Iran during a military exercise, Fars News Agency reported.One of the missiles was reported to be a Fajr-5 rocket, the same type of long-range missile that was fired at Tel Aviv from Gaza during November's Operation Pillar of Defense. 