Sharif declares victory in landmark Pakistan election
Nawaz Sharif has declared victory for his centre-right party in Pakistan's landmark elections, as early results put him on course to win a historic third term as prime minister.
The election, in which 86 million people were eligible to vote, marks Pakistan's first transition from one civilian government to another in its 66-year history.
Millions of people defied deadly polling day attacks to vote, and the result represents a remarkable comeback for Mr Sharif, who heads the centre-right Pakistan Muslim League-N party (PML-N).
The party of his main rival, cricket star Imran Khan, has conceded defeat but vowed to form the next provincial government in the north-west.
"Results are still coming in, but this much is confirmed: we're the single largest party so far," Mr Sharif declared to hoots of joy from his supporters in Lahore.
"Please pray that by morning we're in a position that we don't need the crutch of coalition partners."
Early results suggest no single party will win a simple majority of 172 seats in the national assembly, raising the prospect of protracted talks to form a coalition government.
Mr Sharif previously served as prime minister from 1990-93, when he was sacked for corruption, and from 1997-99, when he was deposed by the military.
His family says he is a changed man who will this time govern more successfully.
The next government will have to contend with Taliban militancy, endemic corruption, chronic power cuts and crumbling infrastructure in the nuclear-armed country of 180 million people.
One of the first likely tasks will be to negotiate with the International Monetary Fund for a multi-billion-dollar bailout.
Mr Sharif has vowed meet the huge challenges facing Pakistan and to bring about change.
"That is what the people voted us for. So we are the change and people have shown their confidence in us," he said.
"They know that we have changed this country in the past ... and we will do it in the future as well."
Mr Sharif's high-voltage campaign saw him clash with Mr Khan, whose promises of reform and ending corruption struck a chord with middle-class and youth voters.
It is now clear that Mr Khan's Tehrik-i-Insaf (PTI) party did not have the momentum needed to trip up Mr Sharif.
Still, it looks set to squeak into second place and says it will form government in the terror-hit north-western province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
That marks an end to decades of two-party dominance by the PML-N and Pakistan People's Party (PPP).
Mr Khan had a last-minute surge of support after fracturing his spine when he fell from a stage at a campaign rallyon Tuesday.
The election commission says voter turnout was nearly 60 per cent, making it the highest since 1977.
More than 86 million people were eligible to vote for the 342-member national assembly and four provincial assemblies in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab, Sindh and Baluchistan.
Queues formed outside polling stations in Pakistan's main cities where people spoke enthusiastically about exercising their democratic right and voting for change, although some expressed nervousness about security.
Voting in Pakistan's financial hub Karachi was marred by allegations of rigging from rival parties, and the election commission ordered a re-vote in more than 30 polling stations in one constituency over accusations of ballot stuffing.
More than 600,000 security personnel have been deployed nationwide at polling stations amid warnings from the Taliban to voters to stay away.
A bomb targeting a candidate in the Awami National Party (ANP) in the commercial hub, Karachi, killed at least 17 people and wounded 30.
A blast in the northern city of Peshawar also injured a number of women voters.