Eurozone crisis: Greek PM warns 'no time to waste' to avoid more austerity - as it happened
Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the latest events in the eurozone, the financial markets and the global economy.
It looks like a lively day ahead, with the Greek cabinet being reshuffled, the markets lively as ever, and Bank of England governor Sir Mervyn King giving his last public appearance before standing down.
In Athens, a new cabinet is being sworn in at lunchtime as prime minister Antonis Samaras tries to put the disorder caused by the closure of Greece's state broadcaster behind him.
Details of the reshuffle emerged last night, and the new team should be sworn in at 12.30pm local time (10.30am BST).
As we'd suspected, the socialist Pasok party (now the only junior member of the coalition) gets more responsibility with leader Evangelos Venizelos becoming foreign minister and deputy PM.
Two other Pasok leading players, Yiannis Maniatis and Michalis Chrysochoidis, get Environment and Transport Ministry.
There's no change at the top of the finance ministry, though, with Yannis Stournaras remaining as finance minister.
The reshuffle is meant to stitch the government more closely together, after Samaras was blasted a high-handed approach to his junior partners (one of whom, Democratic Left, has had enough and quit last week). But with the coalition only holding 153 seats (out of 300), the key question is whether Samaras and Venizelos can keep their teams onside.
The reshuffle has already provoked some confusion. New Democracy’s Sophia Voultepsi was briefly reported to have taken the Deputy Health Minister brief, before declining it for 'personal reasons'.
And the appointment of conservative MP Adonis Georgiadis to the Health Ministry also raised eyebrows, given his previous support for an anti-semetic book titled 'Jews: The Whole Truth’ (more details here).
While Pantelis Kapsis, a former government spokesman under the technocratic government of Lucas Papademos, will run a new ministry for the state broadcaster. He'll be tasked with creating a successor to ERT (whose closure sparked the latest political crisis in Greece).
I'd be very interested to know what Greek readers think of the new cabinet.
Meaanwhile, the financial markets in Europe remain gripped by the danger of a credit crunch in China, and the Federal Reserve's plans to withdraw its stimulus package.
Asian markets have seen a volatile day's trading, with the Chinese Shanghai Composite falling more than 5% at one stage before rallying strongly. European stocks are expected to rise after yesterday's selloff, but bonds will be closely watched for signs that borrowing costs are inching up.
And in London, Sir Mervyn King and senior colleagues from the Bank of England will be appearing at the Treasury Select Committee at Parliament to discuss the Bank's May 2013 Inflation Report. It's King's final public outing before he leaves Threadneedle Street at the end of the week....
I'll be tracking events in Greece, London and across the financial markets through the day....