Kevin Rudd returns, Julia Gillard loses support of partyroom
KEVIN Rudd said he resumes the task he began in 2007 "with humility" and he praised the "extraordinary intelligence" of Julia Gillard who had been "a remarkable reformer."
Mr Rudd said his role is "to forge consensus wherever I can" and to rid the national debate of the vitriol which he says has characterised this parliament.
"In recent years politics has failed the Australian people. There's just been too much negativity all around," he said.
"I intend to lead a government that brings people together and gets the best out of them," he said.
Mr Rudd told young people he understood why they have switched off politics, but he now asks them to re-engage.
"We need you, we need your ideas, we need your enthusiasm," he said.
Julia Gillard visited Governor-General Quentin Bryce to ask her to commission Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister after she lost the Labor leadership.
"In view of his election I have written to the Governor-General asking her to commission Mr Rudd as Prime Minister," Ms Gillard said.
Following her defeat, Ms Gillard confirmed she would not contest the safe seat of Lalor at the 2013 election and has nominated the NDIS, carbon tax and Gonski reforms as key achievements of her minority government.
She said she was "proud" to be the nation's first female prime minister and despite the attacks she says she suffered, she thinks over time it will get easier for women to hold the top job.
"It will be easier for the next woman, and the woman after that and the woman after that. And I am proud of that," she said.
Earlier this evening, Kevin Rudd regained the job he lost to Ms Gillard, three years and three days to the day he was forced out by a leadership ballot.
He won the ballot 57- 45 votes and it is understood he will call an August election.
Treasurer and Deputy Leader Wayne Swan quit the frontbench and Anthony Albanese was elected in his place.
In his outgoing speech, Mr Swan said it was a "privilege"to serve as Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer.
Craig Emerson, Joe Ludwig and Communications Minister Stephen Conroy have quit. Penny Wong has been elected as the new Labor leader in the Senate, a position previously held by Mr Conroy with Jacinta Collins as deputy. Dr Emerson also said he will not contest the next election.
Peter Garrett has also quit and will not contest the seat of Kingsford-Smith at the election.
Julia Gillard said she was proud of the NDIS and carbon tax. Picture: Kym Smith
Returning Officer Chris Hayes said the meeting was quite sombre but people were glad the issue was resolved.
The Governor-General is tonight seeking high-level advice before confirming Kevin Rudd as Prime Minister for the second time.
News Limited has learned that Ms Bryce was waiting to meet with the Acting Solicitor-General to discuss the constitutional impact of the leadership change before agreeing to commission Mr Rudd.
It is understood Ms Gillard is scheduled to travel the short distance to Government House to resign her office at prime minister.
But Ms Bryce will examine the resignation letter before seeking legal advice. Once satisfied she is expected to invite Mr Rudd to form government.
Opposition Leader Tony Abbott has warned Coalition MPs about getting too comfortable.
He warned his colleagues against getting "too cocky'' following the leadership change, according to one MP.
HOW DID WE GET HERE