Syria will implement US-Russian chemical weapons deal once it has UN approval
Damascus will commit to a US-Russian plan to eradicate its chemical weapons once it has United Nations approval, Syria's information minister has said, adding that the regime had already begun preparing relevant documents.
The United States and Russia have agreed on a deal that demands action within days and is designed to eradicate Syria's chemical weapons by mid-2014.
The deal averts the possibility of any immediate US military action against president Bashar al-Assad's government, though the US has warned it remains prepared to take action if diplomacy fails.
"Syria is committing itself to whatever comes from the UN," Omran al-Zoubi said. "We accept the Russian plan to get rid of our chemical weapons.
"In fact, we've started preparing our list. We are already documenting our papers and we have started to do our job.
Syria will implement the US-Russian deal when it "turns into something more concrete" following a UN Security Council vote, Mr Zoubi said.
"For 40 years Syria has always been trusted once it has committed itself."
Mr Zoubi vowed that war-torn Syria would "absolutely" grant access to weapons inspectors, saying the country "respects and honours what it says".
"We take this agreement very seriously," the minister said.
The ambitious plan to dismantle and destroy Syria's chemical arms was thrashed out during three days of talks in Geneva between US secretary of state John Kerry and his Russian counterpart Sergei Lavrov.
It gives Mr Assad a week to hand over details of his regime's arsenal of the internationally-banned arms in order to avert unspecified sanctions and the threat of US-led military strikes.
It also specifies there must be immediate access for arms control experts and that inspections of what the US says is some 45 sites linked to the Syrian chemical weapons program must be completed by November.
The deal has put off the threat of US air strikes, although president Barack Obama has stressed that force remains an option if Mr Assad reneges.
US forces remain in position while Russia still opposes military action, but now backs possible UN sanctions for non-compliance.
Mr Obama has dismissed critics of his quick-changing tactics on Syria for focusing on "style" not substance.
And while thanking Russian president Vladimir Putin for pressing his "client the Assad regime" to disarm, he chided Russia for questioning Mr Assad's guilt over the gas attack.
Responding to concerns, notably in Israel, that a display of American weakness toward Mr Assad could encourage his Iranian backers to develop nuclear weapons, Mr Obama said Tehran's nuclear program was a "far larger issue" for him than the regime's toxins.
"They shouldn't draw a lesson, that we haven't struck, to think we won't strike Iran," he said, disclosing he had exchanged letters with Iran's new president.
"On the other hand, what they should draw from this lesson is that there is the potential of resolving these issues diplomatically.
"I think what the Iranians understand is that the nuclear issue is a far larger issue for us than the chemical weapons issue - that the threat against Israel is much closer to our core interests."
Mr Obama also denied he had been outfoxed by Mr Puting.
"This is not a Cold War contest between us and Russia," he said.
Syria's minister of state for national reconciliation, Ali Haidar, welcomed the agreement when it was announced.
"On one hand, it helps the Syrians emerge from the crisis and on the other, it has allowed for averting war against Syria," he told Russian news agency Ria Novosti.
"This deal is the result of Russian diplomacy and the Russian leadership.
"It's a victory for Syria that was achieved thanks to our Russian friends."
Mr Haidar says the deal "provides international support for all the representatives of the Syrian people to sit down at one table and to resolve their internal problems at the next stage".
He added that it "gives the opportunity to solve in the future all the problems of Syria, not only the problem of chemical weapons".
Mr Kerry has met with Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu to brief him on the plan, and will also meet with representatives from France, Britain, Saudi Arabia and Turkey in Paris on Monday.
Mr Netanyahu says the agreement will be judged on whether it achieved "the complete destruction" of Syria's chemical weapons.
The deal won the backing of China, a veto-wielding permanent member of the Security Council, which like Russia has vetoed several UN resolutions on Syria.
Syrian rebels, fighting to oust Mr Assad since March 2011, have rejected the deal, warning it would not halt the conflict that has killed more than 110,000 people and displaced millions.
"Are we Syrians supposed to wait until mid-2014, to continue being killed every day and to accept [the deal] just because the chemical arms will be destroyed in 2014?" Free Syrian Army chief General Selim Idriss said.
On the streets of Damascus, there was a flicker of hope that the end of the devastating 30-month conflict may be in sight.
"We have more hope now, after this agreement. We might be able to see an end to terrorism and the troubles that we've had no part in creating," beauty salon owner Muna Ibo said.
"I hope Syria recovers, that we can go back to work and just keep on living."
Damascus resident Wassim al-Sharif said the agreement was a "good solution" for the country.
"We lived in peace until this crisis. I used to live in the Palestinian Yarmuk camp, which is now completely destroyed," he said.
"My family is scattered across the city and I live in a hotel.
"It's really awful when there's no hope left."
The United Nations will this week release an inspectors' report into the attack.
UN chief Ban Ki-moon has accused Mr Assad of multiple crimes against humanity and said the report would provide "overwhelming" confirmation chemical weapons were used.