It's total shutdown in Seemandhra
VIJAYAWADA/VISAKHAPATNAM: Normal life came to a grinding halt in all the 13 districts of Seemandhra with people voluntarily observing a complete shutdown in protest against the Union cabinet's decision to create Telangana . The bandh was marred by sporadic incidents of attacks on private vehicles, Congress offices, railway stations and a couple of other government properties in some districts. Traffic between southern and northern parts of India was badly hit as Samaikyandhra protesters squatted on national highways, burnt tyres on arterial roads and prevented movement of vehicles on Chennai-Kolkata, Machilipatnam-Pune, Kondapalli-Jagdalpur, Bangalore-Hyderabad, and Tirupati-Chennai highways. Many private vehicles, especially two-wheelers were set on fire by protesters in Vijayawada, Vizianagaram and Anantapur. All government and private offices, petrol bunks, banks, educational institutions, ATMs, and cinema halls remained closed for the day. While the APNGO Association has called for a two-day bandh, the YSRCP announced that it will shutdown Seemandhra for 72 hours. Power generation at Vijayawada thermal power station was affected as employees refused to attend to duties and did not allow any technical snags to be rectified. Tension mounted in Visakhapatnam, Vijayawada, and Anantapur as activists of TDP and YSRCP clashed with each other in a bid to woo the public. Protests have been going on in Seemandhra region for the past two months causing heavy loss to the state exchequer. Congress offices were attacked at Dhone in Kurnool district and Kakinada in East Godavari district. In Tirupati the agitators stopped power supply to the residence of local MP Chinta Mohan. Pilgrims suffered in Tirupati as RTC buses and private vehicles were stopped between Tirupati and Tirumala. The bandh is likely to cast a shadow on the Brahmotsavams in Tirumala and Dasara festivities at Sri Kanakadurga temple in Vijayawada. With the protesters staging rasta rokos separately on highways, the vehicular movement on the national highways was badly hit. According to reports, national highways were blocked in Vijayawada, Guntur, Ongole, Nellore, Rajahmundry, Eluru, Visakhapatnam, Kurnool, Kadapa, Anantapur, and Srikakulam. Private vehicles, which have been shuttling between district headquarters ever since APSRTC buses went off roads about 50 days ago, joined the agitation as well. Chaos prevailed at government hospitals as doctors joined the strike. Doctors in many places refused to attend to outpatient services. Tension prevailed in Tenali when local TDP activists made a vain bid to barge into assembly speaker Nadendla Manohar's residence. Police caned and dispersed the agitators. Meanwhile, CRPF personnel chased protesters when they entered the ONGC drilling site near Chakalipalem in East Godavari district. In Chittoor, activists attacked the buses of Diwakar travels owned by Congress legislator JC Diwakar Reddy. In Guntur TDP activists attacked district Congress party office and broke windowpanes. TDP activists staged dharna in front of the residence of agriculture minister Kanna Lakshminarayana in Guntur demanding his resignation.