U.S. suspends significant military aid to Egypt
"The United States wants to see Egypt succeed, and we believe the U.S.-Egypt partnership will be strongest when Egypt is represented by an inclusive, democratically elected civilian government based on the rule of law, fundamental freedoms and an open and competitive economy," she said.
Nabil Fahmy said Egypt will hold elections in the spring. He also argued that the political process is open to all "as long as they are committed to the renunciation of violence and terrorism and acts of incitement to them."
"We will continue to review the decisions regarding our assistance periodically and will continue to work with the interim government to help it move toward our shared goals in an atmosphere free of violence and intimidation," Psaki said.
"Before sales resume, Egyptian authorities must investigate and prosecute those responsible for recent incidents of excessive force. Otherwise, the Obama administration will be giving a 'get out of jail free' card to those who have violently suppressed peaceful protestors," he said.
"Immediately, probably, the Egyptian government is going to find it's going to gain somewhat in terms of local public opinion," Wedeman said. "Egyptians I've already been in touch with about this decision or announcement from the United States that it's going to cut aid seem to react positively. There seems to be a lot of frustration with the United States, given its role in Egypt over the last two-and-a-half years since the revolution."
"For the Egyptian government, a cutoff in U.S. aid is symbolically significant, but in terms of the actual amount of money they're getting, it will not make a big difference," he said.
Wedeman said Gulf states have been pouring billions into Egypt since Morsy's ouster. A move to cut off aid would likely anger those allies who have urged the United States to support the military and warned against stopping assistance.
"Rather than encourage reconciliation and restore democracy as it promised, the Egyptian military has reinstituted martial law and cracked down on the Islamic opposition, which has also used violence," he said in a statement. "The administration is trying to have it both ways, by suspending some aid but continuing other aid. By doing that, the message is muddled. If they want to continue aid to the Egyptian government they should ask Congress for a waiver."