The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons wins Nobel Peace Prize
The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which is overseeing the destruction's of Syria's arsenal, has won this year's prestigious Nobel Peace Prize.
Set up in 1997 to enforce a convention to eliminate chemicals weapons worldwide, the OPCW's mission gained critical importance this year after a sarin gas strike in the suburbs of Damascus killed more than 1,400 people in August.
"Since (1997), OPCW has through inspections, destruction be and other means sought the implementation of the convention - 189 states have acceded to the convention to date," said Thorbjorn Jagland, chairman of the Nobel Peace Prize Committee.
"The conventions are the work of OPCW and define the use of chemical weapons as a taboo under international law.
"Recent events in Syria, where chemical weapons have again been put to use, have underlined the need to enhance the efforts to do away with such weapons."
After making some unexpected choices in recent years, including US president Barack Obama in 2009 and the crisis-hit European Union last year, some observers said the Nobel Committee could have pulled a surprise out of its hat.
The favourites to take the top prize were Pakistani schoolgirl Malala Yousafzai, as well as Denis Mukwege, a doctor from the Democratic Republic of Congo, who has been mooted as a possible laureate many times.
But Mr Jagland said the prize was not awarded to the OPCW because of Syria.
"... but because of its long-standing efforts to eliminate chemical weapons and that we are now about to reach the goal to do away with a whole category of weapons of mass destruction," he said.
"That would be a great event in history if we can achieve this. That's why we're highlighting this and giving a message to all those who have not ratified the convention and to those who have not honoured their obligations under the convention.
"This is not about Syria. Of course, Syria has highlighted the terrible role of these weapons once again, unfortunately."
Mr Jagland says a number of states, including the US and Russia, have not destroyed their chemical weapons.
Facing the threat of a US military strike, Syrian president Bashar al-Assad eventually agreed to destroy Syria's sizeable chemical weapons program and allow in OPCW inspectors.
Experts believe Syria has roughly 1,000 tonnes of sarin, mustard and VX nerve gas, some of it stored as bulk raw chemicals and some of it already loaded onto missiles, warheads or rockets.
Under a Russian-US deal struck last month, Syria must render useless all production facilities and weapons-filling equipment by November, a process begun over the past several weeks.
The OPCW said Syria was cooperating and it could eliminate its chemical weapons by mid-2014, provided they received support from all sides in its civil war.
The Nobel Prize consists of a gold medal, a diploma and a prize sum of eight million Swedish kronor ($1.2 million) to be shared if there is more than one laureate.
The prize will be presented in Oslo on December 10, the anniversary of the death of Swedish industrialist Alfred Nobel, who founded the awards in his 1895 will.
Meanwhile, hopes that pioneering Congolese doctor Denis Mukwege would finally win the Nobel Peace Prize were dashed Friday, provoking disappointment and frustration at the rape victims' hospital he founded.
Expectations in the Democratic Republic of Congo had been high in the run-up, with Dr Mukwege second favourite behind Malala in the betting odds.
"It's really disappointing," said Ephrem Bisimwa, the hospital's public relations manager in Panzi near Bukavu, the chief town in the unstable South Kivu province.
Dr Mukwege has set up a hospital and foundation to help the tens of thousands of women raped by local and foreign militiamen, as well as regular soldiers in the army.
Every year, the hospital's main programme for victims of sexual violence takes in over 3,500 women and provides them with reconstructive surgery.
"We really thought this year we were in a strong position," said Mr Bisimwa after the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to the Hague-based Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
"At the beginning we thought of getting everyone together in a big room so we could all hear the announcement. But luckily we didn't do it because a lot of traumatised women would not have been able to take the news," Mr Bisimwa said.
Dr Mukwege, currently in the United States, was more upbeat in his message on Twitter following the news.
"Thanks to all of you who have supported our work recently. The struggle to end sexual violence in conflict and peacetime continues."