Romania IMF Accord Frozen Over Political Dispute on Fuel Tax
The International Monetary Fund and European Union put an aid agreement with Romania on hold after the country’s president refused to approve a review of the deal in a dispute over a fuel tax, Prime Minister Victor Ponta said.
The Washington-based lender’s board canceled a debate this month on Romania’s progress under its precautionary financing accord and said the government still needed to sign off on fiscal policies needed to meet its commitments under the deal. Romania can’t send documents needed to conclude its part without an endorsement from President Traian Basescu, Ponta told reporters in Bucharest today.
The second-poorest European Union state agreed on a 4 billion-euro ($5.4 billion) loan this year equally split between the IMF and the EU to shield itself against market shocks and help reduce debt financing costs. The government has drawn up next year’s budget under the lender’s guidance, targeting a deficit of 2.2 percent of economic output. It includes a plan to add a 7 eurocent tax on each liter of fuel, which Basescu rejects.
“Because this is an international accord we need the president’s endorsement, and this accord will be suspended until he signs the documents,” Ponta said. “We have the ability to keep things under control from a budgetary point of view, and we will surpass this crisis too.”
The leu fell 0.5 percent to the lowest in two months at 4.4637 per euro at 4:15 p.m. in Bucharest today. The yield on Romania’s 2020 euro-denominated bonds rose three basis points, or 0.03 percentage point, to 4.09 percent, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. The cost of insuring Romanian debt against non-payment for five years with credit-default swaps rose seven basis points to 189, the highest since Oct. 14.
Basescu said on Nov. 25 he may reject the 2014 budget, which parliament started debating today, because of the fuel tax. His refusal to sign off on the IMF deal won’t be an issue because Romania doesn’t need the funds and the tax can be discussed at a review mission in January, he said yesterday.
“An additional excise on fuel prices would only hurt consumption and the economic recovery,” Basescu said yesterday.
Romania’s two biggest political figures clashed last year when Ponta’s ruling Social Democratic Party pushed through a vote suspending Basescu from the presidency for almost two months, drawing criticism from Romania’s EU peers. The row pushed the leu to record lows and sent borrowing costs higher. Romania is scheduled to hold presidential and European Parliament elections next year.
“Since Romania’s accord is not immediately threatened by the current stand-off, this is a false crisis that could escalate if politicians decide to continue the stand-off,” Dan Bucsa, an economist at UniCredit Bank AG in London, said in a research report today.
Romania reached a staff-level agreement with the IMF on the first review of its third loan accord since 2009 last month and pledged to continue with state asset sales and maintaining fiscal rigor to unlock a tranche of 194.7 million Special Drawing Rights ($298 million), according to Andrea Schaechter, the lender’s mission chief to the country.
The IMF “is monitoring developments and is awaiting a decision by the authorities on whether they wish to modify the policies needed to secure the agreed deficit target,” the Fund said in an e-mailed statement today.
Romania needs to follow through on fiscal and economic recommendations whether or not it proceeds with the IMF deal, European Union spokesman Simon O’Connor said today in Brussels.
The country stopped relying on funds from the lenders in 2010 and secured two precautionary deals as anchors for fiscal policies. Ponta said he sees no direct effect from the suspension of the accord and the government is “watching for effects on the exchange rate and on borrowing costs.”
Analysts at Raiffeisen Bank Romania SA said a drawn-out dispute could begin to hurt the Black Sea state’s image in the eyes of investors,
“Disagreements between the president and the government on policies to be pursued might start to receive more importance on the part of investors given their impact on the accord with the IMF which is seen as anchor of credibility by foreign investors,” the analysts, including Ionut Dumitru, said in a note to clients today.