State news: American Merrill Newman 'deported' from North Korea
A senior Obama administration official said soon after the North Korean announcement that U.S. authorities have Newman "in hand." State Department spokeswoman Marie Harf subsequently tweeted that U.S. Embassy officials met "Newman at the airport in Beijing and provided all appropriate consular assistance." Video showed him smiling as he walked past a cavalcade of reporters through the Chinese capital's airport.
"Taking into consideration his admittance of the act committed by him on the basis of his wrong understanding (and the) apology made by him for it, his sincere repentance of it and his advanced age and health condition, the above-said institution deported him from the country from a humanitarian viewpoint," the official North Korean report added.
"We welcome the DPRK's decision to release him. This positive decision by the DPRK throws into sharper relief the continuing detention of ... Bae," she added. "... We call on the DPRK once again to pardon and grant Mr. Bae special amnesty and immediately release him as a humanitarian gesture so that he too can return home to his family."
Coincidence or not, the news of Newman's release came on the day that Vice President Joe Biden was in South Korea, where he was to lay a wreath at a memorial for veterans of the war that pitted North Korea against its southern neighbor as well as the United States.
Biden told reporters in South Korea that he "played no direct role" in the release. He added that his office offered to let Newman fly home with him on Air Force Two, but State Department officials said he'd take a direct commercial flight to San Francisco.
"It's a positive thing they've done," said the vice president, who talked Saturday morning by phone with Newman, according to another Obama administration official. "But they still have Mr. Bae, who has no reason being held in the North (and) should be released immediately."
"While the release of Merrill Newman is welcome news indeed, he never should have been detained in the first place. The North Koreans should also release Kenneth Bae as a humanitarian gesture," Richardson said in a statement.
According to his family, Newman went on a 10-day organized private tour of North Korea in October. From phone calls and postcards he sent, the trip was going well and there was no indication of any kind of problem, son Jeff Newman said.
Would he join Bae, an American arrested in North Korea in November 2012 who last May was sentenced to 15 years of hard labor after North Korea's government found him guilty of "hostile acts" and attempts to topple the government?
Pyongyang has long been regarded by many as a repressive state, with its insularity, sharp restrictions on speech and other freedoms, and decades of saber-rattling primarily targeting its chief foes, South Korea and the United States.
Its isolation is exacerbated by widespread uproar over its nuclear program. The East Asian nation's reported quest to create a nuclear weapon, as well as its resistance to international monitoring of its activities, have resulted in economic sanctions, compounding difficulties in getting enough energy and food for its people.
But there have been some indications of change of late. Is Newman's release signal even more of an opening by Pyongyang? Will it lead to even more of a thaw?
Still, this news affects the global political landscape, at the least it appears that the Newman family -- including Merrill's wife, Lee, who last month told CNN that "we need to have Merrill back at the head of the table for the holidays" -- should be complete once again.