Ukraine Forces Retreat, Ceding Square to Protests
There was also the chance that Mr. Yanukovich wanted to send a message to senior diplomats who were in Kiev at the time of the raid, including the European Union’s foreign policy chief, Catherine Ashton, and an American assistant secretary of state, Victoria Nuland.
Ms. Ashton, who met with protesters in Independence Square on Tuesday, and Secretary of State John Kerry both quickly issued statements rebuking the Ukrainian government for the use of force. Mr. Kerry expressed “disgust,” and in a show of support Ms. Nuland visited the square on Wednesday to distribute bread among protesters and the police alike.
Ms. Nuland later met with Mr. Yanukovich, where she said she issued stern criticism. “I made it absolutely clear to him that what happened last night, what has been happening in security terms here, is absolutely impermissible in a European state, in a democratic state,” she said, standing afterward on a street near buses of the riot police.
Reinforcing those words, a State Department spokeswoman in Washington said the United States had not ruled out sanctions, if the Ukrainian government resorted to force.
“All policy options, including sanctions are on the table, in our view, but obviously that is still being evaluated,” said the spokeswoman, Jen Psaki.
There were rumblings in Congress as well, where legislators were considering measures to deny visas to Ukrainian officials or even to freeze Ukrainian assets if the situation deteriorated.
At the same time, Ms. Nuland said she reiterated to Mr. Yanukovich the United States’ willingness to help Ukraine if it defied trade and energy threats from Moscow and signed political and economic agreements with the European Union. His decision not to sign those accords, despite promising to do so for more than a year, set off the initial protests, which gained momentum after a violent crackdown on Nov. 30.
“We also made clear that we believe there is a way out for Ukraine, that it is still possible to save Ukraine’s European future,” Ms. Nuland said. The European accords were expected to be accompanied by a rescue package from the International Monetary Fund, but Mr. Yanukovich had already rejected that aid because of the conditions attached.
Some analysts say Ukraine is expected to default on sovereign debt within two months without outside funding.
Ms. Ashton, at a news conference in Kiev on Wednesday, said that in her meeting with Mr. Yanukovich he had repeated that he wants to sign the accords, perhaps in the spring. Given the series of recent reversals, she said she had no choice but to accept his statements at face value.
Ms. Ashton said Europe, too, wanted to help Ukraine deal with its financial crisis, particularly the cash shortage that Mr. Yanukovich cited as a reason for his move to re-embrace Russia. Ms. Ashton noted that the political chaos was only making things worse.
“If your concern is short-term economic interests, what on earth do you think is happening to the economy now?” she asked. Ms. Ashton called on Mr. Yanukovich to start a dialogue with the leaders of the protest movement.
Increasingly caught between Europe and Russia, and more recently under pressure by the tens of thousands of people protesting in Kiev, Mr. Yanukovich and other officials have seemed increasingly unpredictable and have made seemingly strange statements.
The Ukrainian interior minister, Vitaliy Zakharchenko, issued a statement saying the official purpose of the raid was to open roads and improve the city’s choked traffic. “Main transportation arteries have been blocked by barricades, the necessity and appropriateness of which raise huge doubts,” he said.
After the security forces withdrew from the square, however, there was no change at all in the situation on the roads. The main road leading into Independence Square remained closed, as did a number of side streets.
Mr. Zakharchenko also said there would be no forcible dispersal of protesters from the square.
“No one infringes on citizens’ rights to peaceful protests,” he said. “But we cannot ignore the rights and legal interests of other citizens.”
He said the clearing of the streets was carried out in accordance with a court order.
Many protesters called for Mr. Zakharchenko’s dismissal after the bloody crackdown on Nov. 30. On Wednesday, although the police pushed forcefully through the crowd, they did not use their truncheons.
In yet another ambiguous move, Mr. Yanukovich revived on Wednesday the idea of a so-called round-table meeting to negotiate a resolution to the protests. It was a direct invitation by Mr. Yanukovich to political leaders, in contrast to a meeting on Tuesday that he attended though it was initiated by a former president, Leonid M. Kravchuk.
Mr. Yanukovich invited religious and cultural figures and the leaders of political parties to the planned talks. “Personally, I am willing to participate in this round table,” he said, according to a statement posted on his official website. “For the sake of compromise I urge the opposition not to give up and not to walk on the path of confrontation.”
Mr. Yanukovich also promised not to use force against the protesters.
In Independence Square, protesters spent the day rebuilding the barricades torn down by the authorities overnight. By early afternoon, a welder joined rebar into a lattice filled with nylon bags of snow; the heap was then covered with more snow, then protesters poured water on top to create a patina of ice and a slick structure that could not be dismantled with winches as happened the night before.
By evening, they stood on top of their new barrier, waving Ukrainian flags. “Our colleagues in the Interior Ministry took it apart easily yesterday so we’re building it differently,” said one young man, heaving bags of snow onto the pile.