Nelson Mandela funeral: What to expect as global icon is laid to rest
After Tuesday's vibrant, if rain-drenched, memorial service, followed by three days of public viewing of the former president's casket in Pretoria, the burial will be a slightly more private affair.
Here is how CNN expects events to unfold, based on information from the government and sources involved in planning for the funeral -- although plans may change because of weather, security and other factors.
President Jacob Zuma and other members of South Africa's ruling party, the African National Congress, gathered to bid Mandela farewell from the air force base. "We will miss him. He was our leader in a special time," said Zuma. Mandela's casket, draped in the national flag, was carried by soldiers to the plane.
Thousands of mourners lined the streets from Mthatha Airport, the closest to Qunu, as Mandela's remains were transported to the remote village where he spent much of his childhood.
The South African flag draped over the coffin will be replaced with a tribal symbolof the Xhosa people, symbolizing the return of one of their own.
At dusk, ANC leaders, local chiefs and the men in Mandela's family are expected to gather for a private night vigil, held according to the traditions of the Thembu community, his native clan, before a public funeral the next day. Villagers may gather outside the house to pay their respects.
A private family prayer service will be held Sunday morning at Mandela's home. The funeral will then be held in a huge white tent set up at the family farm.
The Mandela family, President Zuma and Cabinet members will be present as well as local and foreign dignitaries. About 4,500 people are expected.
The military will again be charged with draping Mandela's coffin with the flag. Members of the military will perform a salute, and the national anthem will be played.
A group of family and close friends, expected to number about 430, will walk up to the grave site to bid a final farewell to the man many saw as the father of their nation.
About 2 p.m. -- when the summer sun is high in the sky -- Mandela will be laid to rest in the rocky soil of his childhood home.
The burial area has been especially built for him; some of Mandela's long deceased family members are already buried at the site. It will be, according to custom, a homecoming.
His grave site is surrounded by rocky outcrops, hardy grass used for the grazing of cattle and bright orange aloe plants.
The aloes are indigenous succulents that are hardy, drought-resistant, medicinal plants that bloom across the bushveld when all else is dry and dull. They can be seen as a symbolic floral gesture to a man whose life was filled with sacrifice and tragedy but who triumphed with a tenacity of spirit and hope in even the darkest of days.
Zuma has authorized nearly 12,000 members of the South African National Defence Force to serve alongside the police force "to maintain law and order" during the funeral period, the presidency said. They are employed for 15 days, from December 6 to December 20.