Nelson Mandela: Coffin arrives in Qunu for burial
Nelson Mandela's coffin has arrived in his childhood home in Qunu in the Eastern Cape region of South Africa, the final leg of its journey.
Large numbers of people lined the roads in the rural region to pay their respects as the cortege passed by.
A state funeral will be held on Sunday for Mr Mandela, who died on 5 December.
At least 100,000 people saw the former South African president's body lying in state in Pretoria over the last three days, but some had to be turned away.
The coffin was flown from Waterkloof airbase in Pretoria on a C130 military aircraft, escorted by two fighter jets.
In line with tribal custom, Nelson Mandela's grandson Mandla accompanied him on the journey, speaking to his coffin to tell him he was on his way home to rest.
It arrived in Mthatha, 700 km (450 miles) away, shortly before 14:00 local time (12:00 GMT).
To solemn music, the coffin draped in a South African flag was moved by a military guard of honour and placed in a hearse to begin the 32km journey to Qunu, where Mr Mandela had wanted to spend his final days and where he will be buried.
People waving flags and cheering and singing - in places 10 to 12 deep - lined the route taken by the cortege through Mthatha town to pay their last respects.
Tears as well as smiles could be seen on the faces of onlookers.
"He is finally coming home to rest, I can't even begin to describe the feeling I have inside," 31-year-old Bongani Zibi told AFP news agency.
"Part of me is sad but I'm also happy that he has found peace."
However, some people expressed their frustration that the convoy did not stop, so they had no chance to view the coffin as people in Pretoria had.
"Come home Mandela, the sun has set." These were the painful wails of a woman who was part of a crowd of villagers who welcomed Nelson Mandela's coffin back to his ancestral home of Qunu. They had been waiting along the highway leading to his home all day. Women dressed in traditional Xhosa clothing danced and sang songs about Madiba, asking him to watch over them from the spirit world. One of those gathered said she believed his presence back home would bring good fortune to this modest village. But some expressed unhappiness that they would not be allowed to attend the ceremony because of a strict guest list. "How can you have a guest list for a funeral, that is unAfrican," an elderly woman told me. According to local traditions, everyone is welcome at a funeral and the more, the better. Another woman who lived a few houses away from Mr Mandela's home said she would miss his generosity. "At Christmas time Tatomkhulu (grandfather) would give us clothes for our children". "He was our Christ," she said crying. There are mixed emotions here, a sense of deep loss, punctuated by a sense of pride that a global icon was born of these simple people.
The cortege then drove through the gates of the Mandela homestead in Qunu, where it will rest overnight in the grounds of the royal house of Thembu.
The BBC's Milton Nkosi in Qunu said it was a powerful moment for the local community to see their liberator coming home.
The Thembu community will conduct a traditional Xhosa ceremony - including songs and poems about Mr Mandela's life and his achievements - in a giant white marquee that has been specially erected.
Some 4,000 people - including presidents from Africa, several prime ministers, the Iranian vice-president, and the Prince of Wales - are expected to attend.
Archbishop Desmond Tutu - a long-time friend of Nelson Mandela - has now confirmed he will attend the funeral, having earlier said he had cancelled his flight as he had not received an invitation.
The South African government had earlier said the archbishop was accredited, but that no formal invitations had been sent out.
Ahead of the flight to the Eastern Cape, members of the African National Congress paid final tributes to Nelson Mandela at a ceremony in Pretoria.
President Jacob Zuma, other ANC leaders and more than 1,000 members of the organisation which Mr Mandela once led, attended the event at the Waterkloof air base.
Mourners heard President Zuma pay his own tribute to Nelson Mandela, calling him a "towering figure", "a man of action" and a "democrat who understood the world."
"Yes, we will miss him... He was our father, he was our guardian. He was something special."
"We'll always keep you in our hearts," Mr Zuma said.