Ukraine, Russia to OK trade roadmap, Prime Minister Mykola Azarov says
Stefan Fule, European commissioner for enlargement and European neighborhood policy, said earlier Sundayon Twitter that the words and deeds of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych and his government on the proposed pact were "further & further apart. Their arguments have no grounds in reality."
Fule said he had told Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Serhiy Arbuzov in Brussels, Belgium, last week that further discussion on the agreement was conditional on a clear commitment by Kiev to sign the deal, but he had received no response.
The EU had kept its offer on the table, and the bloc's top diplomat, Catherine Ashton, on Thursday said Yanukovych had assured her Kiev intended to sign the deal after she met with him.
A day earlier, Prime Minister Mykola Azarov told a government meeting Ukraine was still open to signing the European integration deal, if the European Union would agree to provide financial assistance to Ukraine of around 20 billion euros ($27.5 billion).
"We have had no reply (on timetable) from the Ukrainian authorities and so there is no basis to continue work," the diplomat added.
Protesters say an EU agreement would open borders to trade and set the stage for modernization and inclusion. They accuse Yanukovych of preparing to take the country into a Moscow-led customs union.
Moscow has leverage that may have affected Yanukovych's decision last month to backpedal on the EU talks because Russia supplies Ukraine with natural gas.
The EU is also pressuring Yanukovych to free his chief political opponent, Yulia Tymoshenko, who has languished in jail for two years after being convicted of abuse of power in 2011. The EU and other critics decried the verdict as a sham.
In an overnight crackdown last week, police tore down barricades the protesters had set up. Before that, violence had broken out at a previous demonstration.
The case will be put before a judge on Monday, who could order house arrest for those being investigated, said Valery Vilkova, spokeswoman for the general prosecutor.