Anti-government protests continue in Thailand, as PM Yingluck Shinawatra refuses to step down
Anti-government demonstrations in Thailand continue into a third day, with protesters vowing not to quit until the Thai Government steps aside.
The protests have been largely peaceful, although it is more dangerous at night - on Tuesday evening gunshots rang out in the heart of the capital and two people were wounded.
A small explosive was also hurled at the home of former Prime Minister and Opposition Democrat party Leader Abhisit Vejjajia, where some damage was caused but no one was hurt.
The so-called 'Bangkok shutdown' is now entering its third day, with protest leader Suthep Thaugsuban planning to target more government buildings and the prime minister's home.
"The two incidents are a signal that the people's revolution has almost succeeded," he said.
Deputy Prime Minister Pongthep Thepkanchana says he believes support for the protesters is fading.
"We believe the election will bring the situation back to normal," he said.
"We can see that the support of Mr. Suthep is declining - when he is doing something against the law, most people do not support that."
Ms Yingluck has confirmed a general election will be held as planned on February 2, after a meeting to discuss an Election Commission proposal to postpone it.
"If people don't want this government they should go out and vote," she said.
Mr Suthep has threatened to detain the prime minister and cabinet members if they do not step down, and has repeatedly said he is not interested in any election.
He wants the government to be replaced by an unelected "people's council" that will change the electoral system as part of reforms that will weaken the power of the Shinawatra family.
A national security advisor to the Thai government, Sean Boonpracong, told Radio Australia's Asia Pacific program Prime Minister Yingluck is continuing to try and understand the demands of protesters, get them involved in a talks process and exercise restraint.
"She probably would maintain this international approach to this type of protests and will not ramp up any type of more severe measures," he said.
"She wants to make sure that there's plenty of restraint and you have to give credit to the police, even if they 'lose' a little bit, but for the protests in the longer duration, it won't be solving any situation."
Many schools continue to be closed as a precaution in case of trouble.
But shops and most private offices are open, even though many shoppers and commuters appear to be avoiding the city centre for now.
The government has deployed 10,000 police to maintain law and order, along with 8,000 soldiers at government offices.