Ukrainian Prime Minister Resigns as Parliament Repeals Restrictive Laws
Mr. Azarov has been a staunch ally of Mr. Yanukovych throughout the two months of protests roiling Ukraine. But neither his resignation nor the repeal of the restrictive legislation, which the opposition calls the “dictatorship laws,” was seen as likely to appease the protesters.
The concessions would, though, pressure the parliamentary opposition leaders associated with the protest to answer with a de-escalation of their own, and potentially highlight their growing irrelevance if they are unable to deliver.
Multiple right-wing factions, splinter groups and newly formed associations are now active on the street without organized leadership and are not answering to the political parties.
In Independence Square, the central plaza that has been occupied since November by demonstrators, their tents, field kitchens and a stage, reactions to Tuesday’s developments were mixed.
One older woman in a kerchief giddily told the Ukrainian Channel 5 television network after Mr. Azarov’s resignation, “Thank God you heard us!”
But a young man wearing a metal helmet told the television station, “It’s not a victory yet.”
In a statement, Mr. Azarov wrote that he was resigning “for the sake of a peaceful resolution” to the civil unrest, which escalated sharply last week with the deaths of five protesters. Demonstrators occupied provincial administration buildings in at least 10 regions, sending the police fleeing through rear exits in some instances. One policeman was shot to death on a street in Kiev far from the protest site; a nationalist group calling itself the Ukrainian Partisan Army claimed responsibility in a Facebook post.
The relentless pressure on the riot police eased Tuesday in Kiev, the national capital, and provincial capitals. No new buildings were stormed, and a weeklong confrontation on a street in Kiev that is a few hundred yards from the Parliament building was mostly quiet. Protesters warmed themselves beside bonfires, and throughout the occupied center of the city they cheerily scooped fresh snow into nylon bags to heave onto already towering barricades, building them ever higher.
In Odessa, the authorities used a crane to lower concrete blocks onto a wall in front of the regional administration building, to prevent its storming. A similar wall of rough-hewed concrete blocks went up on a street in the government district in Kiev, a new tactic by the riot police.
Columns of buses escorted by police cars and special trains traveling on schedules not advertised in advance arrived in Kiev on Tuesday carrying government supporters from eastern and southern regions of Ukraine for a large pro-government rally.
In the ranks of the radical opposition, empowered now by its survival through a week of fierce street fighting with the police and security services in which scores of people were wounded and arrested, few believed that Mr. Azarov’s resignation was voluntary.
Oleg Tyagnibok, the leader of the nationalist Svoboda party, said Mr. Azarov had been forced out to avoid the no-confidence vote in Parliament. “It’s clear they are looking for ways to avoid responsibility,” he said.
Mr. Yanukovych had previously signaled that he would be willing to dismiss Mr. Azarov, and over the weekend he offered the prime ministership to the parliamentary leader of the opposition Fatherland party, Arseniy P. Yatsenyuk, who declined the offer.
In the morning session of Parliament, lawmakers on Tuesday repealed nine of the 12 restrictive laws that had been passed on Jan. 16 by a show of hands, without debate. Outrage at the limits the laws imposed on free speech and assembly in the country set off the violence on Jan. 19. The repeal vote on Tuesday was conducted more formally, with 361 votes recorded in favor of repeal in the 450-seat chamber.
Ukrainian journalists covering the session rose during a televised news conference with the leader of the Party of Regions faction, Oleksandr Yefremov, and then stood behind him to hold photographs of the swollen and bloody faces of reporter colleagues beaten by the riot police during the fighting. Channel 5 television reported that 42 journalists had been injured.
In a compromise, members of Parliament, including those from opposition parties, also voted to approve more limited versions of some of the repealed restrictions. For example, a provision to make destroying monuments a criminal offense was reinstated, but with the specification that it covered only monuments to fighters against fascism, like the World War II statues that are ubiquitous in Ukraine.
It no longer applies to statues of Lenin, like the one toppled by protesters in Kiev in December; the Svoboda party has called for the dismantling of all of Ukraine’s Lenin statues.