Thailand unrest: Gunfire breaks out between protesters in Bangkok, country tense ahead of vote
Thai government supporters and opposition protesters have opened fire on each other on the streets of Bangkok, as tension builds across Thailand ahead of today's general election.
The violence began on Saturday during clashes in the Laksi district of Bangkok's north after government supporters marched on a polling station occupied by anti-government groups.
Both sides fired pistols and machine guns and there were numerous loud explosions.
Six people were wounded in front of a suburban shopping mall, while gunmen among the crowds were seen hiding their weapons before backing away from the shooting.
Sporadic gunfire continued as the sun began to set, with masked men openly firing handguns.
Security forces fired warning shots in the air with M-16s to allow at least a dozen protesters taking cover under an elevated highway to escape.
"Authorities were able to control today's clashes quickly and the situation has improved now," national security council chief Paradorn Pattantabutr said.
It was not immediately clear whether those wounded were the government's supporters or its opponents.
ABC journalist Norman Hermant was forced to take cover during the gunfire.
The government's decision to press ahead with the election has riled protesters and inflamed tension in Bangkok where demonstrators are in their third week of an occupation of several main intersections.
Ten people have died and at least 577 have been wounded in politically-related violence since late November, according to the Erawan Medical Centre, which monitors Bangkok hospitals.
Thailand's anti-government protesters have sought to block ballot boxes being distributed in several parts of the country.
Police tried to separate the demonstrators from a group of around 200 government supporters - some of whom were armed with sticks and metal bars - as tensions rose in the capital, which has seen several outbreaks of violence since the protests began.
"The government is corrupt," an opposition protester named Sirames said at the Laksi district office in northern Bangkok.
"If we let the vote go on then they will come back, so we should not hold the election."
He said the group planned to block roads around the building until voting ends on Sunday afternoon.
The Election Commission's secretary-general, Puchong Nutrawong, said preparations were "almost 100 per cent ready" in the north, north-east and central provinces.
But he added that there have been problems getting ballots to districts in Bangkok, as well as 12 provinces in the south, where demonstrators had blocked delivery.
The commission has instructed staff to halt voting if there is rioting or violence.
"We don't want this election to be bloody," Mr Puchong said.
"We can get every single agency involved to make this election happen, but if there's blood, what's the point?
"If there is continued obstruction, I pray only that there is no fighting and no coup."
Protest leader Suthep Thaugsuban has vowed not to stop people from voting, while calling for a peaceful blockade of roads in the city.
"The people will not close the polling booths," he said.
"If anyone comes to try to cause trouble, we absolutely will not argue with them. We won't do anything that will hinder people from going to vote."
Mr Suthep said protesters should not fight voters.
"In the south, for those who are surrounding the places where ballots are being collected, surround them as usual, but I ask that you sit there peacefully," he said.
"Don't back down, don't run away, and do not fight them, just pray.
"I believe that this poll will be voided for sure."
More than 93,000 polling stations will be set up around the country.
Thailand's authorities said they could close polling booths if violence takes place.
The government has vowed to push ahead with the general election despite threats by anti-government protesters who have camped out at major intersections in Bangkok.
The main opposition Democrat party, which backs the anti-government protests, is boycotting the election, which prime minister Yingluck Shinawatra's party is expected to win but without enough members to achieve a quorum in parliament.
Anti-government protesters are demanding Ms Yingluck's elected government step down to make way for an unelected "people's council" that would oversee reforms to tackle corruption and alleged vote-buying.