Vladimir Putin backs Egypt army chief Abdulfattah al-Sisi for president
Russia’s President Vladimir Putin has made a startling intervention in Egypt’s political turmoil by backing its defence minister for the presidency, before an election has even been declared.
Whether the minister, the newly promoted Field Marshal Abdulfattah el-Sisi, will stand for president in elections scheduled for later this year is the biggest talking point in Egyptian politics, with elements of a personality cult already forming around him.
His aides have consistently denied reports that he has already made a decision, but Mr Putin chose to ignore that while welcoming him on a visit to Moscow.
“I know that you have made a decision to run for president,” Mr Putin said. “That’s a very responsible decision: to undertake such a mission for the fate of the Egyptian people. On my own part, and on behalf of the Russian people, I wish you success.”
Field Marshal Sisi’s visit to Russia was already being watched closely for clues as to whether the two countries were seeking to renew a military and strategic alliance that was ended by the former President Anwar Sadat 40 years ago.
Since then, Egypt has been firmly in the American orbit, but criticism in Washington of the then General Sisi’s decision last July to oust the Muslim Brotherhood president, Mohammed Morsi, and of the subsequent shooting dead of hundreds of protesters, has enraged the military and its supporters.
Russia is keen to take at least superficial advantage of America’s current unpopularity, and well-placed leaks to Russian media have indicated the two sides are negotiating $2 billion (£1.2 billion) in arms sales, including the S-300 air defence system.
However, the deal has been discussed for some months now without any firm commitment, and would have to be paid for out of the billions of dollars currently being supplied to keep the Egyptian government solvent by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, which both strongly backed Gen Sisi’s coup.
Saudi Arabia is currently furious with President Barack Obama for his failure to intervene more strongly against the Assad regime in Syria and his gradual rapprochement with Riyadh’s strategic foe, Iran.
However, whether that anger would extend to approving a real realignment of Egypt’s position with that of Russia, the closest ally of both Syria and Iran outside the Middle East, is another matter.
Nabil Fahmy, the Egyptian foreign minister, who is accompanying Field Marshal Sisi on his trip to Moscow, his first overseas since the coup, has insisted that Egypt is just “broadening” its diplomatic scope.
The Egyptian rapprochement with Russia does make clear the very differing approaches to the “Arab Spring” taken by Moscow and Washington. Mr Putin has all along seen it as a threat - both to the autocratic rule pursued by many key Russian allies and, increasingly, within Russia itself, and as an opportunity for the strengthening of militant Islamist movements.
America has preferred to see it as an awakening of democratic politics as a result of which moderate Islamism can be strengthened in the face of the militants. By attempting to crush the Muslim Brotherhood, Field Marshal Sisi has put himself firmly in the camp of Moscow - as well as of Riyadh and the Gulf Sunni states which have pursued similar if less bloody crackdowns against Islamist movements, including entirely peaceful ones.
“A stable situation in the whole of the Middle East largely depends on stability in Egypt,” Mr Putin also said. “I am convinced that you with your vast experience will be able to both mobilise your supporters and normalise relations with all sections of Egyptian society.”
Most Egyptians expect Field Marshal Sisi to stand for the presidency and win, bolstered by an unstoppable tide of support in the state-backed media and privately-owned television stations, and by street campaigns mounted by pro-military activists. These have also mobilised remnants of the Mubarak regime, who had previously languished in disgrace since the revolution of 2011.
However, it is unusual for a candidate to be so publicly backed by a foreign country, particularly when he has not even announced his candidature.
Mr Putin’s stance seemed also to contradict the official communique issued after the visit, which “condemned foreign interference in domestic affairs of any country”, a regular diplomatic dig at American concern over human rights in other nations.