Troy Buswell suffers ‘mental breakdown’ after drunken crash - quits Cabinet
TREASURER Troy Buswell, 47, has suffered a mental health breakdown and has resigned from the WA Cabinet, effectively ending his political career.
Premier Colin Barnett yesterday faced an extraordinary press conference, revealing the Treasurer has suffered a “mental health’’ breakdown and had been admitted to hospital in Perth and then Sydney, where he remained for about 10 days.
Mr Barnett says Mr Buswell called him at home on Sunday afternoon to advise him of his decision to resign immediately as a Cabinet Minister.
The Premier said Mr Buswell had crashed his ministerial car into the front fence of his Subiaco home in the early hours of February 23.
JOE SPAGNOLO: ‘See no evil’ method not good enough
OPPOSITION: Mark McGowan calls for ‘immediate’ release of police records
A witness who called police over Mr Buswell’s driving said he had to stop his vehicle to avoid being struck by Mr Buswell’s white Holden Caprice on Roberts Road.
The witness said Mr Buswell then crashed into the front fence of his home and spun the car’s tyres before managing to park in the driveway.
Mr Buswell was reportedly returning from a wedding reception at Kings Park.
Police have not charged him with any offences but began taking photos of the damaged car and fence this morning - more than a fortnight after the accident.
Police Commissioner Karl O’Callaghan said he had also asked police to speak to the witness who first called in the “erratic driving’’ report.
There was no chance of a drink-driving charge, given that it was now three weeks past the incident, he said.
The Police Commissioner said two officers went to Mr Buswell’s house, but had no information who the car or house belonged to.
The house was in darkness and they did not speak to the former Treasurer.
Mr O’Callaghan said the car was registered to the Office of State Aministration, not in Mr Buswell’s name.
Mr Barnett said Mr Buswell’s chief-of-staff informed him on February 24 that he had suffered a breakdown, but the premier’s first knowledge of ``anything to do with erratic driving’’ was on Sunday afternoon.
Last week, when reporters noticed Mr Buswell was absent from cabinet, the Premier said he was on personal leave for health reasons and asked for his privacy to be respected.
``Troy had had a breakdown and asked to keep that private, which I did,’’ Mr Barnett said.
``I knew Troy had been out the night before.
``I was not prying into the particulars.
``My concern was about his care and welfare.’’
He said Mr Buswell had been in hospital in Perth as well as a clinic in Sydney, and remains under medical care.
``He is not in a good place,’’ Mr Barnett said.
``It was later in that first week when he was admitted to hospital that it was more serious.
``It is a very sad day, and a sad situation he found himself in.’’
Mr Barnett said he didn’t regret standing by Mr Buswell during his many controversies over the years.
``Troy has had a turbulent career - tragically maybe it all became too much.
``People in high profile positions are vulnerable, under scrutiny continuously, and if someone is prone to depression, it might bring it on.
``He is a brilliant person, (he has) an enormous capacity for work. Unfortunately, he’s also got a serious health issue.’’
Mr Barnett said Mr Buswell had no excuse or explanation for the accident, and very little recollection of it.
He was very remorseful.
``I think he feels like he has let me down - I don’t think that. I don’t see it that way,’’ the Premier said.
Mr Barnett is temporarily taking on Mr Buswell’s roles as treasurer and transport minister, and does not yet know who will deliver the state budget in May.
He’ll remain the MP for Vasse and it’s uncertain whether he’ll stay in politics.
A permanent replacement is expected to be announced later this week.
This afternoon, Opposition Leader Mark McGowan said all police records surrounding Mr Buswell’s driving incident should be released immediately.
Mr McGowan said it would “help clear the air” over the February 23 incident in which Mr Buswell was seen driving erratically before crashing into his fence.
At a press conference this afternoon Mr McGowan said he wished Mr Buswell and his family “all the best” with regards to his health.
But Mr McGowan used the majority of his press conference to ram home his view the State Government had further explaining to do on the matter and that all police records pertaining to the Subiaco incident should be released.
Police have not charged Mr Buswell with any offence but were at his Subiaco house taking photos of the damaged car and fence yesterday morning, more than a fortnight after the accident.
The day’s drama followed media reports that Mr Buswell — also WA’s Transport Minister — had crashed his car in the early hours of Sunday, February 23, after being at a wedding, where he was seen drinking throughout the evening.
The wedding was at Kings Park, just a short drive from Mr Buswell’s Subiaco home.
The Treasurer went on personal leave the day after the reported crash, which happened in Subiaco near Mr Buswell’s home.
Cabinet members, including Police Minister Liza Harvey, Attorney General Michael Mischin, Helen Morton and Kim Hames, arrived at the Premier’s Hale House, West Perth office, to a flurry of questions from a waiting media pack.
All declined to answer questions as they went into the building.
But Troy Buswell’s long-time friend Education Minister Peter Collier said: “I found out about it last night . . . a friendship is not a part time commodity . . . Troy is my friend.”
Corrective Services Minister Joe Francis said: “ I’m not going to comment on something I don’t know anything about.’
At 1.28am the following day a member of the public called police to report that a white Holden Caprice was being driven erratically on Roberts Road, Subiaco, near Patersons Stadium.
The person who rang police also contacted several media organisations, saying Mr Buswell’s driving forced him to stop to avoid a collision.
The Caprice had earlier been seen obstructing the left lane of Roberts Road, sitting perpendicular to the kerb.
The witness said the Caprice, believed to be Mr Buswell’s Ministerial car, then veered across from the left to the right lane nearly colliding with parked cars.
It then pulled into Mr Buswell’s Roberts Road driveway, where it allegedly hit a metal fence.
Police confirmed they were called to a traffic incident in Subiaco in the early hours of February 23.
Following Mr Buswell’s absence from work on the Monday following the crash, Premier Colin Barnett made a statement last week declaring Mr Buswell had taken three weeks personal leave for a “health related issue’’ and would be back at work at the end of this week.
He asked that Mr Buswell be given privacy to deal with his “health’’ issue.
Last week on radio he commented further that the Treasurer was doing well and would definitely return to work and would more than likely reveal what was wrong.
“Well I’ve been aware of Troy’s condition for some time and I expect him to return to work in a week’s time,” Mr Barnett told ABC radio last week.
“He will be fine. But he has asked for some privacy so I am going to give him that privacy. As I said publicly, it’s a health-related issue.
“I expect him back in a week’s time and I’m sure Troy will say what was wrong with him then.”
Mr Buswell’s time in WA politics has been marred by controversy, having been forced to resign as Opposition leader in 2008 over the infamous chair-sniffing incident, when he admitted sniffing the chair of a female colleague.
In February this year he settled the defamation case with former lover and ex-Greens MP Adele Carles over claims she made in the media alleging inappropriate behaviour from Mr Buswell at a party.
Mr Buswell’s absence comes at a critical time for the State Government with the May budget looming, at a time when WA is desperate to regain its AAA rating.
The Premier is acting as Treasurer and Transport Minister while Mr Buswell is on leave.
January 2008: Mr Buswell admits to and apologises for an incident the previous year where he snapped the elastic bra strap of a Labor staffer.
April 2008: Mr Buswell admits he sniffed the chair of a Liberal staffer in 2005.
April 2010:Mr Buswell admits to having an affair with then Fremantle Greens MP Adele Carles. He later apologises over the affair resigns as treasurer.
February 2011:Mr Buswell, as transport minister, admits to clocking up nine speeding fines in three years.
December 2012: Mr Buswell is accused by Adele Carles of alleged inappropriate behaviour at a Christmas party the year before. Mr Buswell sues Ms Carles over the allegations but the case is later dealt with via an out-of-court settlement.
March 2014: Mr Buswell takes immediate personal leave for “health related” reasons. Reports then emerge Buswell was involved in a late-night car crash the night before he took leave.
Anyone experiencing distress can contact Lifeline’s crisis support line on 131 114.