Burma clears way for international observers for elections
Its invitation was welcomed by Western officials and leaders of Aung San Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy who voiced hope that their presence may guarantee a free and fair election.
Both William Hague, the foreign secretary, and Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, have identified free and fair elections as a key requirement for sanctions against Burma to be lifted.
When Mr Hague visited the country in January he hailed the fast pace of democratic reforms by President Thein Sein since they began last August and urged him to release all political prisoners, end military conflicts with ethnic minority groups and allow access for humanitarian aid, and guarantee free and fair elections in a series of by-elections to be held on April 1st.
He indicated that EU sanctions could be lifted later next month if it met the conditions.
Since then 651 political prisoners have been released, successful talks have been held with several armed minority groups, and campaigning is well under way in by-election contests for 48 constituencies.
Opposition leaders and diplomats remain concerned however over reports of continuing human rights abuses in the Kachin Christian minority areas where fighting continues, and of threats and intimidation by officials in some by-election constituencies.
U Nyan Win, spokesman for Aung San Suu Kyi, said he welcomed the invitation to international observers from the US, EU and the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and hoped it would ease their concerns of potential irregularities on polling day.
"We are afraid and concerned about it. We want it to be free and fair, that's what we are trying to get. There have been no restrictions on my campaign so far," he said.
His outspoken colleague on the NLD's executive committee, the veteran democracy campaigner Win Tin, however said the campaign so far had not been free and fair.
"There are many places where there have been threats and intimidation by officials, where voting lists are incorrect, people missing, many irregularities. We have many difficulties caused by officials and we hope they will change their attitude pretty soon because the ASEAN and EU observers will arrive. We hope the situation will better within two days," he told The Daily Telegraph.
Western officials remain concerned that the Burmese government has yet to meet its demand for humanitarian access to areas where its army has been fighting armed ethnic groups, particularly in areas controlled by the Kachin Independence Organisation.
The government has reached accords with many rebel ethnic groups, but talks with the KIO are said to be "deadlocked". Officials said since Mr Hague's visit only two United Nations relief trucks have been allowed into the area and further aid has been halted by unreasonable government demands.
NLD leader Aung San Suu Kyi is standing for election from a consitutency on the outskirts of Rangoon for the first time since her party swept the 1990 general election but was prevented from taking power by the ruling junta.
These by-elections could see her party return as a significant minority in the Burmese parliament.