Seoul's defense ministry is sure 3 drones came from North Korea
Either way, South Korean defense officials said on Friday they were sure that they came from North Korea and that they were up to no good.
Three diminutive single-engine unmanned propeller planes that look like they could have come from a hobby shop were found on the ground in March and April in parts of the South near the border with the northern Communist regime.
Ministry of National Defense officials in Seoul immediately suspected that the sky-blue colored fliers belonged to Pyongyang. They formed an investigation team with the United States in mid-April to analyze the "travel log file" and photos taken by the drones and announced the results on Friday.
Japanese-made digital cameras, which look like they could be of the consumer variety, were inserted into the bellies of the drones and had taken aerial photos of the South from around the border region.
All three were programmed to fly over military facilities, and two of them had images of targets of military interest -- strategically important islands near the demilitarized zone, and the Blue House, residence and office of South Korea's President Park Geun-hye.
Images from the third drone were not available to South Korean investigators. A wild ginseng digger had stumbled upon the plane and had deleted its memory card so he could use it himself, the Korea Times reported.
The planes were not capable of transmitting images back to North Korea in real time, and the photos themselves were no better than what one might see on a service akin to Google Earth, Kim said in a previous briefing.
The type of drone is not used for long-range missions, a defense analyst said. Instead they're better suited to see what the enemy is up to on the other side of a hill or wall.
"It has quite a small range, it doesn't have very long endurance so it would only be up there for a few hours. You would use those to see what the other guys are doing in a battlefield environment," said James Hardy, the Asia Pacific editor of IHS Jane's Defence Weekly magazine.
"Even if they are to be used for future attacks, (they) can only carry 2-3 kilograms of TNT and cannot cause huge damage."
Video footage shows North Korean exercises using them as missiles, but it's an expensive way to build a bomb, he said. And it could only take out a single vehicle or ship.
In March, Pyongyang fired two mid-range ballistics missiles off its eastern coast, in an apparent response to the drills. Days later, the two sides fired hundreds of shells across the Northern Limit Line, their disputed maritime border.
South Korea's defense ministry called the intrusion by the drones a violation of the truce that ended the bloody conflict between North and South Korea in 1953.