Fed Stands Ready to Do More, Bernanke Says
While the Fed committee that sets monetary policy was prepared to take new steps “if the outlook were to deteriorate significantly,” he said, it “has not agreed on specific criteria or triggers for further action.”
As Mr. Bernanke’s remarks were released publicly, stock prices immediately fell, a sign that investors were hoping for some concrete signs that the Fed would step in to try to bolster the economy. But as the market digested the chairman’s full remarks, prices rebounded and the Dow Jones industrial average rose 164.84 points, or 1.65 percent, to 10,150.65. The yield on the benchmark 10-year note rose to 2.64 percent, from 2.48 percent. The revised second-quarter growth data came after a week that showed that the economic retrenchment that began in the second quarter had spilled into the summer, with a sharp slowdown in new-home sales and a drop in sales of factory goods.
Consumer spending rose 2 percent in the second quarter — slightly better than the Commerce Department had initially projected. And a closely watched survey by the and showed that consumer sentiment ticked up marginally in August, while remaining well below levels seen during the previous six months.
In his first public remarks since the Fed took a modest step on Aug. 10 to lift the economy — a decision to invest proceeds from its huge -bond portfolio in long-term — Mr. Bernanke tried in some respects to dampen expectations that the Fed could make significant headway against the economic sluggishness.
, a former Fed vice chairman and a professor, noted that Mr. Bernanke focused his remarks on the costs as well as the benefits of additional action to help the economy.
“The Fed has run out of the strong tools, and is turning to the weak ones,” Mr. Blinder said in an interview here. “When you’re fighting in a foxhole and you’ve used up the machine guns and hand grenades, then you pull out the swords and start throwing rocks.”
Mr. Blinder said that the economy seemed “substantially worse” than it did three months ago — and that Mr. Bernanke had acknowledged the deterioration, cautiously.
The Obama administration is looking to the Fed to do more to spur the recovery, since its own options are few, given the political in Congress as midterm elections approach. , vacationing on , discussed the economy for about 15 minutes with Mayor of New York before the two men played .
Mr. Bernanke avoided wading into the rancorous political debates over fiscal policy, instead focusing on the two objectives that form the Fed’s legal mandate: price stability and maximum employment.
Inflation has been running well below the Fed’s unofficial target rate of 1.5 to 2 percent. While conceding that inflation had fallen “slightly below” the desirable level, Mr. Bernanke said deflation was “not a significant risk” right now. He said the Fed would “strongly resist deviations from price stability in the downward direction.”
Mr. Bernanke predicted the economy would continue to grow the rest of this year, “albeit at a relatively modest pace.” He said the “preconditions for a pickup of growth in 2011 appear to remain in place,” as banks increase lending, worries over the European sovereign debt crisis abate and consumers save more.
Strikingly, Mr. Bernanke acknowledged that the traditional tradeoff between inflation and employment had become all but obsolete, at least for now. “There is little or no potential conflict between the goals of supporting growth and employment and of maintaining price stability,” he said.
Mr. Bernanke explained in detail the Fed’s decision to use money from its mortgage to buy government debt. The Fed has gobbled up $1.25 trillion in mortgage-backed securities and $175 billion in debts owed by and other government entities — a major reason mortgage rates are at historic lows.
So far, the Fed has received about $140 billion through repayments of the principal on its holdings of those debts. An additional $400 billion or so could be repaid by the end of 2011. If the Fed had not taken the step it did, the central bank’s balance sheet would have gradually shrunk, which would amount to a passive tightening of monetary policy — what Mr. Bernanke called “a perverse outcome.”
He said the Fed’s purchases of longer-term securities had helped bring down long-term interest rates and lower the cost of borrowing, contributing to the modest recovery that began in the spring of 2009.
However, such purchases seemed to be most effective in times of financial stress, and additional purchases would further complicate the Fed’s future “exit strategy” when the time came to return to normal monetary policy, he said.
The Fed has said since March 2009 that “exceptionally low” levels of the fed funds rate, the benchmark short-term interest rate, would be warranted for “an extended period.” The Fed could try to lengthen those expectations, as central banks in and have tried. But Mr. Bernanke cautioned that the Fed might find it “difficult to convey the committee’s policy intentions with sufficient precision and conditionality.”
The Fed currently pays 0.25 percent interest on excess reserves that banks keep at the Fed. But Mr. Bernanke said that slashing that rate even to zero might do no more than lower the fed funds rate by another 0.10 to 0.15 percentage points. He said doing so would harm the liquidity of short-term money markets.
Mr. Bernanke said he saw “no support” on the committee for setting a higher inflation target, as some economists have suggested. He called the strategy “inappropriate for the in current circumstances.”