Occupy May Day – as it happened
8.15am: Good morning and welcome to our live blog coverage of Occupy demonstrations on this May Day. We'll be covering protests in New York City, across the United States and around the world.
May Day is a pagan festival of fertility marking the beginning of summer. Since the late 19th century the day has also been a milestone in the workers' rights movement. If you work an eight-hour day – or if your employer at least pays semi-plausible lip service to an eight-hour day – then you have occasion to celebrate, for it was on 1 May, 1886, that the protests began that would make the 8-hour workday the law.
On this 1 May , New York City has woken up to a better rain than we've had for weeks. It's good for the farmers, as they say. Both supporters and detractors of the Occupy movement will be watching to see how many protesters turn out today as a gauge of the strength of the movement.
• Huge May Day marches have unfolded in Asia and Europe. Thousands turned out to demand higher wages in the Philippines, Indonesia and Taiwan, according to the Associated Press, while around 100,000 marched in Moscow and 2,000 in Greece.
• New York police raided the homes of at least three Occupy activists and "interrogated residents about plans for tomorrow's protest". Gawker reports: "They asked what I was doing tomorrow, and if I knew of any activities, any events—that was how the conversation started," said activist Zachary Dempster.
• Favorite headline so far is in the Murdoch-owned New York Post: "OWS 'May' get ugly out there." The story lede also works in "mayhem." Hats off. The coverage is alarmist but the pun-ny bone is intact.
8.37am: The Occupy movement has called on protesters to participate in a General Strike: stay home from work and school, skip the chores and take to the streets. Rallies are happening in Bryant Park, Madison Square Park and Union Square.
To follow the action on Twitter watch #m1gs, #m1ows and #ows.
Some protesters looking for a meetup at the Brooklyn Bridge also are headed to Bryant Park.
The Guardian's Ryan Devereaux will be providing updates from Bryant Park.
8.40am: The New York Police Department sent around an internal memo yesterday to prepare officers for today's protests. The memo lists planned protests and describes tactics protesters are expected to use. The memo advises that the Occupy protests are distinct from rallies to be held by organized labor, "expected to participate in their own customary May Day rally (which has occurred since 2004)."
Among the planned Occupy rallies the police memo lists are a "wildcat march" beginning at 1pm on East Houston St.; a "Bike Bloc" to take over the streets beginning at 9am at Union Square; an "NYC Hoodie March Against Police Violence"; and a BBQ in Ft. Greene Park. The memo also notes that rallies are planned for Bryant Park, Madison Square Park and Union Square.
"There are fissures within OWS," the NYPD memo notes, "but a 'respect for diversity of tactics,' which includes everything from peaceful protests to the kind of vandalism directed at Starbucks in April, when demonstrators tried to smash the windows at the Starbucks location at Astor Place, has been embraced by the movement."
Occupy has published its own slate of events for the day. Here's a (sort of blurry) picture from Nick Pinto of the Village Voice:
8.45am: My colleagues Ryan Devereaux and Adam Gabbatt filed a story about preparations last night for the OWS General Strike today:
8.50am: Moira Herbst writes in the Guardian that the American labor movement needs to reclaim May Day:
Since the late 19th century, some of the wreaths and adornments have given way to banners and flags, as 1 May has become International Workers' Day. Workers throughout the world hold marches and parties to celebrate solidarity and the common goal of achieving better working conditions and better lives.
But American workers, for the most part, have been left out of the festivities. At the height of the cold war, May Day was considered too radical, too "Soviet" perhaps, and the American Federation of Labor itself wanted distance from it. In 1958, President Dwight Eisenhower went so far as to declare 1 May "National Loyalty Day". Loyalty to one concept of America, that is – not worker solidarity.
8.55am: Occupy protesters are getting wet this morning – and looking for the sun to come out this afternoon.
Mother Jones has a map of planned protests around the country today.
9.11am: For a full schedule of planned rallies and protests in New York City, today, visit the "NYC Full Schedule of Permitted and Unpermitted May Day 2012 Actions" at OccupyWallStreet.org.
9.17am: Occupy protesters have gathered outside the Bank of America tower at Bryant Park. Others are headed for the Chase Bank HQ at Park Ave and 48th St.
9.33am: Some protests and police activity so far this morning, via Twitter:
9.40am: "Happy May Day" and "Today is May" trending on Twitter. (Meanwhile #m1nyc has been temporarily taken over by a spambot offering all manner of outre entertainment.)
9.52am: Check out our slide show of May Day workers' rights rallies around the world today. Nepal, South Korea, Indonesia, Russia, Greece and on.
9.56am: Ryan Devereaux is following Occupy protesters as they make their way from Bryant Square to the Chase Bank headquarters on Park Ave.
10.02am: Another view of the Occupy protest as it moves through Times Square.
Our social news editor Katie Rogers (@katierogers) has put together a public list of @occupydc activists on Twitter. Check it out.
10.09am: Now a good view of a major protest kitty-corner from Radio City Music Hall at 50th St. and 6th Ave.
An on-the-ground, livestream view of the protest from Timcast by Tim Pool is live now.
A line of police on motor scooters has formed on 6th Avenue.
Protesters are drumming and chanting: "All day, all week, Occupy Wall Street."
10.14am: The occupy crowd in Midtown strikes an upbeat tone.
Mic check: "Today is a beautiful day." Mic check: "We love you all." Mic check: "Thanks for coming to the party."
"The people, united, will never be defeated."
10.27am: Here's a split screen of live video of Occupy protests in NYC and in London.
Other live streams from New York here and here.
The Occupy Unitylivestream channel is here. Feeds from LA, San Fran and NYC. Update: and Portland!
10.33am: A crowd of what appears to be hundreds of protesters is moving off 6th Ave. toward Rockefeller plaza. The crowd stopped in front of a Chase Bank branch, where police officers formed a cordon.
10.46am: The Occupy protest moving down 5th Ave. in Manhattan is big enough that the sidewalks are full and police have yelled at protesters to clear intersections. The crowd is moving but the number of people involved makes fluid movement impossible.
We're watching Tim Pool's livecast as he walks with the crowd.
The rain has stopped in New York. It's not exactly sunny, but the umbrellas and ponchos have disappeared.
Protesters are chanting, "Banks got bailed out, we got sold out."
10.50am: Occupy protesters are planning May Day protests across the country. A Washington DC protest is scheduled for 3.30pmET. A protest in Chicago is due to start momentarily. In San Francisco, ferry operators have shut down service this morning in anticipation of a strike, according to CNN.
In Los Angeles, a "'4 Winds' People's Power Car and Bike Caravan" is planned to move from the four corners of the city and converge around downtown LA this afternoon.
11.02am: An Occupy protester is arrested in Midtown. Infraction unknown.
11.05am:My colleague Katie Rogers has more detail on May Day Occupy protests planned nationwide today:
EAST COAST: In the District, over 300 protesters have RSVP'd to a May Day festival to begin at 3:30pm EST, and a march from Malcolm X Park (16th St and Euclid St NW) beginning at 6pm EST; the group plans to end their march at the White House.
MIDWEST: Occupy Chicago protesters will rally at 1pm EST. According to The Chicago Tribune, protesters will gather at Union Park on the city's West side and proceed with a 2pm march to Federal Plaza in the Loop.
WEST COAST: A large march is planned for the West Coast, but protesters say they will no longer attempt to shut down the Golden Gate Bridge as previously planned. Protesters say they'll participate in worker and student protests and strikes in Oakland and San Francisco.
11.12am: Follow our Ryan Devereaux as he tweets from the Occupy protests in New York City today.
11.18am: Our Karen McVeigh has more on the internal memo produced by the NYPD to guide officer response to today's protests:
Produced by the NYPD SHIELD counterterrorism programme, it warns of possible "militant elements" among protesters and of disruptive activities, such as vandalism.
The briefing, dated April 27, 2012, noted there are "fissures" within the OWS movement and that a "respect for diversity of tactics" included vandalism.
It said: "The General Strike is the first of several major global demonstrations that the OWS movement has played a role in planning, including demonstrations scheduled for May 12, May 15 and May 17-21. As such, it should be expected that organizers have emphasized the important of turnout and will be seeking maximum media coverage."
It warned that "pop-up" and splinter demonstrations and flash mobs may occur at any time especially during the evening actions.
The disruptive events referred to in the NYPD briefing include: * an unpermited "wildcat march" at 1pm at Sara D Roosevelt Park. Organisers have advocated the use of so-called "Black-bloc" tactics to confront the police "sometimes violently" and cited the tactics used in the G20 summit in Pittsburgh when trash cans, rocks and barricades were used in confrontations with police. * a "Bike Bloc" in which small groups of protesters on bikes would try to disrupt traffic *attempts to block Manhattan-bound traffic at bridges and tunnels as well as attempts to stop ferry passengers. * an NYPD hoodie march against police violence
11.23am: Workers, unions and demonstrators have taken to the streets across the globe to mark May Day, and participants and locals have shared the scenes on Twitter.
If you've been involved in an event to mark May Day, send a tweet to @guardian and we'll update this Storify.
11.34am: How big is the nationwide Occupy General Strike? We invite you to form your own reporter estimate.
Here are live streams of Occupy protests in:
New York and New York Portland Chicago Los Angeles San Francisco
Who are we missing? Tweet @TeeMcSee or @KatieRogers
11.45am: Most protesters are celebrating May Day as an occasion to commemorate and promulgate the struggle for workers' rights.
Some, however, are unwilling to give up their attachment to the holiday's colorful pagan roots.
Let them eat their cake – and have it too.
11.56am: View of the protest at Bryant Park.
Expected at the park at noon is Tom Morello, formerly of Rage Against the Machine, who will lead a "Guitarmy" Guitar Workshop and Rehearsal.
The gathering at Bryant Park is operating with a permit from the city of New York.
12.01pm: Protesters in Chicago have started marching through the Loop in the city's downtown area, chanting against Bank of America: "You pay, I pay, B of A has got to Pay!"
Watch the livestream of the march here. According to Chicagoist, nearby businesses, including Bank of America, were told to give vendor lists to law enforcement officials and to keep their cameras on and working.
12.08pm: Reports of protesters marching across the Williamsburg and Brooklyn bridges. See a live stream of marchers on the Williamsburg Bridge here.
The camera is following a tuba player, and being followed by protesters carrying a banner reading "Kill Capitalism, Save the World."
12.15pm: Police activity in Midtown, three avenue blocks from the heart of the protests in Bryant Park.
12.21pm: The livestream of the protestthat just crossed the Williamsburg Bridge is showing major protest activity on the Manhattan side of the bridge, on Delancey street and through the Lower East side.
The protest on the Lower East Side features a full marching band. Dressed as a marching band.
occupywallst.org is encouraging demonstrators to converge at Houston and 2nd Ave.
11:10am: Occupy Bushwick crossing the Williamsburg Bridge to join demos in Manhattan. Many folks heading back to Bryant Square to rest until next action. The Bike Bloc will be converging at 1 PM for wildcat march at Houston and 2nd Ave. Bring your bicycle! Meanwhile in Washington, DC, @OccupyKSt tweets: ¨We're already arriving at Malcolm X park for celebration. #M1 festivities start at 3, march at 6!¨
12.38pm: The NYPD official Twitter account has been inactive for 21 hours.
Nothing to see here.
12.41pm: A new live stream out of LA, by CrossXBones.
A small group of protesters chants, "Black, brown, Asian, white, LA for the general strike."
12.55pm: Here's a picture of those arrests earlier on the Williamsburg Bridge.
1.14pm: A quick overview of the Occupy protests in NYC at the moment. Observers report large crowds of protesters, numbering in the hundreds, on Fifth Ave. in Midtown and on Houston Street.
A large number of protesters remains in Bryant Park. The protesters also have a permit to gather at 4pm in Union Square, which may bring together the largest crowd of the day as rallies uptown and downtown converge.
@Timcast is capturing the action on 5th Ave.
1.25pm: My colleague Adam Gabbatt caught the march on Houston St.
My colleague Ryan Devereaux is nearby. He has found the "Kill Capitalism, Save the World" sign we saw crossing the Williamsburg Bridge earlier.
1.32pm: Reports of clashes between police and protesters at the Occupy rally in Oakland. A live stream is here.
Here, somewhat fuzzily, is the scene outside a Wells Fargo bank in downtown Oakland.
occupywallst.org reports that helicopters are overhead. And in fact they are audible in the CourtneyOccupy livestream from the site.
Protesters are chanting "Whose streets? Our streets." But they're hard to hear with the helicopters.
1.38pm: Marchers are moving through the Mission District of San Francisco. Occupy marchers there have joined up with unions and immigrants rights groups.
You can follow the action in San Francisco on the punkboyinsf live stream.
And by the way, you can check out Occupy Unity to keep up with live streams across the country.
1.46pm: A May Day rally in Minneapolis, which you can follow at the uneditedcamera livestream.
The music at this march is good.
1.47pm: An arrest in Oakland after an alleged chalking incident.
2.06pm: @NSFreePress has a dozen cameras in the crowds in NYC. You can check out their live blog here.
2.15pm: Former Rage Against the Machine guitarist Tom Morello is addressing the crowd in Bryant Park. He's to lead the "guitarmy" – a cadre of protesters bearing instruments – in a march to Union Square.
"This year is the 100th anniversary of Woody Guthrie's birth. If he were alive, even at 100, he would be in the streets with us today to sing this song – our song – 'This Land Is Your Land'."
Morello begins singing the song. Guthrie, whose father was a Democratic booster, was named for Woodrow Wilson, the Democratic candidate for president in 1912, the year the folk singer was born on Bastille Day, July 14.
2.24pm: Arrests now in Washington Square Park as well. New York police have not released a tally of arrests for the day so far. We have picked up reports of about 10 over the course of the morning. As protesters converge on Union Square there may be more.
2.30pm: I've just been speaking to Laura Long, who is part of the Occupy Oakland strike action in California. She said protesters have split into separate groups, including "anti-capitalist, anti-patriarchy and anti-gentrification", and are marching to areas in downtown Oakland.
She said the reaction from passersby had been "very mixed" but "for the most part [there has been] a lot of support". There were some 150 people in Laura's march, she said, with protesters expecting numbers to grow through the day.
As we spoke Laura and her fellow protesters arrived at Wells Fargo bank in downtown Oakland, where there is currently a stand off with police. Steven Angell sends this picture from the scene.
This is Adam Gabbatt taking over from Tom McCarthy's excellent work.
2.52pm: Photo embed of Occupy Boston marchers in the rain, courtesy of my colleague Katie Rogers:
Rainy weather appeared to be an early morning deterrent to Occupy Boston protesters, but by early afternoon a crowd was marching and handing out "Occupy Justice" clothing patches to bystanders. The "Death of Capitalism Funeral Procession" is set to begin at Trinity Church in the city's Back Bay area around 7pm.
3.05pm: Here's the latest news story from Ryan Devereaux and Eoin Reynolds on the day so far:
3.21pm: Kettling nets are quite a blast from the past. They were all the rage last year.
3.31pm: There are reports that tear gas has been deployed in Oakland. Mother Jones writer Josh Harkinson just tweeted that a "flashbang grenade just went off" before saying he had just been teargassed.
However there is some confusion as to whether it was a smoke bomb or tear gas:
Harkinson reported leading up to this that as police detained a woman they "knocked her off her bike and tackled her", adding it was "Totally uncler why".
3.36pm: Robert Salonga, a reporter at the Contra Costa Times, has tweeted a few pictures of the scene in Oakland right now.
Salonga says one of the police officers at the scene has been hit by paint.
4.11pm: In New York, occupy protesters have just been watching Tom Morello take to the stage at Union Square with his "guitarmy". Here's a picture from livecaster Tim Pool's stream:
5.05pm: Some 15 protesters had been arrested as of 4.30pm, according to the Daily News.
5.11pm: Police in Oakland have apparently confirmed that tear gas was used earlier today. San Francisco Chronicle reporter Demian Bulwa tweets:
5.22pm: Earlier we heard about Josh Harkinson, a Mother Jones writer, report that just prior to tear gas being used in Oakland police apparently attempting to restrain a woman had "knocked her off her bike and tackled her".
This video footage appears to be of the same incident, from ABC7. At first glance it seems heavy handed to say the least.

5.45pm: Here's a summary of the events so far:
• Activists across the US have joined in 1 May protests. The Occupy movement has called on protesters to participate in a General Strike: stay home from work and school, skip the chores and take to the streets.
• Police in Oakland have used tear gas on a crowd of protesters. San Francisco Chronicle reporter Demian Bulwa said police confirmed to him they used the gas "to gain the attention of the crowd". Officers took four people into custody.
• In New York 15 protesters had been arrested by 4.30pm. A large crowd of protesters have gathered in Union Square ahead of a march to Wall Street this evening.
5.56pm: According to various reports on Twitter occupy Wall Street protesters have left Union Square and are marching towards Wall Street. This photo suggests there are a lot of them.
6.18pm: In Seattle a "citizen superhero" has allegedly sprayed protesters with pepper spray, according to Gawker.
Rodney Lotter posted an image to his Facebook of the superhero, adding: "Phoenix Jones and his spider man sidekick pepper spraying people randomly (including me while trying to take pics) in front of the court house earlier".
6.37pm: In New York protesters are walking down Broadway from Union Square, which takes them straight past the Guardian's office - here's a photo.
6.56pm: And still they go past. Unions appeared to be at the front of the march, with more bona fide Occupy protesters bringing up the rear. From nine floors up the action appeared good natured.
Sorry for the shakiness – I'm scared of heights.
Down at crowd level, these women from the Laborers International Union Of North America march south.
7.21pm: Photographer James Fassinger has been out on the march in New York for the Guardian. The first gives some idea of the numbers of protesters as they headed down Broadway. Looking from above, it really was impressive.
7.57pm: In New York protesters have reached Wall Street but the street itself has been closed off by police, leading activists to reportedly continue to the former Occupy base of Zuccotti Park.
8.34pm: Much of the chatter on Twitter seems to be about whether or not police used a tank to patrol Occupy Oakland protests this afternoon. Whether you think they did or not sort of depends on whether you consider this vehicleto be a tank:
Here's a snap from a different angle, from @marymad:
8.54pm: "Thousands" of Occupy protesters have gathered at 55 Water Street in downtown Manhattan, according to Tim Pool's live stream of the march.
Gawker's Adrien Chen reports that an official Occupy Wall Street text has referred to the gathering on Water Street as a "new occupation of Wall Street". This could get interesting.
9.18pm: Protesters are proposing to occupy the location at 55 Water Street, I've just been told.
"From what I understand they're talking about a new occupation," said Ed Needham, who acts as a spokesman for Occupy Wall Street.
"It is about to be proposed. I'm not exactly sure if this is the result of some individuals taking iniative, given how things are at the moment, or if this is something that was perhaps planned but not publicised, even internally."
Needham said: "People will decide in our traditional, messy form, whether or not that's what they want to do. But I do know there are people who would like to take that initiative."
9.29pm: It seems Reuters can't quite make up its mind what it thinks of today's Occupy action. Or else it changed its mind quickly.
At 6.17pm the day had been "a dud":
At 7.25pm the day was "far from being a dud":
So was Reuters producing different videos for organisations with different political leanings? Different video producers having different takes?
9.51pm: The park is due to close at 10pm, according to reports on Twitter. Tim Pool reports on his live stream that police have circled the park, with hundreds said to be still gathered.
Testing times to come, perhaps, for the potential new occupation.
10.09pm: A white shirted officer has just told protesters at 55 Water Street in downtown Manhattan that if they do not leave they face arrest.
"This is a New York city park. It is closed. If you leave now you will not be placed under arrest," he said.
"If you stay here you will be arrested for trespassing."
He added that protesters have "five minutes" to leave.
That info from Tim Pool's "Timcast" live stream – watch the action there live.
10.35pm: Police have just made arrests at 55 Water Street, or the New York Veterans Vietnam Memorial, as it will be known from hereonin.
Watching the Timcast livestream one could see a white shirted officer warned protesters they would be arrested if they remained at the memorial, prompting some to move. Others did not, and officers moved forward, detaining at least two people.
As protesters walked away, police detained a man on a side street.
10.45pm: Driven out of the Veterans Vietnam Memorial at 55 Water Street, protesters appear to have gathered at Zuccotti Park – site of the encampment until November last year.
11.23pm: Numerous reports from Oakland on Twitter of police using "snatch squads" to arrest protesters. Korgasm is live streaming from the protests in the downtown area.
Gavin Aronsen, a writer at Mother Jones, reports that flash bangs have been used as well as the tear gas we heard of earlier.
11.49pm: It's difficult to gauge exact numbers without being at the scene, but the amount of people at Zuccotti Park seems to have dwindled a bit. With that, this blog will come to an end. Thanks for reading.