Murdoch wields axe and chequebook
A News website is reporting that the company will shrink its 19 eastern seaboard divisions to just five over the next 18 to 24 months. It did not disclose the scale of the job losses but said they are likely to be fewer than those at Fairfax. Attention this morning, though, had been diverted to the surprise takeover bid for ConsMedia, itself a major stakeholder of Foxtel and Foxtel Sports. The News bid for ConsMedia is $3.50 a share, or about $1.97 billion, and has the blessing of Mr Packer who holds his controlling stake through his Consolidated Press Holdings (CPH) company. ConsMedia shares leapt 30 cents, or 9.7 per cent, to $3.48 after trading resumed at 11am AEST. News shares ended 11 cents, or 0.6 per cent, at $20.15.
‘‘CPH welcomes News's proposal and looks forward to [ConsMedia] and News working together to address the detailed terms and conditions,’’ Mr Packer said in a statement. CPH considers the offer price to be fair and will support the proposal in the absence of a superior cash offer, he said. He then told The Australian he was "happy to live with" the $3.50 a share offer. It's Citizen Kane and the mining magnate
News Ltd's bid was fair, analysts told BusinessDay, adding it was likely of the potential bidders to win regulatory approval. "Our view is the price is pretty fair. News Ltd is the most logical buyer and the least likely to have problems with the ACCC," one analyst said. Steve Allen, media expert at Fusion Strategy said the offer from News Ltd followed owner News Corporation's long established strategy of lifting its stakes in partly held pay TV companies around the world. "It was a once in a lifetime opporturtinity" for News Ltd. News would emerge with 50 per cent control of Foxtel, the country's biggest pay TV operator, and all of FoxTel Sports - provided it can secure approval from market regulator, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission.
Telstra holds the other half of Foxtel. The telco said it would be happy to work with News Ltd as a joint owner of Foxtel and believed the move would be good for shareholders and customers. ‘‘We’ve worked successfully with News as partners in Foxtel and we look forward to this partnership continuing to deliver value for Foxtel shareholders and a great pay TV experience for customers,’’ a Telstra spokeswoman told AAP. News Corp has been the centre of a series of investigations in the UK after at least one of its newspapers engaged in widescale telephone hacking. The company has also been accused of wielding excessive political clout in the country - an issue which may get an airing in Australia given the current consolidation apparently underway. At Fairfax, meanwhile, investors are awaiting the next move by Gina Rinehart, the world's richest woman and also Fairfax's biggest single shareholder. Mrs Rinehart is demanding three seats on the company's board and has so far failed to respond to a letter from Fairfax journalists calling on her to sign up to their charter of independence from management influence on their work.
Another of Australia's tycoons, Kerry Stokes, may also have a say as the media landscape shifts. Mr Stokes is the second-largest shareholder in ConsMedia, with a stake of almost a quarter in the company. By selling its pay TV holdings, Mr Packer would all but exit Australia's media market, leaving him with just a 6.9 per cent stake in Ten Network. The ConsMedia deal, though, would bolster Mr Packer's warchest by about $1 billion as he considers expanding his 10 per cent stake in Echo Entertainment. On a much smaller scale, News is also understood to have purchased the niche business commentary website Business Spectator and its sister Eureka Report publication.
The takeover action in the media sector initially helped lift Fairfax shares this morning, before reversing course. They ended the day down half a cent to 59 cents. The stock has had a volatile week, soaring on Monday and diving yesterday. Shares in Seven Group, controlled by Mr Stokes, gained 25 cents, or 3.2 per cent, to $8.14. News chief executive Mr Williams, himself a former head of Foxtel, has been reviewing News' operations since taking the top job in December 2011. News prints The Australian, Sydney's The Daily Telegraphand Melbourne's Herald Sun newspapers, has been battling the same decline in advertising spending that has bedevilled other media companies in Australia. As with newspaper companies worldwide, however, the company is also struggling to adjust to the drift of readership to online services that tend to generate much lower advertising revenue than traditional newsprint.
One media analyst, who asked not to be named, said News Ltd faced similar challenges to Fairfax. "Just like you're seeing with Fairfax, they're are having to realign their cost bases and find a pathway to a digital-only model," the analyst, declining to be named, said. "In achieving that pathway there is going to be a lot of cost reduction and redundancies." Estimates of the News jobs cuts from analysts and union officials range from 400 to 1000, with half of the cuts to come from the editorial departments.
The planned purchases by News Ltd, as well as the recent moves by mining magnate Mrs Rinehart to take a nearly 20 per cent stake in Fairfax showed there was too much concentration in the industry in Australia, said Deakin University journalism professor Martin Hirst. "It's another step in having only two media companies in Australia and the frightening prospect of one being controlled by Murdoch and one being controlled by Rinehart," he said. "It's Citizen Kane and the mining magnate." "We're seeing capitalism at its rawest," he said. "The biggest fish eat the smaller fish." The recent concentration of ownership was "bad" because of the lack of diversity of voices, said Professor Hirst.
The Australian, meanwhile, reports News is expected to announce as early as today that it has bought the Business Spectator and Eureka Report businesses, splashing out about $22 million. BusinessDay understands the online deal was completed some weeks ago after Fairfax turned down an offer to acquire the company, Australian Independent Business Media, for about $30 million.