BAE  and EADS  Merger Talks Disintegrate
An effort to create a European behemoth in aerospace and military manufacturing to rival Boeing of the United States has collapsed amid political divisions involving Britain, France and Germany.
In a statement just hours before a Wednesday deadline set by British authorities, BAE Systems of Britain and European Aeronautic Defense and Space, or EADS — the parent of Airbus — said that despite having presented a merger plan based on “sound industrial logic,” officials from the three governments could not agree on ownership and industrial structure.
At a time when unity among European governments has been of critical importance as the Continent grapples with its debt crisis, the failure of the deal exposed how competing national considerations can get in the way of cross-border cooperation.
In particular, the aborted merger shows Germany’s willingness to put its national interests before Europe’s despite its leadership role in the region. That was the case even though a successful merger of BAE and EADS would have created a more robust European competitor.
“That government disagreements killed this deal carries a lesson for consolidation of the European defense market as a whole,” said Guy Anderson, a senior military industry analyst with IHS Jane’s, a consulting and analysis firm.
Merger negotiations had been in the works for months, but as the talks neared Wednesday’s deadlines, German negotiators appeared reluctant. “It became clear over the last few days that there was a lack of German support for the deal over all,” said one person with knowledge of the British side of the negotiations who requested anonymity. “They appeared to be struggling to see what the advantages of the deal were for Germany.”
The German government had sought a stake equal to France’s in the combined BAE-EADS. The share for France, which currently owns 15 percent of EADS, would have been reduced to 9 percent under the merger plan. Spain, which holds 5.45 percent, would have a stake of around 3 percent. Germany does not currently have a stake in EADS, but a state-owned bank had planned to buy the EADS shares now held by Daimler. Still, that would have resulted in a smaller stake than France’s.
Britain, which owns no shares in BAE but can veto any merger, was initially wary of putting so much of the combined company in the hands of France and Germany, worried that government ownership would handicap the company’s ability to secure future military contracts in the United States.
Britain eventually came to accept the idea of direct French and German ownership, said people close to the negotiations, who also spoke on condition of anonymity. But the British sought guarantees from Paris and Berlin that they would not seek to increase their stakes down the road, once Daimler and the French conglomerate Lagardère sold their EADS holdings. France, however, refused to commit to a binding cap on its stake.
Politicians in Berlin worried that plans to locate the civil aviation business with Airbus’s headquarters in Toulouse, France, and the military business with BAE’s base in Britain, left Germany without an operational sphere of influence. In recent days, the people close to the talks said, Germany’s demands focused more intensively on securing long-term job guarantees as well as locating at least a division headquarters — possibly the Eurocopter helicopter business or the Astrium space activities — on its soil.
A spokesman for the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, released a terse statement on Wednesday acknowledging the decision to abandon the merger. “For the German government, the priority is that EADS is able to continue its positive development in all its fields of business,” Steffen Seibert, a German government spokesman, said.
Speaking at a news conference in Madrid, President François Hollande of France was unapologetic about his country’s desire to maintain its shareholding in a strategic aerospace and military contracting company. The decision to abandon the merger, he said, rested with the companies.
“It’s not cause for me to either express regret or to rejoice,” he said.
In comments to reporters in London, Ian G. King, the chief executive of BAE, indicated that Germany was the main sticking point. “That would be an accurate representation,” he said, according to Reuters.
The chief executive of EADS, Thomas O. Enders, said in a statement, “It is, of course, a pity we didn’t succeed, but I’m glad we tried.” Mr. Enders, a German, has long pressed for the elimination of government interference in the management of the company.
For BAE and EADS, the spotlight now turns on what each company does next.
“It’s unlikely they will have the stomach to go through this again any time soon,” Richard Aboulafia, an aerospace analyst with the Teal Group in Washington, said on Wednesday.
By joining forces, EADS and BAE Systems had hoped to create a stronger rival to Boeing, the world’s biggest military contracting and aerospace company. The activities of the combined company would have been evenly split between the passenger jet market and the military market. The passenger jet market is growing rapidly, but remains volatile. Military contracts provide more steady revenue, but large European countries and the United States have been reining in their military spending.
The failure of the merger attempt could leave BAE, which has sought to expand in the United States, as a takeover target.