Obama and Putin’s G8 meeting in Fermanagh to boost Donegal tourism
Newly elected US President Barack Obama and German Chancellor Angela Merkel will join other world leaders at the exclusive five-start Lough Erne golf resort just outside Enniskillen for the G8 summit next June.
Newly elected US President Barack Obama and German Chancellor Angela Merkel will join other world leaders at the exclusive five-start Lough Erne golf resort just outside Enniskillen for the G8 summit next June.
The choice of venue was confirmed a short time ago by British Prime Minister David Cameron who is in Armagh today.
The decision to choose Lough Erne will have a massive impact on tourism not only in Fermanagh but also in the neighbouring counties of Donegal and Sligo.
It is estimated that with advance parties, security entourage, translators and the world press, over 4,000 bed nights could be created within the region with the added bonus of the world wide publicity.
The luxury resort is set on its very own 600 acre peninsula, between Castle Hume Lough and Lower Lough Erne, just outside Enniskillen, and would be regarded as a very secure location for such a summit. The decision means world leaders such as Barack Obama, Vladimir Putin and David Cameron will be converging on West Fermanagh next summer.
The British Government previously hosted the summit in 2005 at the Gleneagles in Scotland, a similar resort to the Lough Erne.
The G8 consists of the United States, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia and the United Kingdom. The European Union is also represented by the Presidents of the European Commission and the European Council. World leaders gather at the G8 summit every year to discuss major global economic, political, and security challenges.
The UK will play host to the 2013 meeting.
Lough Erne Golf Resort offers 120 rooms and suites, two championship golf courses and an authentic Thai spa. The resorts six conference rooms enjoy spectacular views over Castle Hume Lough and the Faldo Championship Course both Rory McIlroy and Darren Clarke have spent many’s a leisurely and undisturbed few hours.