For AXA it's goodbye NAB, hello AMP
The commission said that the sale and various undertakings given to maintain investment in the platform to help build IOOF into a major competitor to the industry’s bigger players did not provide “sufficient certainty” in addressing the ACCC’s concerns. Potential rival suitor AMP said it was "very pleased" with the ACCC decision, and is mulling its next step. "AMP has always said AXA remains strategically attractive but at the right price," a spokeswoman said. "We don't know what our next steps are, it's too early to say," she said, adding: "It's a great outcome for competition." NAB’s exclusivity agreement with Paris-based AXA SA and AXA APH will expire at midnight, leaving any of the parties free to officially terminate the agreement. The exclusivity agreement was put in place in April to allow the bank time to gain approval from the ACCC for its bid for AXA APH, and has been extended three times.
The ACCC said in a statement released before the market opened that the sale of North and the undertakings did not go far enough to re-assure it that there would not be a substantial lessening of competition in the retail investment platform market. The platforms are used by financial advisers and planners to channel and manage their clients’ money into superannuation funds and other such investments. The ACCC raised particular concerns about the impact of NAB owning the Navigator platform alongside North which both target sophisticated investors. The sale of North to IOOF was designed to overcome those objections but the commission said that a majority of industry players who responded to the public soundings it had undertaken over a two week period last month were still heavily opposed to the NAB/AXA deal.
Financial planners, dealer groups and investment product providers had all raised further worries that the undertakings would not provide “effective competitive constraint” on the merged banking and fund management entity. “The undertakings as proposed place a heavy reliance upon IOOF having sufficient distribution capability to provide an effective competitive constraint upon key players in the foreseeable future,” the commission said. Deal likely to be abandoned With the ACCC now implacably opposed to the takeover, it is almost certain that the two parties along with AXA’s majority shareholder, AXA SA of France, will abandon the deal. NAB moved on AXA after AMP launched its initial attempt to merge with AXA and quickly secured the agreement of the Melbourne-based fund manager’s board with a higher all-cash offer of $6.43 a share. It also offered a scrip alternative for those shareholders looking to take NAB shares.
In statements released after the ACCC’s decision, NAB said that it was considering the implications of the ruling for its proposal to acquire AXA’s Australasian business and offload its Asian operations to AXA SA for $9.6 billion. For its part AXA AP said it had noted what had happened and would, in effect, await the bank’s response. However, there are now very few avenues open to NAB to continue its nine month long campaign to acquire the company unless it can come up with a radically different proposal to satisfy not only AXA AP and AXA SA but also the commission. But any such plan would have likely needed to have been aired in the four months of detailed negotiations that NAB had with the ACCC over its offer to sell the North platform to IOOF. In a detailed rejection of NAB’s plan to divest North, the commission said that the sale of the platform itself would not be enough to either transform IOOF nor strengthen the platform’s long term future.
The key issue in the market was the distribution network of financial planners who use the platform and its related financial products that go under the same brand name said the commission, and these were not included in the sale or in IOOF’s planned use of North. “The exclusion of distribution assets and the North products in the proposed undertakings impacts directly on the ongoing viability and competitiveness of the divestiture business,” said the commission’s deputy chairman Peter Kell. “The proposed undertakings are also dependent on third parties to complete certain actions and involve complex and long term behavioural obligations that present risks.” It was for those reasons that the ACCC felt that IOOF would not be in a position to make a significant enough challenge to a merged NAB-AXA and why therefore it could not accept what the bank was proposing to do.
The ACCC’s objections support the contentions made by the major opponent to the takeover, AMP, in its submission that called on the commission to reject the revised deal. AMP argued that the issue was about distribution and whether IOOF would be in any position to take on its bigger rivals even with an enhanced platform business. However, while the bid has now been dealt a fatal blow, it is by no means certain that AMP will be able to launch a new bid of its own for AXA AP. Its scrip-based bid was heavily dependent on the value of its shares and a fall in its stock price has undercut much of the company’s ability to put an offer that would anywhere attractive enough to the AXA board which will look for a sizeable cash component. Analysts are also pondering whether AXA’s major French shareholder will make a move of its own by launching a bid for the stock it doesn’t currently control given its enthusiasm to buy the burgeoning and more profitable Asian operations.