Mark Cuban’s inside-trading case revived
SAN FRANCISCO (MarketWatch) — A federal appeals court revived the Securities and Exchange Commission’s insider-trading case against Mark Cuban on Tuesday, more than a year after it had been dismissed by a lower court.
In a ruling filed with the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in Texas, Judge Patrick Higginbotham wrote that the court is vacating an earlier judgment dismissing the case and remanding it for further proceedings, including a possible trial.
“We are pleased with the court’s decision and look forward to presenting our case,” SEC spokesman John Nester said in a statement from the agency.
The SEC filed suit against Cuban, the high-profile investor and owner of the Dallas Mavericks professional-basketball team, in late 2008. The suit alleged that Cuban sold shares of the Internet company Mamma.com based on nonpublic information and in the process spared himself hundreds of thousands of dollars in losses.
In its suit, the SEC alleged that Cuban in 2004 promised to keep information about a planned secondary stock offering by Mamma.com confidential, even as he sold his stake prior to the public disclosure of the offering and a subsequent decline in Mamma.com’s share price.
Stephen Best, an attorney representing Cuban, said his client is “naturally disappointed in the court’s decision,” though he is also “mindful of the fact that the decision does not mean that he is liable for anything.”
Cuban “will immediately be considering all … appeal options,” Best added, arguing the facts of the case will “show that the SEC alleged facts that it knew it could never prove.”
In his own court filing early last year, Cuban asked for the insider-trading charges to be dropped. “Although the SEC has often argued that any recipient of material, nonpublic information has potential insider-trading liability, the U.S. Supreme Court has repeatedly rejected the SEC’s view,” Cuban said in the January 2009 filing.
A federal judge granted Cuban’s motion for dismissal roughly seven months later.
Mamma.com, an online search engine, was founded in the 1990s. The company changed its name to Copernic Inc. in 2007, and later sold its search assets to closely held Empresario Inc.
According to court filings, Cuban acquired a 6.3% stake in Mamma.com in early 2004. Company executives later informed him of the planned secondary stock offering, which would issue shares at a discount to market prices, and Cuban sold his stake in June of that year. The subsequent public announcement of the offering sent Mamma.com shares nearly 40% lower, according to filings.
Cuban avoided over $750,000 in losses as a result of his sale, according to filings.