AT&T to acquire DirecTV in deal
AT&T plans to acquire satellite TV operator DirecTV for $48.5 billion, the companies announced Sunday, marking the latest in a series of mega-mergers that are reshaping the cable and telecom landscapes.
The deal would elevate AT&T, the second-largest U.S. wireless carrier, into a major player in the pay-TV business. The company would have 26 million video subscribers after combining DirecTV with its existing landline TV offering, U-verse.
That could help AT&T bundle video and Internet services to better compete with Comcast, which is making its own $45 billion bid for Time Warner Cable. In another sign of industry consolidation, SoftBank, fresh off its successful acquisition of Sprint, is reportedly lining up an offer for T-Mobile.
The rush of deal-making highlights the competitive pressures in the industry, as companies look to expand their services to stay ahead of changing consumer TV-viewing and Internet habits.
“This is a unique opportunity that will redefine the video entertainment industry and create a company able to offer new bundles and deliver content to consumers across multiple screens – mobile devices, TVs, laptops, cars and even airplanes,” AT&T CEO Randall Stephenson said in a statement.
The transaction must win approval from the Justice Department and Federal Communications Commission, which already have their hands full reviewing the Comcast deal. AT&T — which saw its $39 billion bid for T-Mobile blocked by regulators in 2011 — tried to sweeten its new merger for regulators with a slew of voluntary concessions.
The wireless giant said it would adhere to the FCC’s 2010 net neutrality order barring Internet-service providers from blocking or discriminating against certain kinds of Web traffic. That FCC order was thrown out by a federal court this year, and the agency has launched a new effort to rewrite the rules. AT&T said it would follow the net neutrality principles for three years after its DirecTV deal gets a green light from the government.
AT&T also pledged to bid at least $9 billion in the government’s upcoming wireless spectrum auction, provided there is a “sufficient” amount of airwaves available to boost its nationwide footprint. Ensuring the major carriers participate in the auction has been a top goal of FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler, who has been sparring with AT&T and Verizon over the auction rules.
The company further promised to expand its broadband service, particularly to rural areas, and preserve standalone DirecTV cable packages for three years.
Opponents of greater industry consolidation are already criticizing the AT&T deal.
“The captains of our communications industry have clearly run out of ideas,” Craig Aaron, the president of Free Press, said Sunday before the deal was officially announced. “Instead of innovating and investing in their networks, companies like AT&T and Comcast are simply buying up the competition.”
Stephenson in March described Comcast’s bid for Time Warner Cable as an “industry-redefining deal,” a comment that many interpreted as a sign that AT&T would make a long-rumored move on DirecTV.
A successful AT&T acquisition of DirecTV could be a loss for DISH Network, which also has reportedly been interested in DirecTV. DISH Chairman Charlie Ergen acknowledged in recent days that his company could not beat AT&T in a bidding war.