Seven Stragglers Leave AIIB Crowd at an Even 50
It was supposed to be 57 countries signing on to join the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank on Monday. It ended up being 50.
Most of the seven countries that held off joining the China-led bank on Monday cited bureaucratic difficulties, but in one case politics appears to have intruded: The Philippines is adopting a wait-and-see approach amid a dispute with Beijing over territory in the South China Sea.
As 50 nations signed the bank’s articles of incorporation at a ceremony in the cavernous Great Hall of the People Monday, the island nation stayed on the sidelines as did Denmark, Kuwait, Malaysia, Poland, South Africa and Thailand.
Finance Minister Lou Jiwei called the new $100 billion bank a “win-win for Asia” and a “new type of multilateral bank for the 21st century.” Its rules give laggards through the end of the year to dig out their pens.
“We have until December to decide,” Philippines Finance Secretary Cesar Purisima said Monday. This follows comments earlier this month in Japan by President Benigno Aquino III that his country wants to ensure that the AIIB’s economic aid won’t be subjected to “vagaries of politics between our countries.”
Tensions between the two ramped up further Monday when the Chinese Foreign Ministry accused the Philippines of spreading misinformation after Manila aired two parts of a three-part television documentary defending its position.
“The Philippines is attempting to mislead and deceive, gain sympathy by cheating and create the illusion of the ‘victim,’” Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said in a statement on the ministry’s website. A Philippines Department of Foreign Affairs official said the government-funded documentary was part of an information and education campaign “to increase the level of public awareness and understanding” of the territorial issue.
Most of the other prospective infrastructure bank members who didn’t sign up Monday blamed temporary procedural constraints at home and said they expected to sign within the next few months.
The relatively short time between the end of AIIB negotiations in Singapore in May and Monday’s signing ceremony left insufficient time for Polish ministries and government lawyers to consult over the new bank, said Wojciech Jakobiec, the Polish Embassy’s Beijing spokesman. “It’s simply a question of timing,” he added.
Denmark recently wrapped up an election and needs to let the new government settle in and formally decide on joining, said an official at the Danish Embassy in Beijing.
Malaysia’s government-run Bernama news agency cited internal procedures as the reason for not signing, while South African National Treasury official Andile Kuzwayo said pressing domestic commitments got in the way, although the country is committed to meeting the year-end deadline, he added.
Will China and the stragglers hold their own slimmed down ceremony if and when they’re fully on board? “That would be nice,” said Poland’s Mr. Jakobiec. “But given other countries’ legal systems, I assume that might be very difficult getting everyone there at the same moment,” he said.
The new bank aims to spur infrastructure spending, improve connectivity and fight poverty in the Asia-Pacific region, Chinese officials said Monday. The Asia-Pacific region needs $8 trillion in infrastructure investment between 2010 and 2020, according to Asian Development Bank figures.
As the largest shareholder, China will hold 26.06% of the votes, giving it an effective veto over major decisions, followed by India with 7.5% and Russia with 5.92%, according to the official Xinhua News Agency.
–Mark Magnier and Cris Larano, with contributions from Jason Ng