Apple Veteran Overseeing Electric-Car Project Leaving Company
Attendees gather during an Apple event at the Flint Center for the Performing Arts on September 9, 2014 in Cupertino, Calif.
Steve Zadesky, a 16-year Apple veteran who has been overseeing its electric-car project for the last two years, has told people he is leaving the company. The timing of his departure isn’t clear. He is still at Apple for now.
A person familiar with the matter said Mr. Zadesky’s departure was for personal reasons and wasn’t related to his performance. Mr. Zadesky didn’t immediately respond to a message sent through LinkedIn.
Still, the pending departure marks a setback for one of the most talked-about projects in the technology field. Apple has become the most valuable company in the world making consumer electronics products, but moving into the automotive sector poses big new challenges.
Mr. Zadesky, who worked on the iPod and the iPhone during his career, was given permission in 2014 to start investigating Apple’s entry into the electric car market. Last year, Apple designated the initiative—code-named “Titan”— a committed project and set a ship date of 2019.
In Apple’s parlance, a “ship date” doesn’t necessarily mean the date that customers receive a new product; it can also mean the date that engineers sign off on the product’s main features. Some team members expect that it might take several more years to get a differentiated electric car ready, the people familiar with the matter said.
An engineer at Ford Motor Co. before joining Apple in 1999, Mr. Zadesky was in charge of tripling the size of the automotive team—already at around 600 employees in September—while coming up with a vision for the product.
The team has encountered some problems, according to people familiar with the matter, in laying out clear goals for the project. Apple has urged the team to push ahead with ambitious deadlines even though some on the team felt that those targets weren’t attainable, these people said.
Apple hasn’t confirmed that it is working on a car, but it has hired a slew of veterans from the automobile industry and experts in battery technology and autonomous driving. At the WSJDLive conference in October, Apple Chief Executive Tim Cook said that he thinks “there will be a massive change in the industry” as software and autonomous driving become more important.