UPDATE 2-Judge upholds Airgas poison pill defense
* Use of “poison pill” defense against takeover upheld
* Ruling could have far-reaching impact on deals (Adds background, judge and Airgas comment, from paragraph four)
NEW YORK, Feb 15 (Reuters) - A Delaware judge upheld Airgas Inc’s ARG.N poison pill defense against a $5.9 billion hostile takeover by Air Products & Chemicals Inc (APD.N) on Tuesday in a decision that could affect corporate dealmaking.
The decision blocks Air Products from buying its rival for $70 a share. Air Products has spent a year pursuing the deal, which would have transformed it into the dominant North America supplier of industrial gases, which are that are used in hospitals, factories and by welders.
Air Products is expected to appeal to Delaware’s Supreme Court.
“As this case demonstrates, in order to have any effectiveness, pills do not — and can not — have a set expiration date,” wrote Judge William Chandler of Delaware’s Chancery Court in his opinion.
However, he went on to say that the ruling does not endorse a “just say never” approach to a bid. He said the mechanisms for a hostile bidder to get around a pill have been in place since 1985 when the state’s Supreme Court first upheld the pill defense.
The ruling comes just as big corporate mergers are becoming increasingly frequent following a drought during the 2007-2009 recession.
A pill is meant to give a board of directors time to find alternatives and explain to its shareholders why a hostile bid is inadequate. The measure has been criticized as a way for management to entrench themselves at the expense of shareholders, who are prevented from accepting the offer.
Airgas Chief Executive Officer Peter McCausland said, “We are pleased with the Chancery Court’s ruling, which is consistent with established Delaware precedent.”
The ruling is the second legal setback for Air Products in the takeover battle. The state’s Supreme Court last year struck down a change to Airgas’s bylaws that would have brought forward the company’s annual meeting and might have given Air Products a chance to seize control of the Airgas board by now.