HSBC sets pace on pay disclosure as it reports profits doubled in 2010
HSBC set the pace for disclosure of bankers' pay by revealing that 253 of its staff earn more than £1m as it reported a more than doubling of profits to $19bn (£11.8bn) in 2010.
Britain's largest bank provided more information on top pay than any of its rivals as chairman Douglas Flint admitted that 89 staff paid more than £1m were based in the UK.
Under disclosure demanded by the authorities in Hong Kong, the bank said that the five "highest paid individuals globally" – including a non-board director who took home between £8.4m and £8.5m – received a combined £34.3m in salaries, bonuses and pension contributions.
But, under the disclosure required in the UK through Project Merlin, the total of the "five highest paid senior executives" was just over £12m – prompting accusations that the coalition was allowing banks to hide the pay of its highest paid traders and deal-doers in a way that the Hong Kong rules did not.
Lord Oakeshott, the Liberal Democrat peer who resigned as the party's Treasury spokesman in the Lords after criticising Project Merlin, said: "British disclosure standards under what is a Project Mirage are less than half Hong Kong's. Shareholders and non-executives need to know all the biggest packages, not just the ones it suits to show."
Labour MP Chuka Umunna, who sits on the Treasury select committee, said he had tabled questions to the chancellor to seek clarity on what the Treasury uses to define "executive".
A Treasury spokesman said the coalition had set "world-leading" disclosure on pay. Flint said the discrepancy was because the UK wanted to know the pay of five individuals who reported to the chief executive while Hong Kong wanted to know the five highest paid, which included traders.
The bank also complied with a new Financial Services Authority rule, which requires so-called "code staff" – those deemed to be high paid and taking big risks – to have their pay published in aggregate. Becoming the first bank to do this – nine months earlier than required – HSBC said 280 of its most senior employees earned a total of $471m, which averages at $1.7m – just over £1m. Some 186 of these are in the UK.
Stuart Gulliver, who took over as chief executive at the start of the year, is to take his £5.2m bonus in shares. His total pay was £6.1m, down on the £10m he received a year ago when he was the highest-paid employee of the bank. He was handed an extra £3m worth of shares from pay plans dating back to 2007, although the bank insisted this was double counting.
While the chief executive's office is Hong Kong, Gulliver joked he lives on Cathay Pacific and British Airways, spending a third of his time in the UK, a third in Hong Kong and a third in the air.
He replaced Michael Geoghegan as chief executive after a very public boardroom reshuffle. For 2010 Geoghegan received £5.8m. After stepping down at the end of December, he is also to receive £1m for 2011 and a pension contribution of £401,250. He will receive £200,000 in consultancy fees to 1 April, which he will donate to charity.
The bank cut its long-term return on equity target to 12-15% from 15-19%, blaming the costs caused by regulations requiring banks to hold more capital and extra liquid instruments that can be sold quickly in a crisis. Its shares fell 4% to 678p as the market digested numbers which, Gulliver admitted, showed income was flat, costs were up and that profits had been bolstered by the $12.4bn fall in impairments to $14bn – the lowest since 2006. For 2009 the bank reported a 24% fall in pre-tax profit to $7bn.