Anglo chief paid €1m as lender posts record loss of €17.7bn
STRICKEN Anglo Irish Bank forked out almost €1m for the services of chief executive Mike Aynsley last year, including eight return flights to his native Australia and a "housing allowance" to run a second home here.
STRICKEN Anglo Irish Bank forked out almost €1m for the services of chief executive Mike Aynsley last year, including eight return flights to his native Australia and a "housing allowance" to run a second home here.
Details of the banker's package emerged yesterday as the nationalised bank confirmed it had lost €17.7bn last year, marking the biggest loss in Irish corporate history.
Mr Aynsley said the loss should be Anglo's worst, "unless the market tanks again", adding that the bank doesn't expect to need a bigger bailout than the €29.3bn it's already been promised.
Anglo's annual report also showed that the bank wrote off €363m of debts last year, but finance boss Maarten van Eden insisted the bank "hasn't forgiven any loans".
Mr Aynsley yesterday defended his €974,000 package, saying that it was boosted considerably by special allowances he gets because his family is still living in Australia.
When the banker joined Anglo he was given a "housing allowance" to maintain a home here in addition to his family home in Australia.
Last year's package also features a one-off relocation allowance and eight return tickets for Mr Aynsley and his family to travel back and forth, including four in business class.
All in, the "benefits" come in at €341,000. "Half of that's going straight to tax," Mr Aynsley said.
"But yes, they're very big numbers and I'm very grateful that the Government put this in place because it allowed me to come here.
"When my family comes over here next year, the allowances scale back."
The rest of the Anglo boss's package is made up of a salary of €500,000 and pension contributions of €133,000.
Salaries across Anglo's 1,300 strong-work force averaged €97,000 last year, but the Anglo boss said they were "not comparable" with pay at other banks since Anglo no longer has a range of lower-paid roles, like branch staff.
"You can't manage a portfolio of €35bn loans for massive recovery without people, and they've got to be good people," Mr Aynsley said.
Anglo bosses also confirmed that the bank continues to hire staff because of the "high level of attrition" in some areas.
In a morning radio interview, Mr Aynsley also launched an attack on his former colleagues, saying the bank had "cleaned the scum off the top off the pond".