Jimmy Choo Sold to Labelux for About $800 Million
Labelux, a privately held luxury group, said Sunday that it had agreed to acquire the high-end shoe and accessories company Jimmy Choo from TowerBrook Capital Partners, a private equity company, and minority shareholders.
The price was not disclosed. TowerBrook had been considering taking Jimmy Choo public, but opted to sell it to a strategic buyer. The sale values the company at about £500 million, or $800 million, two people with direct knowledge of the matter said, declining to elaborate or be identified because they were not authorized to discuss the matter.
“Jimmy Choo has expanded from 60 stores to an international footprint of 120 sites and substantial potential awaits the Jimmy Choo brand, particularly in Asia, where Labelux has a proven track record,” Ramez Sousou, co-chief executive of TowerBrook, said in a statement. TowerBrook bought the company in 2007.
Jimmy Choo’s net sales grew to 150 million pounds last year, and the company says it is seeing “double-digit growth” in all regions and product units.
The luxury industry is going through a period of intense activity, consolidating through deals and raising money in initial public offerings.
LVMH announced its 3.7 billion euro takeover of the Italian jewelry maker Bulgari in March, while Prada is slated to go public in Hong Kong next month, seeking 1.8 billion euros. Earlier this month, Hermes — itself threatened by a takeover from LVMH — sold its stake in the fashion house Jean-Paul Gaultier to the Catalan perfume maker, Puig.
Labelux, based in Austria, is a division of Joh. A. Benckiser, the investment arm of the Reimann family. Founded in 2007, Labelux holds such fashion brands as Bally, Derek Lam and Zagliani in its portfolio.
Jimmy Choo’s top management, including its founder and chief creative officer, Tamara Mellon, and its chief executive, Joshua Schulman, reportedly plan to remain with the company after it changes hands.
Labelux hired Rothschild as its financial adviser and Hogan Lovells as legal counsel. Mr. Schulman was advised by Pearce L.L.P. Ms. Mellon was advised by MX Capital Partners, Vedder Price and Travers Smith. TowerBrook hired Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley as its advisers, and Kirkland & Ellis as legal counsel. The deal is expected to close next month.