iafrica.com  Foxconn boosts morale
Taiwanese technology giant Foxconn plans to hold a morale-boosting "employee rally" on Wednesday after a string of suicides at its Chinese factories turned a spotlight on working conditions.
"Foxconn feels it's perhaps time to look back and to learn from the tragedies and to send an important message to their employees that they are not alone, and that the Foxconn family is there to support them and to help them through their challenges," it said in a statement.
The march on Wednesday afternoon is aimed at promoting "unity among employees of Foxconn and to extend moral support and resources to help employees deal with personal and work challenges," it added.
It follows the suicides of 13 workers at Foxconn, which assembles Apple's iPhone and other well-known products, which highlighted working conditions for about 200 million migrant workers who are helping drive China's stunning economic rise.
The rally ? themed "Treasure your life, love your family, care for each other to build a wonderful future" ? will be held at Foxconn facilities across China, including a giant campus in the southern city of Shenzhen, it said.
Ten of the deaths happened at Foxconn's Shenzhen facility, which employs an estimated 400 000 workers and is fitted with spotless factories, bakeries, banks, employee apartments, acupuncture clinics and fast-food shops.
The high-profile suicides this year sparked an investigation and prompted Foxconn founder Terry Gou to lead media on a tour of the Shenzhen campus in May.
Labour rights activists have blamed suicides at Foxconn ? the world's largest maker of computer components and a supplier to leading brands such as Dell and Nokia ? on tough working conditions in its factories.
Gou has said none of the suicides was directly work-related and that he was cleared by Chinese authorities of any wrongdoing in the lead up to the incidents.
In May, Foxconn urged workers to sign contracts promising not to kill themselves ? hours before the 11th worker this year fell to his death ? prompting widespread criticism.
The firm responded by installing a suicide hotline, hired Buddhist monks and counsellors to help at-risk employees, pledging to retrain its supervisors and install safety nets outside buildings to thwart future suicide bids.
It also gave employees a pay rise of 67 percent, to 2000 yuan (around $290) a month, effective from 1 October.