S&P surprises with cut to Italian debt rating
Update Standard and Poor's has downgraded its ratings on Italy by one notch to A/A-1 and kept its outlook on negative, a major surprise that threatens to add to concerns of contagion in the debt-stressed euro zone.
The news came at about 8.30 am, eastern Australian time, and sent the Australian dollarinto a tailspin against the US dollar and the yen. The dollar lost about three-quarters of a US cent within mintues to drop to about $US1.015, while it fell to a six-month low of 77.7 yen in recent trading.
Australian shares aded to yesterday's 1.6 per cent slide on these renewed European concerns, with the overall market already down 14 per cent for 2011 prior to today. The ASX 200 share index was off 0.3 per cent in early trading.
"It's just more of the same negative news," said Stephen Roberts, a senior economist at Nomura in Sydney. "It only adds to the contagion risk over Greece and has encouraged the flight to safety in markets here," he added. S&P in a release dated September 19 said the cut reflected its view of Italy's weakening economic growth prospects.
Italy's fragile governing coalition and policy differences within parliament will likely continue to limit the government's ability to respond decisively to the challenging domestic and external macroeconomic environment, the agency said. "In our opinion, the measures included in and the implementation timeline of Italy's National Reform Plan will likely do little to boost Italy's economic performance, particularly against the backdrop of tightening financial conditions and the government's fiscal austerity program," said S&P.
The move from S&P came as a surprise as the market had thought Moody's was more likely to downgrade Italy first. Moody's last week said it would take another month to decide on its action.First-mover S&P sent shockwaves through financial markets in early August when it downgraded US debt for the first time after US President Barack Obama and Republican leaders struggled to meet a deadline to raise the country's debt ceiling.