Qantas customers only winners
QANTAS CEO Alan Joyce says the Federal Government was warned the airline was in crisis weeks ahead of the grounding of the fleet.
He said customers were the only winners following yesterday's emergency Fair Work Australia (FWA) hearing, after the airline and unions were given 21 days to reach a settlement.
"I don't think any side should be declaring victory, this is a victory for the Qantas customers," he told Macquarie Radio.
"It gives certainty for the customers going forward, the unions can't take any more action...
"Qantas can't take any more action, that's gone, so our aircraft go back in the air."
Mr Joyce said Qantas was aiming to have a positioning flight at 12.25pm (AEDT) today, with the first flight carrying customers to take to the skies before 2pm (AEDT).
"We will be putting a lot of flights back in to Melbourne from Sydney," Mr Joyce said, referring to the traffic flow for the Melbourne Cup.
Mr Joyce said Federal Transport Minister Anthony Albanese was warned on October 21 of the pending crisis.
"We've certainly had a dialogue going back weeks saying how bad this is for the company," he said.
"There was absolutely lots of contact with ministers' offices ... We'd been making it very clear to both sides of politics that this could not continue, that Qantas was getting to a critical phase.
"We told them that we could not survive indefinitely the way this was going."
Mr Joyce said he was faced with three options: to capitulate to the unions' demands, to do nothing or to lock out staff that were taking the industrial action.
"The dispute was unbalanced, all the pain was on one side ... we had to do something."
Mr Joyce said he had not called Prime Minister Gillard to tell her about his decision to ground the entire Qantas fleet because she was at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) in Perth.
"I had rang three minister and talked to three ministers ... we had no expectation to talk to her because we knew she was tied up," he said.