Eurozone crisis live: Greece talks grind on as 'deadline' passes
5.30pm: So as another deadline for the Greek crisis whizzed by with nothing resolved, it's time to call a halt to proceedings.
There was much rhetoric from the likes of Angela Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy, trying to push Greece into agreeing cutbacks, and growing concerns about Portugal, prompting a response from the country's prime minister.
But Greece was again centre stage, as the resumption of key talks between prime minister Lucas Papademos and other party leaders was pushed back to tomorrow. Papademos is meant to be meeting the troika later today to discuss proposed austerity measures, but don't hold your breath.
The markets have taken all this remarkably calmly, with the FTSE 100 down just 8.87 points at 5892.20, Germany's Dax virtually unchanged and France's Cac off 0.66%. Across the Atlantic the Dow Jones Industrial Average is currently 44 points lower. The euro fell to around $1.302 before recovering to 1.314.
We'll be back tomorrow to cover all the latest developments, and in the meantime, good bye and thanks as usual for all the comments.
5.13pm: Maybe Papademos wasted his time getting that report on what would happen if Greece goes bust.
German chancellor Angela Merkel has just said in a TV interview - alongside her chum Nicholas Sarkozy:
But she also said there would only be a second Greek bailout if the country got its public finances in order, which pretty much echoes what the twosome said earlier at their joint press conference.
4.37pm: What would actually happen to the country if Greece does go bust?
That's what the country's technocrat prime minister Lucas Papademos is finding out, as the various meetings about its debt and austerity measures drag on. Papademos has asked experts at Athens' finance ministry to compile a detailed analysis of what bankruptcy would entail. Our correspondent Helena Smith says:
Presumably to push them into finally backing the proposals.
But the protests against austerity continue. Greece's two major unions - representing 2m people or around half the workforce - have called a 24 hour strike tomorrow, the latest in a series of walkouts since the first bailouts in 2010. Ilias Iliopoulos, secretary general of public sector union Adedy, told Reuters:
4.13pm: Portugal seems determined to have its place in the sun today, despite most eyes still being on the interminable Greek talks.
After a spokesman denied a report the country was sounding out advisers about restructuring its debt, the Portuguese prime minister Passos Coelho has come out fighting.
He told journalists that Portugal's debt load was sustainable, its borrowing profile was closer to Ireland - the current EU austerity poster child - and its situation was fundamentally different from Greece. According to Reuters he said:
Let's hope he is not protesting too much.....
3.51pm: A quick run around the markets. In early trading Wall Street has following other global markets lower, as the lack of progress in Greece encourages a spot of profit-taking after last week's rises.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average is down just over 50 points, or 0.4%, while the FTSE 100 is off 16.47 points at 5884.6. Germany, France and Italy have edged marginally lower, while the euro has slipped to $1.3066, but is off its worst levels.
3.44pm: Readers may recall that on Friday we linked to a reportsuggesting Portugal was sounding out advisers about restructuring its debts, in a similar way to Greece.
In a move entirely in keeping with the seeming lack of urgency surrounding much of this crisis, Portugal has now finally responded. A spokesman told Reuters:
The report, coincidentally, is from IFR, a news service run by... Thomson Reuters. Strangely it now has today's date, but it was definitely around on Friday.
3.16pm: Speaking of Portugal, the European Central Bank was widely believed to be buying the country's bonds last week.
Although it does not break down its data, the bank has announced it spent €124m on eurozone sovereign debt last week, compared to €63m the previous week. This is basically just keeping things ticking along, a position backed by Germany while others - France, Italy, Britain, the US etc - want it to take a more aggressive stance in its buying.
The bank's latest policy meeting comes later this week, with uncertainty about whether - like Greece's private bondholders - it will be taking a haircut on the €40bn or so of the country's bonds it owns.
2.46pm: Gavan Nolan, credit analyst at Markit, notes the markets appear to be increasingly fearful about Portugal being the next in the firing line as debt and austerity talks in Athens run down to the wire. The cost of insuring five-year Portuguese government bonds has risen 38% in the last month.
My colleague Phillip Inman suggests Portuguese politicians will be watching the endgame in Athens with great interest. Any concessions won from Brussels may soon be mirrored in political calls from Lisbon.
My colleague Nick Fletcher takes over the Eurozone Crisis blog from here.
2.25pm: The saga of the missing meeting continues. Now Reuters is reporting that Greek political leaders have delayed until tomorrow a critical meeting, which had been eagerly anticipated today — first this morning, then in the early evening. Despite claims that progress is being made in talks over fresh austerity measures between coalition politicians, repeated delays are adding to concerns in the wider markets.
Meanwhile, the cost of insuring Greek sovereign debt against default has been creeping back upwards in recent weeks. For five-year bonds, credit default swaps - a measure of the cost of insurance - have climbed from 5200 basis points to 6542 in the last ten days.
1.35pm: Data released by the European Union this morning showed that the combined debt of the 27 members of the EU has now hit €10,320,106,100,000, or €10.3 trillion.
The new statistics, published by Eurostat, showed that the EU collective debt now equals 82.2% of GDP. France and the UK both owe 85.2% of their national output, with Germany in slightly better shape with a national debt worth 81.8% of GDP.
The data also shows how national debts have swelled over the last few years (see above).
You can see all the information on the Datablog.
1.04pm: Debt talks delays in Athens continues to hit the currency markets, as traders fear the spectre of a chaotic default and contagion. Euro now down 0.6% at $1.3064.
After gaining strength since mid-January on optimism about a deal, the euro is now dipping again.
12.55pm: A meeting between Greek prime minister Lucas Papademos and coalition party leaders is likely to take place early this evening, says Helena Smith in Athens.
12.20pm: Nicolas Sarkozy and Angela Merkel have also waded into the situation, at a joint news conference in Paris this lunchtime.
Sarkozy claimed – with just a hint of optimism – that an agreement over Greece's second bailout has "never been closer". The French president also urged Greece's political leaders to follow through on their commitments.
Chancellor Merkel told the press conference that it was important to see "some progress" in "the next few days", and also insisted that Greece must decide whether it remains in the euro. She said:
And without a new programme of aid, Greece would head to default next month.
12.06pm: The European commission has blasted Greece for its failure to reach an agreement, and insisted that time has run out.
EC spokesman Amadeu Altafaj told journalists in Brussels that "the ball was in the court of the Greek authorities", insisting that they must now decide whether it would accept the terms of its proposed second bailout.
Altafaj added that EU finance ministers would meet as soon as Greece has said it will make its commitments.
In other words – don't wait for us to hold our next meeting. We're waiting for you.
11.48am: Frustrations at the missed-deadline-that-never-was over fresh Greek austerity measures are brilliantly articulated by Louise Cooper, of BGC Partners, who gives us an etymology lesson. "Deadline", she reminds us, was originally a Civil War term for a line that marked the boundary beyond which a prisoner could not go without being shot.
We've been messed around a good deal on Greek deadlines in recent days (see below). Meanwhile, eurozone heavyweights are piling on the pressure. Eurogroup president Jean-Claude Juncker, of Luxembourg, said: "If we were to determine that everything has gone wrong with Greece, then there would be no new programme, then this would mean that in March they would have to declare bankruptcy."
The latest hint as to when we might learn more came from one Greek MP, a member of the ruling Pasok party, who has told Bloomberg TV that agreement among coalition politicians must be reached by tomorrow afternoon. Should we hold our breath on that promise? Perhaps not.
11.46am: Germany's December factory orders were up 1.7% on the previous month, well ahead of expectations and boosting the impression that the eurozone's largest economy continues to power ahead, boosted by demand from further afield.
11.10am: A curious historical echo: Today is the anniversary of the 1832 crowning of Otto, King of Greece, an occasion that saw the birth of a (highly indebted) modern state – albeit under the protection of the UK, France and Russia. As FT Alphaville notes Otto was really quite Bavarian. In fact, he was the son of King Ludwig I. His rule saw massive tax hikes and led to widespread discontent – even an assassination attempt on his wife. Eventually, he was ousted in a coup and retreated to Bavaria in 1862. A lesson for our times?
10.33am: Should Scotland vote for independence, it could emerge with something less than a triple A credit rating, according to a mischievous article in the FT this morning. Taking unofficial soundings from the big three credit rating agencies – Standard & Poor's, Moody's and Fitch – the report suggests Scotland might scrape in with an investment-grade rating, but some notches short of the UK's triple A. SNP describes such reports as "inaccurate".
9.31am: The pound has strengthened this morning against the euro as concerns about Greece continue to build. The euro was down about 0.4% against the pound at 82.87 pence. Sterling is now close to its highest level since September 2010 – despite the prospect of the Bank of England opting for another dose of quantitative easing shortly.
9.29am: Hmmm. Greek government officials are now telling Reuters there is no deadline at noon today (10am GMT). They say the only commitment is to reach agreement before the next meeting of the Eurogroup of eurozone finance ministers. A meeting had been in the diary for 4pm today – but appears to have been cancelled over the weekend. On Friday a spokesman for the German finance ministry told Reuters:
So the deadline for Greek political agreement is a meeting, invitations to which will only be sent out once Greek political agreement has been reached.
9.10am: European prime minister resigns months ahead of elections and after weeks of nationwide protest against tough austerity measures... Not Greece's Lucas Papademos (yet). In fact it's Emil Boc of Romania.
8.43am: Helena Smith, in Athens, confirms the prospect of April elections is looming large over intense negotiations among coalition parties about Greek austerity proposals.
Their deliberations will be followed by a brief meeting with prime minister Lucas Papademos. He, in turn, will deliver Greece's position to the "troika" of visiting debt auditors from the EU, ECB and IMF. It's likely, however, that word will leak out before then. Even if further cost-cutting measures are accepted, says Helena, it is far from sure that recalcitrant MPs will also endorse them.
8.30am: The FT has a story this morning suggesting as many as half of the capital-boosting proposals put forward by 30 European banks may be rejected as not sufficiently credible. Remember these banks were forced to come up with plans to increase their capital cushions after the European Banking Authority in December found that together they needed to raise €115bn to meet their regulatory targets.
The EBA board are due to discuss submitted plans at a meeting next week. Some experts have pointed a finger at Commerzbank as one bank likely to find filling its capital shortfall a big ask. Since then the German bank has generated €3bn of capital toward its €5.3bn stress test shortfall and local regulators have played down concerns.
Spanish bank Santander was found to have the largest shortfall - of €15bn - but has insisted it has found ways of filling the gap. Only Italy's Unicredit opted for a rights issue to raise capital - and look how well that went.
Update: The European Banking Authority says it will provide an update on bank recapitalisation plans after its board meeting on February 8-9, according to Reuters. Playing down concerns that a large number of proposals were likely to be rejected, the regulator said: "The overwhelming majority of measures outlined in the plans appear to be, in aggregate, in line with the spirit and the letter of the EBA's recommendation."
8.16am: There's not much in the diary today (other than Greece). Here's the agenda:
•10am deadline for Greek politicians to reach agreement on austerity measures •11am German factory orders for December (Consensus forecast: 1% rise) •2pm Klaas Knot, governing council member of the ECB speaking at an event in Amsterdam
8.05am: As time ticks on there is increasing concern that a lack of agreement among Greek politicians will overshadow the day. The Asian markets were up overnight on the back of Friday's strong jobs figures from the US. (Japan's Nikkei average rose 1.1% to a three-month high of 8,925 points, the Hang Seng was up 0.51% at 20,862.) Back in Europe the mood is more sombre.
Greek coalition parties are supposed to be working to a deadline of midday - 10am GMT. That might get pushed back, of course, but if it passes without agreement it will do nothing to calm the mood.
Here is the view from analysts at Investec:
7.45am: Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the eurozone financial crisis.
Today is deadline day for Greece, which must tell the European Union whether it accepts the terms of its second bailout, worth €130bn. The heads of its three largest political parties spent the weekend locked in talks, but are still divided.
One leader – Laos's Giorgos Karatzaferis - has already refused to endorse the painful package of spending cuts and tax rises. Can PM Lucas Papademos pull a deal out of the fire?
Athens is also still struggling to reach a deal with its private creditors over its debt restructuring package – adding to fears that Greece might fall into bankruptcy.
On the economic front, the latest German factory order data should be released this morning, showing how its manufacturers fared at the end of 2011.