James Murdoch resigns from News International as firm admits papers could be sold off
Murdoch, 39, has relinquished his newspaper position to focus on expanding the company’s international television business, News Corporation, NI’s parent company, said in a statement.
It comes after News Corp's Chief Operating Officer, Chase Carey, revealed he had held a number of talks with the company's executives about selling or separating the publishing unit from the company.
“There certainly is an awareness” that New York-based News Corp. would trade at higher multiples if it didn’t own newspapers, Carey said at the Deutsche Bank (DBK) media conference in Palm Beach, Florida.
<noframe>Twitter: Dan Sabbagh - &ldquo;There certainly is an awareness&rdquo; that News Corp. would trade at higher multiples if it didn&rsquo;t own newspapers, Chase Carey said yesterday</noframe>
During his five-year term, James Murdoch oversaw the closure of the News of the World, News International’s biggest selling newspaper.
He also faced fierce criticism of his handling of the hacking scandal and was accused of misleading parliament over his knowledge of phone hacking at the newspaper.
And he oversaw the decision to put The Times’ website behind an online paywall.
Following the announcement the News Corp chairman Rupert Murdoch, James’s father, praised his son’s leadership, saying: “We are all grateful for James' leadership at News International…where he has made lasting contributions to the group's strategy in paid digital content and its efforts to improve and enhance governance programs.
“He has demonstrated leadership and continues to create great value at Star TV, Sky Deutschland, Sky Italia, and BSkyB.
“Now that he has moved to New York, James will continue to assume a variety of essential corporate leadership mandates, with particular focus on important pay-TV businesses and broader international operations.”
His decision to step down comes less than a week after the launch of the Sun on Sunday, which Rupert Murdoch oversaw in London.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Robert Peston - News Corp source: J Murdoch went because "you only need one Murdoch running the newspapers" - ie Rupert is back to stay. See my blog soon&lt;/noframe&gt;
James Murdoch added: “I deeply appreciate the dedication of my many talented colleagues at News International who work tirelessly to inform the public and am confident about the tremendous momentum we have achieved under the leadership of my father and Tom Mockridge,”
“With the successful launch of The Sun on Sunday and new business practices in place across all titles, News International is now in a strong position to build on its successes in the future.”
News Corp., based in New York, owns the Wall Street Journal and the New York Post in the U.S., as well as the Times, Sun, and just-introduced Sun on Sunday in the U.K. The company derives more than 70 percent of its operating income from its television businesses that includes Fox Broadcast and the FX cable channel. Publishing accounts for less than a fifth of annual operating income and is “significantly down year-on-year on profitability,” according to Carey.
News Corp. rose 1.6 percent to $19.81 at the close in New York on Tuesday. The shares have gained 11 percent this year.
For the moment, the company is focusing on increasing profit margins at the publishing businesses, Carey said. He left open the possibility the board could consider a spin off.
“As a board, we will and have and will continue to discuss everything that we think that makes sense,” Carey said.