James Murdoch quits as hacking claims keep coming
News Corp's Australian-listed shares, meanwhile, rose on the news of James Murdoch's shift. A-class shares gained as much as 7 cents, or 0.4 per cent, to $18.53, while its B-class shares were up as much as 9 cents, or 0.5 per cent, to $18.95. James Murdoch has faced tough questions from British parliamentarians about how much he knew about the degree of phone-hacking at the News of the World. The day before his resignation was announced, he was lambasted by MP Chris Bryant, who accused him of being involved in a corporate cover-up of hacking at News International. The hacking took place before Mr Murdoch was in the chair but he was in charge in 2009 and 2010 when the company repeatedly denied that hacking went beyond a single "rogue reporter". His five-year term also saw the closure of the News of the Worldafter revelations it had hacked the voicemail of a murdered schoolgirl, as well as the decision to put The Times website behind a pay-wall. There were more revelations this week at the Leveson inquiry into the media about the degree to which Ms Brooks knew of police evidence of widespread phone hacking in 2006. This led to further questions about how Mr Murdoch, to whom she reported, could have remained unknowing.
The Press Association reports that Scotland Yard detectives invited Ms Brooks to join their 2006 prosecution of a journalist and private detective working for the News of the World as a potential victim of illegal interception of voicemails after it was found her voicemail had been intercepted as often as twice a week. She did not take up the offer, and in fact passed on information about the hacking investigation she gleaned from the police to the News of the World's lawyers. Paul Connew, a former deputy editor of the News of the World, told the BBC he thought Mr Murdoch "had been moved out of the firing line" because he would face sharp criticism in the final report by a media select committee of MPs investigating hacking. The trouble is that wittingly or unwittingly … he became caught up in that cover-up. "He wasn't around when the original hacking era started. He wasn't around when the doomed and disastrous cover-up was launched. The trouble is that wittingly or unwittingly … he became caught up in that cover-up," Mr Connew said.
Mr Murdoch had acknowledged receiving an email from a senior executive that warned of evidence that hacking was more widespread but had denied opening the attachment with this information. Mr Connew said this either amounted to "complete incompetence or something more sinister". Mr Connew said there were rumours on Wall Street that News Corp was considering bundling its News International titles into a separate company, detached from News Corp. News titles also include The Australian, the Daily Telegraph and the Herald Sun in Australia. News Corp faced the prospect of a "devastating prosecution" under laws that forbid American companies from being involved in corruption of public officials overseas, he said. Several News International staff have been arrested over suspicions of payments to officials in Britain. Rupert Murdoch would still control any such new company, Mr Connew said.
Steven Barnett, professor of communications at Westminster University, agreed that concerns about the American operation would probably have been paramount. "I think it is a deep-seated fear that there's still a possibility that there might be some sort of criminal investigation launched in America," he said. "You could argue that James Murdoch has become a fall guy … the sacrificial lamb." Mr Bryant repeated that he thought it inconceivable that Mr Murdoch "wasn't either willingly blind or fully conscious" of the scale of news-hacking. "That alone makes him unfit to be a director of a company in this country, let alone chairman of News International and chairman of [satellite broadcaster] BSkyB." He said Britain should examine media ownership. "We as a country have to decide if one person should have 40 per cent of newspapers and the single biggest share of the biggest broadcaster by value, BSkyB." Mr Bryant said the Murdochs had brought "important British titles" into disrepute, and that The Times was now losing money "hand over fist".
News Corporation released a statement saying that Tom Mockridge, CEO of News International, would continue in his post and report to News Corp president Chase Carey. Rupert Murdoch said in the statement, "We are all grateful for James's leadership at News International and across Europe and Asia, where he has made lasting contributions to the group's strategy in paid digital content and its efforts to improve and enhance governance programs." James Murdoch, who recently moved to New York, said he deeply appreciated the dedication of talented colleagues at News International. "With the successful launch of The Sun on Sunday and new business practices in place across all titles, News International is now in a strong position to build on its successes in the future."