ICC defends decision to suspend Pakistan cricketers
The International Cricket Council today defended its decision to charge three Pakistan cricketers under its anti-corruption code.
The three men, accused of an alleged betting scam, were today formally interviewed by police under caution and later released without police charges.
Mohammad Amir, Mohammad Asif and Test captain Salman Butt were interviewed separately at Kilburn police station in north London.
Afterwards, their lawyer, Elizabeth Robertson, said they had attended voluntarily and at no time were they under arrest. She said the men would continue to co-operate fully with police and the ICC, which has charged them under its anti-corruption code and provisionally banned them from playing in any match.
Despite the ICC charges, police have yet to decide whether there is enough evidence to charge the players with conspiracy to commit fraud. The council's anti-corruption and security unit is conducting its own, parallel investigation.
ICC investigators will not question the players until they receive permission from the police. They are finalising an "information sharing protocol" to pool evidence.
The police seized money and mobile phones from the players last Sunday and are investigating any possible link between bank notes found in their possession and the money handed to a middle-man as part of the sting by the News of the World, which made the allegations.
Before any prosecution, Scotland Yard would have to prove that any money they received from Mazhar Majeed was taken in return for deliberately bowling no-balls. The players have told friends they are prepared to tell detectives they did receive payments from Majeed, but this was entirely proper because he was their agent.
Majeed, who was arrested last weekend by police over the News of the World allegations, and by customs over money-laundering allegations, is responsible for organising the three players' sponsorship deals.
At least one of them did not have a UK bank account. Majeed has represented members of Pakistan's test side in this role for several years.
Last night, the ICC moved to suspend the trio provisionally after charging them with "various offences" under its code of conduct. Sir Ronnie Flanagan, the recently appointed chairman of the anti-corruption unit, and Haroon Lorgat, the ICC chief executive, insisted the offences were not "the tip of the iceberg". But Lorgat conceded that the sport faced its worst crisis since the Hansie Cronje match-fixing affair a decade ago.
Pakistan high commissioner Wajid Hasan this morning accused the ICC of "playing to the public gallery" by suspending the three cricketers.
He said: "I have heard the press briefing by two ICC Representatives today. I have also learnt that ICC has taken Amir's name off from the list of players of the year. What happened to the general principle of law – innocent until proven guilty?
"After the shocking, arbitrary and high-handed suspension of the three cricketers through the ICC's uncalled-for action, nothing is coming to me as a surprise. My apprehensions that there is a rat in the whole affair are being strengthened."
He said the ICC had "no authority" to intervene and has previously claimed the players were "set up" by the News of the World, which is expected to publish further revelations on Sunday. On the same day, England will face Pakistan in the first of two Twenty20 matches in Cardiff.
Lorgat insisted that the proper processes had been followed and denied Hasan's claims." I certainly wouldn't subscribe to the view that there is some sort of conspiracy around Pakistan cricket.
"This particular incident with the three players is unrelated to the challenge that we've got in keeping Pakistan involved as a full member of the International Cricket Council," he said. The country has been unable to play at home since a terrorist attack on the Sri Lanka team bus in Lahore last year.