Fabrice Muamba news: Bolton consider pulling out of FA Cup with fiancee Shauna leading prayers
Bolton may withdraw from the FA Cup as Fabrice Muamba battles for his life after suffering a heart attack.
As players paid their tributes on the field and beyond, it emerged that Bolton may decide to pull out of the competition to avoid a harrowing return to Tottenham.
Muamba's fiancee has urged everyone to keep praying for the Bolton star to recover. The midfielder spent a second night on a life support machine at the London Chest Hospital on Sunday.
On Monday morning, a joint statement from Bolton, Barts and The NHS Trust read: 'Fabrice Muamba's heart condition is stable, but he remains critically ill in intensive care at The London Chest Hospital. The family is grateful to the media for continuing to respect their privacy at this time.'
The football world has united in support for Muamba - and his partner Shauna, who runs a successful Caribbean food catering business and got engaged to the footballer on Valentine’s Day, took to Twitter to write: '2 everyone out there thank u so much for all the love and support collectively as a family we appreciate it all. Plz continue 2 pray 4 fab x.
'Fabrice WILL!! Pull through because God is good. Love u so much @fmuamba keep strong we're praying for u honey xx.
'Please keep praying for @fmuamba its really helping I can feel it xx. God is in control. Please keep @fmuamba in ur prayers xx.'
Saturday's match against Tottenham was quickly abandoned after the horrific moment when Muamba fell to the turf with no-one close to him.
If the rescheduled game is axed, Tottenham would go into a semi-final against Chelsea at Wembley. Bolton would not be penalised if they decide to withdraw.
A source close to Bolton told the : 'This is a group of young men, just kids really. How could they cope with going back to Spurs and going through it all again?'
Bolton’s next match is the relegation six-pointer against Lancashire rivals Blackburn this Saturday, although it may also be under threat.
The club's reserve match against West Bromwich Albion, scheduled for Wednesday, has already been postponed.
Gary Cahill, his former teammate, wore a message on his T-shirt that said: ‘Pray 4 Muamba’ as he scored for Chelsea in the FA Cup win over Leicester on Sunday.
He was joined by Liverpool striker Luis Suarez, who wrote on Twitter: ‘I want to dedicate (the goal) to Muamba. Keep fighting buddy, don’t give up.’
Manchester United’s players led a round of applause for the stricken player before their 5-0 win at Wolves, while Tottenham striker Jermain Defoe and his mother visited Muamba and his family in hospital.
As the 23-year-old spent a second night on life support, Bolton plan for all their players to have further heart screenings and ECGs on Monday.
Muamba had heart tests along with his team-mates at the start of the season, but they did not flag up any problems for the athletic midfielder.
Bolton’s Barclays Premier League fixture at Aston Villa on Tuesday has been postponed.
Tottenham will have trained counsellors at their Spurs Lodge training ground on Tuesday to help players affected.
Their goalkeeper, Brad Friedel, pulled out of appearing on Match of the Day 2 on Sunday night.
After scoring and revealing his personal message to Muamba, Cahill - who played with the midfielder at Bolton - said: ‘The game was a bit of a blur for me after having seen what happened yesterday.
'I just hope he is OK. My mind was in a different place today.’
A round of applause echoed around Stamford Bridge ahead of Sunday’s game, while Liverpool offered their thoughts and prayers for Muamba during the pre-match handshake.
Supporters at the matches at Wolves, Newcastle and Cardiff also paid tribute to the ex-England Under 21 midfielder.
And in Spain, Real Madrid players wore T-shirts before their game against Malaga with messages of support for Muamba.
Tottenham striker Defoe - who was visibly traumatised by the incident - visited Muamba yon Sunday and a number of his Bolton team-mates also wish to return to London to be close to their friend and colleague.
It was claimed on Sunday night that the supporter who jumped on to the pitch just moments after Muamba collapsed was a heart specialist who advised the medical staff to take the player to the London Chest Hospital rather than the closer North Middlesex Hospital.
And it is understood the fan’s intervention played a key role in ensuring Muamba had the best possible chance of surviving the ordeal. Referee Howard Webb abandoned the match as medics tried to revive the player, whose heart stopped beating by itself for two hours.
A Bolton statement read on Sunday: ‘Fabrice Muamba remains in a critical condition in intensive care in the heart attack centre at the London Chest Hospital.
‘Fabrice was admitted to the hospital on Saturday evening after collapsing at White Hart Lane, where he sustained a cardiac arrest.
‘Fabrice received prolonged resuscitation at the ground and on route to the London Chest Hospital, where his heart eventually started working.
‘As is normal medical practice, Fabrice remains anaesthetised in intensive care and will be for at least 24 hours.’
Manager Owen Coyle added: ‘Fabrice’s family have asked me to pass on their thanks for the many, many kind messages of support from not only Bolton fans but also fans from clubs across the country and abroad.’
Saturday’s events bear a chilling similarity to former Manchester City midfielder Marc Vivien Foe’s death in 2003, when he collapsed while playing for Cameroon against Colombia.
It brought back painful memories for ESPN pundit Kevin Keegan, who was Foe’s City manager at the time of his death. ‘Although every case is different, there were horrible similarities with what happened to Marc,’ he said.
‘There was no way the game could continue here - you could see, from the distress of players on both sides, that you can’t play football after something so traumatic.’