Andy Murray says his Australian Open final opponent Novak Djokovic is favourite to win the title
Andy Murray is better rested and yet to be pushed to five sets at this year's Australian Open, but the Scot knows the score when it comes to Sunday's final against Novak Djokovic.
Murray has finished runner-up at the event three times, including losses to Djokovic in the 2011 and 2013 finals.
In sharp contrast, Djokovic has won all four finals he has contested at Melbourne Park.
Rod Laver Arena has been Djokovic's playground throughout his career and Murray opined the world number one would be a deserving favourite when the match starts at 7.30pm AEDT.
"He has a fantastic record here. He obviously loves the court and the conditions," Murray said.
"I've never won against him here before.
"It would be a big upset if I manage to win."
The grab for underdog status is a time-honoured tradition in every sport.
But Murray insisted his claim was genuine.
"I played him a couple times very close to the end of last year and lost pretty comfortably," Murray said.
"For me it would be a big turnaround in a few months if I was able to win."
To raise the Norman Brookes Challenge Cup, Murray must rewrite history as the first man to bounce back and reign after three sapping finals defeats.
Djokovic is also drawing confidence from beating Murray in seven of eight encounters over the past two years.
But Murray's two grand slam titles have come after wins over Djokovic, in the 2013 final of Wimbledon and 2012 US Open decider.
The Serb disagreed with Murray's assessment of favouritism, painting a significantly different picture of Sunday's clash.
"He's been playing some great tennis these couple weeks," Djokovic said of Murray.
"He already knows what it takes to win a grand slam title."
Djokovic noted Murray is a different beast now that he's shaken the grand slam gorilla off his back.
"He's going for the shots," said the top seed.
"He's one of the best defenders in the game, no question about it. He is an incredible counter-puncher.
"He's got a lot of variety in his game. He's got also a big serve."