Marlins, Pirates players reportedly worried about Zika virus ahead of Puerto Rico series
The Marlins and Pirates are scheduled to play in Puerto Rico next month. The two-game series scheduled for May 30-31 at San Juan's Hiram Bithorn Stadium has some players worried after about 400 cases of the Zika virus have been confirmed in Puerto Rico, according to Yahoo Sports.
The virus, which is spread by mosquito bites and through sexual contact, has been linked to birth defects in babies. There has not been any discussion about canceling the series.
MORE: Latino legends of the major leagues
"The health and safety of our players and staff is our No. 1 priority," Brian Warecki, the Pirates' vice president of communications, said, via Yahoo. "We are working closely with all parties, including MLB, MLBPA and the CDC, to ensure we are fully educated on the issue. We are very confident that we are taking the overly cautious steps to ensure we have a very successful two-game series in San Juan."
Some teams were concerned about the virus prior to spring training in Florida. Major League Baseball cautioned people then to be careful around standing water and encouraged them to wear insect repellent. MLB remains in contact with federal health officials.
"We believe the games will be played as scheduled, and we are having ongoing conversations with the CDC to alleviate the players' concerns," Patrick Courtney, MLB's chief communications officer, said. 
MORE: Hope Solo changes mind, will play in Olympics
Other MLB teams with scouts in the Caribbean have advised employees planning on having children in the near future to skip scheduled visits, sources told Yahoo Sports. Because the virus originated in Brazil, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have also recommended pregnant women not travel to Rio de Janeiro in August for the Olympics.
The Puerto Rico series is to honor Pirates Hall of Famer Roberto Clemente, who was from Puerto Rico. The two games will be the first regular-season games played in Puerto Rico since the Marlins and Mets played a three-game series at Hiram Bithorn Stadium in 2010. The Pirates last played in Puerto Rico in 2004, when they played a four-game set against the Montreal Expos.