Paralympic cyclist Bahman Golbarnezhad dies after crash in road race
THE PARALYMPICS have been marred by tragedy after a competitor in the men's cycling road race died following a crash in the race.
Iranian Bahman Golbarnezhad was rushed to hospital after a fall competing in the C4-5 event in Rio today.
The rider suffered a cardiac arrest after hitting his head against a rock but despite receiving emergency treatment on the course and on the way to hospital, the 48-year-old was pronounced dead in hospital.
The race was also marred by another crash just yards from the finishing line when two rivals competing for gold tumbled over each other.
International Paralympic Committee president Sir Philip Carven said: “This is truly heart-breaking news and the thoughts and condolences of the whole Paralympic Movement are with Bahman’s family, friends, and teammates as well as the whole of the National Paralympic Committee (NPC) of Iran.
“The Paralympic Family is united in grief at this horrendous tragedy which casts a shadow over what have been great Paralympic Games here in Rio.”
It is with deep sadness and regret that the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) confirms the death of the Iranian Para cyclist Bahman Golbarnezhad following an accident in this morning’s (17 September) road race at the Rio 2016 Paralympic Games. Golbarnezhad, 48, was involved in a crash at around 10:40am on the first section of the Grumari loop, a mountainous stretch of the course. The athlete received treatment at the scene and was in the process of being taken to the athlete hospital when he suffered a cardiac arrest. The ambulance then diverted to the nearby Unimed Rio Hospital in Barra where he passed away soon after arrival. The athlete’s family who are in Iran was informed this afternoon and the Iranian team was brought together in the Athlete Village earlier this evening and told of the news. Sir Philip Carven, IPC President, said: “This is truly heart-breaking news and the thoughts and condolences of the whole Paralympic Movement are with Bahman’s family, friends, and teammates as well as the whole of the National Paralympic Committee (NPC) of Iran. “The Paralympic Family is united in grief at this horrendous tragedy which casts a shadow over what have been great Paralympic Games here in Rio.” Carlos Nuzman, President of Rio 2016, said: “This is very sad news for sport and for the Paralympic movement. Our hearts and prayers are with Bahman’s family, his teammates and all the people of Iran.” Brian Cookson, UCI President, said: “I am devastated to hear about the death of Iranian rider Bahman Golbarnezhad. Our thoughts are with his family and friends, and the NPC of Iran to whom we offer our most sincere condolences.” Following Golbarnezhad‘s passing the Iranian Flag has been lowered to half-mast in the Paralympic Village. The Paralympic flag will also be flown at half-mast in the Paralympic Village and at the Rio Centro venue where Iran on Sunday (18 September) will play Bosnia and Herzegovina in the sitting volleyball gold medal match. During tomorrow’s Closing Ceremony a moment of silence will be held. An investigation into the circumstances of the accident has been launched.
Golbarnezhad was born in Shiraz, Iran. He also competed in the London Paralympics and didn't medal.
The road races began at Pontal and included the Grumari circuit incorporated in the Rio Olympics road races.
The Vista Chinesa circuit - which included a treacherous descent where Holland’s Annemiek van Vleuten crashed into the curb, sustaining heavy concussion - was not part of the Paralympic course.
Golbarnezhad was 14th in the time-trial on Wednesday and was Iran’s sole cyclist at the Rio Games.
Iran’s NPC said in a statement: “Regretfully, I.R.IRAN NPC announces that Mr. Bahman Golbarnezhad, passed away because of his accident during the competition.”