Status Quo Running Unopposed in FIFA Election
Even Blatter, who seemed unmoved by the turmoil surrounding his organization during a contentious news conference Monday, struck a more somber tone. Perhaps trying to ease into a more conciliatory mode ahead of his acceptance speech, Blatter told the convention that FIFA is “shaking on its foundations.”
“I thought we were in a world of fair play, respect and discipline, and unfortunately I have to see it no longer is the case,” Blatter said. “There is danger.”
One sign that things are not going well is that FIFA is left taking advice from the International Olympic Committee, which had a bribery scandal of its own surrounding the 2002 Salt Lake Games.
“I am sure that FIFA can emerge stronger,” the I.O.C. president Jacques Rogge said in a speech to the FIFA delegates.
First the delegates must make it through Wednesday. There appears to be little chance of full-blown chaos, as talk of a walkout by the Asian delegation cooled. But there should be plenty of strong rhetoric; 18 top soccer officials are scheduled to speak.
FIFA has been swamped by a steady stream of bribery accusations in recent months. The first batch involved the vote in December that awarded the 2018 World Cup to Russia and the 2022 World Cup to Qatar.
The more recent batch of accusations centered on the election for president. Blatter’s only challenger, Mohamed bin Hammam of Qatar, and another longtime power broker, Jack Warner of Trinidad and Tobago, have been accused of offering $40,000 each to soccer officials of about two dozen Caribbean nations in exchange for their support of Bin Hammam’s bid.
Bin Hammam withdrew from the contest late Saturday. He and Warner were suspended indefinitely by FIFA on Sunday.
The English and the Scottish associations were among those calling for a postponement of the vote, contending that more time is needed for an investigation, and for alternate presidential candidates to join the race.
But a postponement appears unlikely. Several of those entering the building Tuesday noted that it requires three-quarters of the 208 soccer federations, not just two, to prevent a vote, even in an election with just one candidate amid extenuating circumstances.
So Blatter arrived at FIFA’s most carefully scrutinized meeting expecting to remain president of a teetering organization that he has led for 13 years. Hundreds of delegates — some, perhaps, with firsthand knowledge of the scandal now surfacing — came to figure out how FIFA will change its culture without changing its leadership.