Grand National 2012: Neptune Collonges pips Sunnyhillboy in closest finish ever
The 11 year-old winner, trained by Paul Nicholls and ridden by his second jockey Daryl Jacob, was retired on the spot by owner John Hales having overhauled Sunnyhillboy in the very last stride in a desperately-close finish.
It left the jockey on the runner-up, Richie McLernon, ruing modern technology and the invention of digital pixels; 15 years ago it would have been called a dead-heat.
But, once again an incident-packed race took a heavy toll with the Gold Cup winner Synchronised, a faller, and According To Pete, brought down, both at the new, modified Becher’s, fatally injured. Two horses, Weird Al and Killyglen, received veterinary treatment to injuries that were not believed to be life-threatening.
Until yesterday, Nicholls had an appalling record with just a second place – Royal Auclair in 2005 – to show for 52 runners in the race, but this time he slipped in under the radar with just one runner, a horse who has played third fiddle to his better-known stable companions Kauto Star and Denman throughout his career.
Ruby Walsh, who missed the race with concussion sustained in a hurdle race earlier, had even discarded him in favour of the Willie Mullins-trained On His Own and punters had similarly disregarded his chances sending him off at 33-1, but he has now earned his place among racing’s immortals.
“He’s the classiest horse I’ve ever run in the race,” said Nicholls, who has now won every big jump race going. “Pat, John’s wife, took a bit of persuading to let us run him, but I’ve always thought he was the right type. He had a lot of weight, but he’s always carried a lot of weight in his races. I thought we were set for second at the last but the other began tying up and we kept galloping to the winning post.”
Speaking about the ride Jacob had given the horse, he added: “He gave him a peach of a ride. I’ve always said it is not the easiest job in the world being my second jockey but he’s got better and better as the season has gone on and this will have done him the world of good and cemented the job.”
It was three-and-a-half minutes before the 28-year-old Jacob’s victory was confirmed by the judge after the pair had crossed the line, inseparable to the naked eye. “I just kept my head down and wasn’t quite sure where the post was but I could see the other fellow tying up and Nipper [Neptune Collonges] kept grinding away.” he said. “He was going the same speed at the start as he was at the finish. He knew exactly what pace he was going and I just had to trust him on it. He never missed a beat at his fences and he loved it. He kept getting me out of trouble. I was confident he’d run a big race because he was one of the class horses in it.
“I’m delighted for Paul and everyone who is part of the team down at Ditcheat. It’s a great team effort and just very pleased and lucky to be a part of it.”
Hales, a toy manufacturer with the concession for Teletubbies and Peppa Pig plus this year’s Olympic mascots, has had some big winners over the years, including two Champion Chases with One Man and Azertyuiop, but this, his first runner in the National, capped it all.
“I didn’t take much persuading but my wife and daughter did,” he said. “Aintree owned me a favour [a reference to One Man’s tragic death over the Mildmay course at Aintree in 1998] and when he crossed the line I thought we might have got it. We have sad memories but love coming here. I’m so emotional, I can’t believe it. I just wanted him to get around safe and I never dreamed he would win.”
Despite the much-publicised modifications to the course only 15 completed this year’s race. Neptune Collonges crept into contention on the second circuit but 17 had already departed by the time they finished the first circuit. Neptune Collonges was beginning to make steady progress as Planet of Sound led them along with Katie Walsh in close contention on Seabass, who was heavily backed on the day.
On His Own was travelling well when he came down at Becher’s second time, dashing Paul Townend’s hopes but, worse, bringing down According To Pete, who was also going well. In the tangle of horses he was fatally injured.
Crossing the Melling Road for the last time, with two fences to jump, a first female-ridden winner looked the most likely scenario as Seabass hit the front travelling as well as anything.
But, despite leading over the last fence, his stamina was running out and Walsh had to settle for third, five lengths behind the front two and, by some margin, the best performance in the race ever by a girl.
“He just got under the last a bit, but I had an unbelievable ride,” she said, grinning from ear to ear. “I thought at the second last I had a chance but the others just stayed on better than me.”