Ron Washington, Texas Rangers clinch AL West against Oakland A’s – The Mercury News
The mob formed right around third base as the Texas Rangers poured out of their dugout Saturday afternoon to celebrate their first American League West title in 11 years.
A’s second baseman Mark Ellis knows that euphoria. That’s what made the Rangers’ 4-3 division-clinching victory over the A’s at the Oakland Coliseum so difficult for him to digest.
Ellis is the only player on the A’s active roster who was part of Oakland’s last AL West-winning squad in 2006.
He can attest that being part of the celebration is more fun than watching it.
“It’s just so hard watching it on your home field,” Ellis said. “It’s tough. “… You want it back. It’s been a while here now. It’s been, I guess, four years? It’s something you want every year.”
Jorge Cantu’s homer off Michael Wuertz in the top of the eighth snapped a 3-3 tie, paving the way for a Rangers party that seemed all but assured for the past several weeks.
Texas has led the AL West by at least seven games every day since July 25. And while the Rangers entered Saturday just 24-25 since Aug. 1, neither the A’s nor the Los Angeles Angels could mount the kind of winning streak needed to put on any pressure.
A’s manager Bob Geren tipped his cap to the Rangers, who claimed the fourth division title in club history. They also won the AL West in 1996, 1998 and 1999.
“I think a lot of it was that stretch in the middle of the season,” Geren said. “They won (11) in a row (in June), where they separated themselves from the pack.”
As much as it pained Ellis to watch the Rangers clinch, he said he was happy for Texas manager Ron Washington, a member of the A’s coaching staff from 1996-2006.
Washington left following the 2006 season when Geren replaced Ken Macha as the A’s skipper. He was hired that same winter to replace Buck Showalter in the Rangers’ dugout.
“I’m 100 percent happy for Wash. He’s done a great job with that team,” Ellis said. “For him to do as much as he did for our organization, and go to that team and take them to the playoffs is pretty neat.”
Washington, who dealt with a media storm in spring training after news surfaced he had failed a drug test in 2009, gave each of his players a hug as they lined up and proceeded past him after the final out.
“I’m a lifer in baseball,” Washington said. “I do know that you’ve got to keep things in perspective, because your main focus is to get to the World Series. But we’ve accomplished what needed to accomplish to get an opportunity to do that.”
Geren said the A’s now must shift their attention to other goals. They’re 77-77 with eight games remaining, and they’re seeking their first winning record under Geren. They’re also trying to hold on to second place, which would be their highest finish since 2006.
“We have a great pitching staff, and if we can improve offensively, that could be us” celebrating in the future, Geren said.
Cliff Pennington pulled the A’s into a 3-3 tie with a two-run homer off Clay Rapada in the seventh.
But Cantu answered in the eighth, homering on a 3-2 hanging slider from Wuertz (2-3) to put Texas back on top. Wuertz hadn’t pitched since Monday because of swelling in his right thumb.
Cantu also drove in a run with a single in the sixth, his first RBI in 84 plate appearances since being accquired from the Florida Marlins on July 29.