AFL Finals: Western Bulldogs beat GWS Giants by six points to reach grand final for first time since 1961
The Western Bulldogs are into the grand final for the first time in 55 years after beating GWS by six points in the game of the season at Sydney Showgrounds.
In a match that ebbed and flowed for four quarters, it was the Bulldogs who got their noses in front when the final siren sounded, edging the despairing Giants 13.11 (89) to 12.11 (83).
The defining moments in the final quarter will live in the memories of Dogs fans for generations, with one of Australian football's greatest droughts on the cusp of being broken.
Jason Johannisen, Marcus Bontempelli, Tom Liberatore and Liam Picken rose above the manic pressure and desperation in the last quarter and forced their team over the line. When the match was to be won, it was a handful of key Bulldogs that won it.
Bontempelli kicked a crucial goal to put the Dogs in front after the Giants had pushed ahead by 14 early in the last, after Johannisen had broken the lines with a blistering run past his tiring opponents off half-back.
Picken won contest after contest and pulled out massive smothers when the Giants threatened to attack at a stage where every score was critical,. Liberatore's poise under pressure set up Jack Macrae for the match-sealing goal.
Clay Smith had four goals to his name at half-time and continued to be influential after the long break, while Luke Dahlhaus was visibly exhausted in the closing stages after four quarters of incredible effort.
But for all of their good work, it could have just as easily been for nothing. The Giants could hardly have done more to win this game, and early in the last would have thought they had.
Goals to the excellent pair of Rory Lobb and Toby Greene pushed the margin past two goals, and momentum was firmly with the hosts. The Giants had weathered an early storm to stay in the match, and eventually worked their way into a winning position.
Dylan Shiel's second half was inspirational, making the most of Shane Mumford's ruck dominance to lead GWS from the midfield. At three-quarter-time, the Giants led by just a point.
For a while, it looked like the Bulldogs would rue missed opportunities. They were on top early without putting it on the scoreboard, and through many of their dominant periods could not turn inside 50's into goals, largely due to a lack of talls in the forward line.
Smith was a sensation, but often was playing a lone hand. Tom Boyd was forced to ruck after an eye injury to Jordan Roughead and struggled, while Jake Stringer did not have his best game.
But more questions will be asked of some key Giants, most notably Jeremy Cameron. The difference in the Giants' win over Sydney, Cameron had just two kicks for the game, none of them for goals.
Heath Shaw also struggled, despite a key third-quarter goal, and often looked more interested in antagonising Bulldogs players than defending them as Smith and Tory Dickson ran riot.
The Giants certainly weren't helped by a concussion to co-captain Callan Ward, and will head to the off-season safe in the knowledge that while this is an opportunity missed, it won't be the last for this team.
But the grand final awaits for the Bulldogs, something fans haven't been able to say since 1961. They will have the backing of almost every neutral supporter in the country at the MCG next Saturday.