Simon Gerrans beats Andre Greipel in sprint finish to stage one of Tour Down Under
Australian cycling star Simon Gerrans is the man to beat in the Tour Down Under after winning stage one.
The Orica-GreenEDGE leader out-sprinted German Andre Greipel (Lotto Belisol) and Australian Steele Von Hoff (Garmin Sharp) in an uphill sprint at the end of stage one.
Earlier this month, Gerrans showed he was in form by winning the Australian road championship.
Check out the 2014 Tour Down Under stage maps to see where the riders will be racing.
Greipel has been almost unbeatable in sprint finishes at the Tour, but the uphill finish worked to Gerrans' advantage and he had a perfect lead out from team-mate Daryl Impey.
Gerrans, Greipel and retired Australian Stuart O'Grady are the only riders to have won the Tour twice.
"Looking towards the end of the week, it probably would have been better if Andre had the lead going into tomorrow," Gerrans said.
"But like I said, you have to take every opportunity that comes up and you have to go for these stage wins when you can get them."
Greipel is one of the world's top sprinters, but the uphill finish and the Menglers Hill climb with only 15km left worked to Gerrans' advantage.
Impey's lead out set up Gerrans for the win, with Greipel second and Australian Steele Von Hoff (Garmin Sharp) third.
"Andre is obviously one of the fastest guys going around, so I'm pretty pleased to get him on the line there," Gerrans said.
"But it was a tough final, everyone was pretty tired after Menglers, so it would have taken the sting out of his legs a little bit."
A front group of about 50 riders went clear as the peloton splintered on the Menglers Hill Climb within 15km of the finish.
Australian pre-race favourites Cadel Evans (BMC) and Richie Porte (Sky) were among the leaders.
Australian Adam Hansen (Lotto-Belisol) went clear at the top of Menglers Hill to take the King of the Mountain prize, but he was soon caught.
Rising Australian star Caleb Ewan (UniSA) was among those dropped on the climb.
Europcar team-mates Yukiya Arashiro (Japan) and Bjorn Thurau (Germany) attacked on the descent before the front group caught them with about 1km left.
There was a crash just before 1km to go which appeared to take out several riders.
Australians Neil Van Der Ploeg (UniSA) and Will Clarke (Drapac) attacked within minutes of the start and built a lead of four minutes.
But the peloton always kept the gap in check and they were caught at 119km.
Gerrans gained a one-second time bonus when he finished third on the second intermediate sprint at 71km.
That bonus could be important, given the overall Tour is often decided by less than 10 seconds.
The stage went ahead as planned after concerns over the weekend about a nearby bushfire, which was contained.