Serena Williams beats battling Garbiñe Muguruza to win Wimbledon
If Serena Williams can survive her recurring, inexplicable dips in power and concentration yet prevail against a young contender as talented as Garbiñe Muguruza to win her sixth Wimbledon title and her 21st major, she is well placed to continue breaking records for as long as her body and spirit allow.
There is nobody to stop her. It is as simple as that. Heather Watson gave her a major fright in the third round and Victoria Azarenka stretched her to the limit in the quarter-finals, but Maria Sharapova, her supposed arch-rival, folded in the semis, leaving it to the young Spanish star Muguruza to take her to the wire in Saturday’s final.
Williams at 33 became the oldest slam champion of the modern era by beating her excellent opponent, 12 years her junior, 6-4, 6-4 in an hour and 23 minutes, thrilling Centre Court with a coronation final that briefly looked like turning into an insurrection.
Instead, Williams came through as the holder of all four majors for the first time since she had that honour in 2003, putting her within sight of Steffi Graf’s 22 majors, as well as Margaret Court’s all-time mark of 24. If she retains the US Open she will have become only the fourth woman to claim a calendar-year grand slam. That is a lot to celebrate on a warm Saturday afternoon. But it might all have turned horribly wrong. The best player in the world did not make it easy for herself in this her 25th slam final.
It is all very well having the biggest serve in tennis – Williams finished the fortnight with 80 aces, 13 more than Roger Federer, who put 20 on Andy Murray on Friday – but if you fail to land six of them in the box in the first game of a grand slam final against a hungry young player such as Muguruza, life gets complicated.
Spanish eyes lit up when her vaunted opponent gifted her the first game on the fourth break point, pushing a trembling backhand long after seven worrying minutes.
Sharapova had three double faults in her first service game against Williams in the semi-finals and lost. Would we witness another meltdown here?
There was no early peace for Williams, no room for her to work her way into the match as Muguruza drew on the experience of having beaten her so handily in her troubled times at the French Open in 2014, when the Spaniard was ranked 35 in the world.
That was a shock, even though Williams was not at her best. These were different circumstances. Muguruza, seeded 20th, had worked her way assiduously through the draw, finishing off the challenges of Caroline Wozniacki and Agnieszka Radwanska to earn a place in her first slam final. Her confidence and her daring were sky-high.
She held for two-love and took two points off the Williams serve, which had dipped to an alarming 20%, before the world No1 got a grip. It finally clicked and she trailed 1-2 after quarter of an hour. She had a look at deuce in the fourth game but her footwork was sluggish and her face anguished; she had plenty of catching up to do.
A second ace settled her nerves as she held in the fifth, but she still struggled for rhythm off the ground. Muguruza was hanging tough and saved two break points to maintain her lead. The question that whispered its way around Centre Court now was: could she keep it up and take the first set?
After half an hour, Williams struck something like her best serving form, holding to love for 3-4, but her ground strokes and her balance needed work. She got another two break points, the first saved by the Spaniard’s second ace, the second surrendered with a loose forehand and they were back to parity.
A fourth double fault did not slow the Williams fightback and Muguruza found herself serving to stay in the set just 20 minutes after having the world No1 at her mercy. After an ace got her to game point, she again hit wide for deuce then double faulted. Williams had set point – and took it, after 44 minutes, with an angry, relieved forehand.
She closed her eyes and breathed deep during the break. Soon, the familiar pattern would emerge: an opponent in contention introduced to the reality of sustaining the challenge.
Williams broke, held and was 3-1 up in the second, and banging down her eighth ace nearly an hour after those three double faults had given Muguruza hope. A ninth ace induced panic at the other end and the Spaniard’s forehand drifted long.
Williams was now a couple of games away from confirming her dominance – if she could crack Muguruza’s serve again and finish the way she knows best. But Muguruza was not quite done and broke her to love in the seventh game.
The ninth game of the second set encapsulated the struggle. Muguruza, having held through deuce to force Williams to serve for the title, the world No1 double faulted for the eighth time and, watching two ground strokes whirr past her, faced three break points.
She struck a 10th ace for 30-40 and one more for deuce. Her 12th, at 121 miles an hour, delivered her championship point, but Muguruza saved, advancing to the net to land a perfect forehand in the deuce corner. They both hit long, Muguruza by a millimetre, within the margin of error.
Williams netted a forehand from the baseline and the crowd went wild as the Spaniard lived again. She took it with a belting backhand for 4-5, and the mood of the match was transformed yet again.
The end could hardly have been a greater anticlimax. Muguruza double faulted for the second time; Williams got the benefit of a kind net cord; Muguruza hit long, then just wide – and the deed was done.