ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Kelly Slater has clinched an unprecedented 10th world surfing title with victory in his quarter-final heat at the Rip Curl Pro Search in Puerto Rico.
Thousands of fans crowded Middles Beach in the Aguadilla region of the island and were treated to a surfing exhibition as Slater destroyed Brazilian Adriano De Souza with a two-wave score of 18.87 points out of 20.
Slater described his week as a story of two extremes.
On Tuesday he discovered his greatest ever rival Andy Irons had passed away aged 32, and on Saturday he became a 10-time world champion.
Speaking immediately after coming out of the water, Slater declared he would trade his titles just to have Irons back.
The 38-year-old began his career way back in 1991 and wasted little time achieving success, claiming his first championship in 1992.
The Floridian then won consecutive crowns from 1994 through to 1998, before carrying his dominance through a second decade by taking out titles in 2005, 2006, 2008.
Slater had tears in his eyes after clinching the title, but the champion showed class in sending messages of support to Irons' family back in Hawaii.
"I just want to send my condolences to Andy's family, I'm a little overwhelmed right now but I want to dedicate this to Andy," he said.
"It's like exact opposites. This doesn't really offset that, I'd give this title away in a second if Andy could come back, but it's nice because Andy was one of the last guys I saw in Portugal and he gave me a big hug and he said, 'I want you to win this thing and I'm really pulling for you and I'm really proud of you.'
"Even last week before I came to Puerto Rico he called one of my friends in Hawaii and said the exact same thing and he sent me that message and all I can say is I got that message.
"When a friend asked me if I'd decided to win 10 after a couple of contests this year and I told him, 'yeah ok.'
"It seemed like Jordy was the guy to beat from early on.
"To have all these things come together I knew something special was happening."
Slater used to surf regularly in Puerto Rico as a teenager and said Middles Beach seemed like a second home, with his mother Judy and brother Skippy in attendance.
"It's nice, it's great, I haven't been surfing in this part of the island since about '88," he said.
"I used to come here a lot, it used to be like a second home to me, it was like my little Hawaii."
Asked if he planned on extending his record beyond 10 titles, Slater said he wanted some time to think that through.
"Give me a second buddy, I'm wet still," he said.