Super Bowl 2015: How to bluff your way through the game
This Sunday around four million people in the UK will be watching the New England Patriots take on the Seattle Seahawks in the Super Bowl.
Some say it's a game of strategy and skill unequalled in modern sport, others say it's just men running around in silly hats.
If you don't know much about the sport but are planning (or being forced) to watch the game don't worry.
Here are some handy phrases so you can sound just like an expert.
Each team is split into two units; an attacking one and a defensive one.
The team which has control of the ball will have their offence (attacking players) on the pitch and the team without it will have their defence (defensive players) on.
This is true for the majority of the game except when one team has chosen to kick the ball. The 'special teams' come on for that.
Top tip: Make sure you pronounce defence like this: "Dee-fence".
Examples you could use: "New England's offence relies a lot on Tom Brady to be successful don't you think?" or "Seattle's defence is nasty (meaning good)".
Seattle Seahawks player Marshawn Lynch is one of the most talked about players in the NFL. He makes headlines because of his choice of cleats (football boots) or his refusal to speak to the press.
On the field he's famous for an epic run in 2011 where he broke eight tackles to score in a play-off game.
When he's playing well people say he's in "Beast Mode".
Top tip: Mention that Lynch has run the ball for more than 1,000 yards (a common benchmark for a successful year) for the last four seasons.
Example: When number 24 for the Seattle Seahawks gets given the ball, just yell "BEAST" as loud as you can.
These "downs" are key to the game and will crop up all the time, so nail these and you'll sound like a pro!
Basically you get four attempts (a down) to move the ball 10 yards (by either running or passing it). If you make 10 yards then you get another set of four downs.
On the corner of your TV screen it'll say 1st and 10. That means it's the 1st Down with 10 yards to make.
If a team makes three yards, for argument's sake, then next it's 2nd and Seven, 3rd and Four etc. If they fail to make 10 yards in the four downs then the other team gets the ball.
Top tip: If teams fail to make 10 yards on their first three attempts then they'll probably kick it away on their 4th down. This means the other team will have further to go to score.
Examples of use: "I'd throw the ball deep on Second down" or "Seattle always run the ball on First down"
You probably know that a quarterback is the leader of the team and the player that throws the ball a lot. On Sunday two of the best in the business will be playing,
Russell Wilson of the Seahawks is a more modern mobile player who will run with the ball himself.
New England's Tom Brady is a more of a traditional player, called a "pocket passer". He will tend to stand in one spot and throw the ball.
Top tip: Players like Tom Brady, Joe Flacco and Payton Manning have kept the traditional way of playing the position alive. Some had predicted that pocket passers would become a thing of the past.
Examples of use: "I think Tom Brady is a good example of how pocket passers can still be successful in the league."
Let's finish with some pretty advanced stuff. If you get this right then people will start thinking you actually know what you're talking about.
The Seattle team is renowned for having a good defensive unit. Some say it's one of the best ever.
There are loads of different types of defence that teams can run (called schemes). Seattle uses a system called the "Cover Three".
Top tip: Each team's defensive scheme is almost unique to them. Seattle's "Cover 3" takes advantage of its better players, Richard Sherman and Kam Chancellor.
Example: "New England are really struggling to pass the ball today. I put it down to the Seahawks Cover Three Defence."
Follow @BBCNewsbeat on Twitter, BBCNewsbeat on Instagram and Radio1Newsbeat on YouTube