NBA: Clippers Sale Is Complete, Steve Ballmer Becomes New Team Owner
The Donald Sterling saga may finally be over for the Los Angeles Clippers.
The NBA announced on Tuesday that the sale of the team to former Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer has closed. Ballmer bid $2 billion to purchase the team, a record amount for an NBA franchise, in May in a deal brokered by Shelly Sterling on behalf of the Sterling Family Trust.
“I am humbled and honored to be the new owner of the Los Angeles Clippers,” Ballmer said in a statement released by the team. “Clipper fans are so amazing. They have remained fiercely loyal to our franchise through some extraordinary times."
Donald Sterling, who purchased the team in 1981 for $12.5 million, was banned for life from the NBA in April following the release of audio recordings in which he made racist remarks. He later attempted to block the sale of the team to Ballmer after his estranged wife had him removed as an administrator of the family trust that owned the team. A judge ruled against Donald Sterling in July in his bid to block the sale, upholding his removal as a co-trustee after doctors found he had signs of Alzheimer's disease.
A tweet from the Clippers' official Twitter account shortly after the NBA announcement signaled excitement within the organization to move forward with Ballmer.
MORE FROM THE ASSOCIATED PRESS:
LOS ANGELES (AP) — Steve Ballmer officially became the new owner of the Los Angeles Clippers on Tuesday. The team said the sale closed after a California court confirmed the authority of Shelly Sterling, on behalf of the Sterling Family Trust, to sell the franchise to the former Microsoft CEO. Her estranged husband, Donald Sterling, had unsuccessfully fought the sale of the team he owned since 1981 in court. The NBA Board of Governors had previously approved the $2 billion sale. "I am humbled and honored to be the new owner of the Los Angeles Clippers," Ballmer said in a statement. "Clipper fans are so amazing. They have remained fiercely loyal to our franchise through some extraordinary times." Adam Streisand, Ballmer's attorney, said Tuesday that Superior Court Judge Michael Levanas signed the order authorizing the sale even if Donald Sterling's attorneys filed an appeal. "We were ready," Streisand said. "Within minutes, the deal was signed, sealed and delivered." He said even if Donald Sterling seeks an emergency order directing the judge to vacate his order, the attorney is confident an appellate court would agree that Levanas made the correct decision. The transaction ends Donald Sterling's run as the longest-tenured owner in the NBA after 33 years. After buying the Clippers in 1981, he moved the franchise from San Diego to Los Angeles three years later. The 80-year-old real estate mogul has been in probate court fighting his wife's proposed deal to sell. At issue was whether Donald Sterling killed the deal by revoking the trust after his wife removed him as a trustee. Shelly Sterling acted after doctors found Donald had symptoms of Alzheimer's disease. The drama began in April when a recording surfaced of Donald Sterling dressing down his young girlfriend for bringing black men to Clippers games. The audio spurred the NBA to ban Sterling for life and fine him $2.5 million. His wife of 58 years then took control of a family trust and negotiated a record $2 billion sale of the team to Ballmer. Shelly Sterling said she was initially given her husband's blessing to sell the team and he praised the deal she reached. When it came time to sign it at the end of May, however, Sterling said he would not sell and would sue the league. Ballmer said he will be "hardcore" in giving the team, coach Doc Rivers, the staff and players the support they need. Rivers called it "an amazing new day in Clippers history," and said he's inspired by Ballmer's passion for the game. Ballmer, Rivers and Clippers players will attend a new fan festival announced for next Monday at Staples Center.