French Open 2013: Jo-Wilfried Tsonga sees off Roger Federer in straight sets to reach semi-finals
Tsonga brought the guillotine down on Roger Federer, that giant of the ancien régime, who has rarely been so outclassed at a grand slam event.
From the eighth game of the match, when he gave up the first of six breaks of serve to the fourth seed, Federer committed a stream of unforced errors that even the blustery conditions could not explain away.
“I struggled a little bit everywhere,” Federer said. “This is a crushing loss and I am disappointed about it. But I have no choice but to move on. I have so many more things to worry about right now other than just this.”
Tsonga’s 7-5, 6-3, 6-3 win took just 1hr 51min, and was Federer’s second-heaviest defeat at any major since he began his gilded run 10 years ago. The heaviest was the 2008 final here, when Rafael Nadal gave up just four games in a performance for the ages.
Tsonga has always had the power and the creativity; what he has added this year is discipline, under the rigorous training programme of his new coach, Roger Rasheed.
So while we saw all the trademarks yesterday – the thunderous serves and forehands, the tank-like rumbles to the net – we did not see him give up his usual quota of cheap points. “After a while I realised it was tough staying alone because there are many things you have to manage as a tennis player,” said Tsonga, who spent 18 months without a coach before teaming up with Rasheed in November. “You have to be on time for practising every day. You have to eat correctly. You have to sleep well. You need the life of a champion.”
Asked whether he had given up chocolate as part of the new approach, Tsonga grinned. “It’s the same as when you go on a diet,” he said. “You can’t live without any pleasure at all. So maybe tonight I’ll indulge myself in having some bubbles in my water.”
A law of modern tennis states that whenever Federer loses at a big tournament, obituaries are written. Admittedly, he will go into Wimbledon, which begins on June 24, as defending champion, and very possibly as the No2 seed.
But this has not been a vintage season to date. By the same stage of last year, the great man had already won four titles, whereas he has only a runners-up finish in Rome to show for the first half of 2013.
You can trace the gentle downslope in Federer’s mastery in the select group of players who are capable of beating him at a slam. At his peak, around 2006, only Rafael Nadal could do it, and even then only at Roland Garros. But Novak Djokovic has now knocked him over four times, while Juan Martín del Potro, Robin Soderling, Tomas Berdych, Tsonga and, most recently, Andy Murray have also got in on the act.
It is still to Federer’s great credit that he never loses before the quarter-finals, despite a near-miss against Gilles Simon on Sunday. But the knock-backs are coming a little more regularly and a little harder with each passing year.
There is no halting the passing of time, and you have to wonder about the state of his rickety back. While he denied there was any such problem yesterday, he did admit that he had taken to wearing an undershirt to “keep the wind away”.
His serve was not at its sharpest and his three botched overheads were collector’s items, for he normally has the most reliable smash in tennis.
With Murray absent and Federer evicted, we can say for certain that this will be the first grand slam to feature a finalist from outside the top four since Wimbledon 2010, when Berdych lost to Nadal.
That man will be either Tsonga or David Ferrer, who had an easy ride in a 6-2, 6-1, 6-1 victory over Tommy Robredo.
Tsonga was heavily criticised last year for telling an interviewer, just two weeks before the French Open, that “there’s no chance that a Frenchman will win Roland Garros”. It was hardly the most upbeat of comments. But he has worked furiously this year to lose a couple of pounds from what could be a heavyweight boxer’s physique, and to tighten up his formerly wayward backhand. All that effort has clearly brightened his outlook as well.
If Tsonga maintains the winning streak, he will meet Noah, a close friend whom he likes to call “my big brother,” on finals day here. For Noah, ominously enough, has been booked to present the trophy.