Arsenal win the FA Cup with Aaron Ramsey again the hero
He saved the best for last, Arsene Wenger. Or, at least, his team saved their very best performance of the season for their last game.
And if it were to be Wenger’s finale after 21 years, if Tuesday’s board meeting were to result in something cataclysmic in football terms and wholly unexpected at this late stage, at least he will always have this on which to reflect in his dotage.
A mesmerising Arsenalside outplayed the Premier League champions. They should have won be a far greater margin, hitting the woodwork three times. In fact they played like a Wenger side, but one from 13 years ago, with panache, obduracy, commitment and zeal.
Forget for the moment that Chelseafailed to show. You could almost forgive them that after their enormous achievement of winning the league. This was Arsenal’s day and Wenger’s moment. Since the depths of the winter he has endured abuse, been pilloried by his own and it has hurt his pride. Truth to be told, performances at Bayern, West Brom and Crystal Palace have stretched the patience of even loyal lieutenants.
Yet here he is, with his third FA Cup in four years, surpassing Aston Villa’s George Ramsey, who won his first in 1887, as the most-successful manager of all time in this competition. And with 13 victories in the competition, he has guided his team to being the greatest club of all time in the FA Cup. If this is failure, it’s a specialism many would love to have.
Does it rescue the season? To some extent. The bigger question, perhaps for another day, was where had this team and this strength of mind been hiding when it was required in February and March?
But given the magnitude of his achievements, it was telling to hear him answer the question as to whether this was one of the proudest moments of his career. ‘It is,’ he said. ‘Because nobody gave us a chance. And we responded with attitude and class. I spent every minute of the season with full commitment and refused to give up. That’s why today I am maybe more proud than usual. Because the team and myself have refused to give up.’
He was correct that this was a wholly unexpected victory. Even with Laurent Koscielny and Shkodran Mustafi, Arsenal are inferior to Chelsea. Without them, you feared for Wenger that it might be one of those days when Chelsea simply swat Arsenal aside.
Yet Chelsea looked what they were; a team who had achieved their season’s goal two weeks ago. And Arsenal were a side transformed, more akin to the real Barcelona than the horribly lightweight version they usually resemble. The back three, a mere work in progress, suddenly afforded them space and angles hitherto unimagined.
Per Mertesacker, on the back of the 37 minutes played all season, was simply refusing to be bamboozled by Hazard despite the Belgian being half his height and twice his speed; Rob Holding, despite at times being out-battled by Costa, looked composed and assured for much of the game; Hector Bellerin constantly exposed Marcos Alonso.
Chiefly though it was about Alexis Sanchez, ably assisted by Mesut Ozil. The Chilean was everywhere: at left back to tidy up; at centre forward to press the goalkeeper; at inside left, where he was actually meant to be, giving Cesar Azpilicueta a hard time.
And, yes, he was there with his hands up, punching the ball on to assist his own goal which was conceived and delivered by him alone, with a touch of Diego Maradona. Only four minutes had gone. Ramsey had harried Chelsea to win back possession, which would be a constant feature of that first half. But Sanchez it was who chipped it into the box. David Luiz headed away and up leapt Sanchez, pushing the ball with his hands into the box towards Ramsey, who had strayed into an offside position.
Ramsey feinted, Chelsea hesitated and Sanchez, a bundle of energy, just kept on running, pushed his the Welsh team-mate aside and struck deftly past Courtois. The flag was raised by the assistant referee but after a short pause Anthony Taylor overruled him. Antonio Conte was understandably baffled why it hadn’t been disallowed.
But it wasn’t an anomaly. Wave after wave came, the Arsenal attacks. On 16 minutes, a flowing move saw Ozil find Sanchez, who delivered just an exquisite pass back to Ozil whose chip was scrambled off the line by Cahill
On 19 minutes, Ozil’s corner was wonderfully met by the head of Danny Welbeck. Courtois was beaten, the ball headed goal-wards yet bounced off the post. Ramsey, shocked, should have scored but couldn’t adapt his body shape and saw the ball bounce of his chest back on to the post and out. Cahill it was again who had to hoist the ball off the line from Wellbeck’s shot and Courtois who pushed Granit Xhaka’s 30-yard strike away on 32 minutes.
David Ospina, preferred over Petr Cech, thwarted Costa on 29 minutes but otherwise Chelsea barely contributed. That couldn’t last. Intent replaced lethargy at re-start. Kante gave early warning with his 48th minute strike and on 52 minutes Ospina saved well from Victor Moses.
But Chelsea became the authors of their own downfall on 68 minutes. Moses, already booked on 57 minutes, drifted into the penalty area, sensed Oxlade-Chamberlain closing in and fell to ground, anticipating a challenge. But the Arsenal player had made none and unfortunately for Moses, referee Taylor was standing in direct sight. A yellow card was inevitable, as well the red which followed.
A man down, a goal down and twenty two minutes to play in a game in which they had barely shown, it didn’t look good. Predictably it was Diego Costa who dragged them back into the game. 
David Luiz robbed Ozil and Willian lofted a ball towards Costa. Pushing aside Holding, he took it down on his chest, struck it into the ground past Ospina on 76 minutes.
Yet having established a foothold in the game, Chelsea reverted to the slack defending which beset them all match. 
Straight from kick off, Arsenal worked the ball down the left and substitute Olivier Giroud, with his first touch chased it down, beat Gary Cahill and pulled the ball back. N’Golo Kante neglected to pick up Ramsey, who headed home. He won the final in 2014; now he had done so again.
Two minutes and nine seconds had elapsed since Costa had equalised. This was a fatal blow. A frantic few minutes would ensure: Bellerin shooting just wide; Ospina making a vital save from from; and Ozil shimmying before hitting the post. But Arsenal got there. 
On Saturday they summoned the spirit of a former age and played like a Wenger team should. 