La Liga: Sociedad inflict Barcelona's first defeat
Real Sociedad hit back from two goals down to beat 10-man Barcelona 3-2 and end their unbeaten La Liga record in stunning fashion at the Anoeta.
All looked to be going to plan for Tito Vilanova's visitors when Lionel Messi and Pedro Rodriguez put them two goals up within 25 minutes.
But Gonzalo Castro's brilliant strike gave Sociedad hope before half-time and then, after Barca had lost centre-back Gerard Pique to a red card, Castro's curling effort was deflected into his own net by Barca substitute Javier Mascherano.
That sent the home fans wild, but it got even better in stoppage time when Imanol Agirretxe poked Carlos Martinez's cross from the right past Victor Valdes.
"We congratulate them,'' said Barca boss Tito Vilanova. "It is more credit to them than due to a fault of ours. I have no reproaches for my players
In the first half we had control of the game and hit the post twice. (Sociedad goalkeeper Claudio) Bravo has been playing very well - the team had conceded only six goals at home (before kick-off). (Even) at 0-2 I never thought it would be an easy match. I know Real Sociedad are a much more intense team than a year ago.''
Sevilla failed to get Unai Emery's league reign off to the perfect start as an error from goalkeeper Andres Palop gifted Getafe a 1-1 draw at the Alfonso Perez Coliseum.
Jose Antonio Reyes put Sevilla in front with a neat finish shortly before half-time, but the lead lasted only three minutes as Palop got caught under Adrian Colunga's inswinging cross and allowed the ball to float over his head and into the net.
Sevilla continued to have the better of the play after the break but Alvaro Negredo blasted over with their best chance.
Malaga missed the chance to climb to fourth place as lowly Celta Vigo battled hard for a deserved 1-1 draw at La Rosaleda.
Martin Demichelis bundled the ball over the line after a goalmouth scramble to give the hosts the lead seven minutes before the interval, but Celta grew as the match wore on and levelled 14 minutes from time as Augusto Fernandez side-footed home.
The point moves Celta two points clear of the relegation zone in 17th place, while Malaga stay fifth.
Granada secured only their second home win of the season as a Jordi Amat own goal and a late strike on his full debut from Recio handed them a much-needed 2-0 victory over an under-strength Rayo Vallecano.
The visitors came into the game on the back of four consecutive wins that had propelled them into the European places, but without the injured Leo Baptistao and suspended Alejandro Dominguez they lacked the same cutting edge and were made to pay for some defensive errors.
Amat unintentionally gave the hosts the lead on 24 minutes when he turned Allan Nyom's cross into his own goal and, after Lass Bangoura had passed up a great chance to bring Rayo level after the break, Recio sealed the win for the home side with a low drive from the edge of the area.
Victory moved Granada out of the bottom three as Rayo remained in sixth.
Information from the Press Association was used in this report