ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Lionel Messi added yet another record to his stellar list of achievements over the past 12 months on Monday when he won an unprecedented fourth consecutive Ballon d'Or at a FIFA gala in Zurich.
The accolade seals Messi's status as the greatest player of his generation after he saw off Real Madrid rival Cristiano Ronaldo and Barcelona teammate Andres Iniesta for the prize.
Messi received a vote share of 41.60 per cent, Ronaldo took 23.68 and Iniesta 10.91.
Messi and former French star, UEFA president Michel Platini, had prior to Monday been the only players to win three straight Ballon d'Or awards while Dutch greats Johan Cruyff and Marco Van Basten both won the accolade on three occasions.
Spain's Vicente del Bosque was named coach of the year for 2012, seeing off competition from Real Madrid's Jose Mourinho and former Barcelona coach Josep Guardiola.
Messi's success crowned another landmark year for the Argentine who is already the top scorer in La Liga for the ongoing season with 25 goals, having also broken Gerd Muller's 40-year record for the most goals in a calendar year.
He finished 2012 with an astonishing 91 goals in all competitions.
But Messi has insisted his scoring records will mean nothing if Barcelona do not go on to take the La Liga title off Real or fail to win the Champions League.
"It is incredible to receive this prize once again and it's impressive it makes it four in a row. I would like to share this with my Barca teammates - particularly with Andres, who is here with me," said the ever unassuming Messi.
"I am proud to be able to train alongside him every day.
"I am also thinking of my teammates in the Argentina squad.
"Thank you to all those who voted for me, skippers, coaches and national coaches.
"Thank you too to my family, my friends and of course my wife and son, who is the best thing that ever happened to me," said the 25-year-old from Rosario, who in November became a father to son Thiago.
Beforehand he had said winning for Barcelona outweighed any personal glory.
"It's nice to beat records but the win for the team is what is important. My goals are to win titles with the team, the Spanish league, Spanish Cup or Champions League is more important than any personal records."
Barca coach Tito Vilanova had already eulogised his player in advance of Messi's win.
"Leo's great quality is that he plays as if he is still a child," Vilanova opined.
"He was always good as a youngster and you didn't need to be a coach to say that. It was a joy to see him play as a 15-year-old and that continues now."
Portugal captain Ronaldo at least has the consolation of having won in 2008 before Messi's hegemony began while Iniesta can for his part bask in the knowledge that he has won a World Cup and two Euros - including Euro 2012 - whereas Messi still has to replicate such achievements at international level.
Until he can lift top honours with Argentina, some observers will insist he cannot be classed as the greatest player ever, moving ahead of Pele and Diego Maradona - who were never eligible for this award.
Already, at just 25, Messi's club achievements stack up very comparably with these two legends of the game.
Over the last four seasons he has been the top scorer in the Champions League.
Pele, for all his achievements, only once topped the scoring charts in South America's premier club competition, the Copa Libertadores, which he won with Santos twice.
Messi and Iniesta were joined by three of their Barcelona team-mates in the Team of the Year which all came from Spain's la Liga.
Five Real Madrid players made the XI, with goalkeeper Iker Casillas, Sergio Ramos, Marcelo and Xabi Alonso joining Ronaldo in the side.
Colombian striker Radamel Falcao, from Real's cross-town rivals Atletico, rounded out the chosen 11.
EPL Player of the Year Robin van Persie, who moved from Arsenal to Manchester United in August, may count himself a little unfortunate to miss out, but competition for attacking berths was exceptionally strong, with Neymar of Santos and Paris St-Germain's Zlatan Ibrahimovic not making the side despite hitting over 50 goals in the calendar year.
Bundesliga player of the year Marco Reus had a decent claim to a midfield spot, but Xavi and Iniesta again hold their usual positions in the side, alongside their fellow European champion with Spain, Xabi Alonso.
Champions League winner Chelsea is not represented in the side. Juan Mata could not force out his Spanish team-mates in midfield and
Petr Cech and Ashley Cole perhaps suffer from having a less impressive second half of the calendar year.
The award of best coach went to Spain's Vicente del Bosque, who beat off competition from Real Madrid's Jose Mourinho, the 2010 winner, and former Barcelona coach Pep Guardiola.
"It is an honour for me to receive this award," said Del Bosque, who led Spain to Euro 2012 glory - having also landed the World Cup two years earlier.
"It is an honour to represent Spanish football and the Spanish national side. I thank all the players - they make us (the coaches) better.
"This prize can be extended to all coaches, to people who dedicate themselves to football," added the ever humble coach.
One award that did not go to a Spanish resident, was the goal of the year award, won by Miroslav Stoch for his fantastic volley against Genclerbirligi in the Turkish Super Lig.
It is perhaps worth noting that Ibrahimovic's incredible overhead kick for Sweden against England was not in contention for this award as it came after the cut-off point in the year.