Ireland coach Giovanni Trapattoni too costly to be sacked
The 73 year-old, who ended the Republic’s 10-year wait for an appearance at a major tournament by guiding the country to this summer’s Euro 2012, woke to scathing headlines in the Irish newspapers on Saturday, with all titles universally calling for ‘Trap’ to go.
Headlines such as ‘Time’s Up Trap’, ‘Trap Door’ and ‘Humiliation Once Again,’ centred on the former Juventus and Bayern Munich coach’s tactical rigidity and questionable selections and he was also booed by a small section of the Aviva Stadium crowd when he attempted to control a loose ball in the technical area during the second-half of the Germany defeat.
But, while another defeat against the Faroe Islands in Torshavn on Tuesday would place Trapattoni under even greater pressure to resign, the size of his contract would make it difficult for the Football Association of Ireland to dismiss their veteran manager.
An £8 million windfall generated from Euro 2012 qualification has largely been spent on bonuses and logistics connected to the tournament, so the prospect of a compensation package ranging up to £3 million to fire Trapattoni is regarded as unpalatable.
And, with Ireland’s qualification hopes likely to depend on the outcome of their fixtures against Sweden and Austria, the most likely challengers for second spot behind the Germans, Trapattoni has vowed to fight on.
“It’s a long way to Tipperary,” Trapattoni said. “Germany have gone, they will qualify as group winners, but we are in there fighting with Austria and Sweden for qualification.
“The players have to answer us and I am sure that they can. We need to see their commitment in a very important situation here.” With former Ireland manager Mick McCarthy out of work and understood to be open a return to the job he left in the autumn of 2002, contenders to replace Trapattoni will not be in short supply or lacking in quality.
Jon Walters, the Stoke City forward who was controversially selected ahead of West Brom’s Shane Long against the Germans by Trapattoni, admits that the manager is not the only man under pressure.
“After a performance like that [against Germany], there are young and hungry lads on the bench and outside the squad who want to be part of the Irish international scene and they’ll be wanting places now,” he said.
“I think everyone’s future is in doubt, I think every single place on the team is up for grabs. It wasn’t good enough. The manager didn’t have to say much when we came in, everyone felt it, everyone was hurting.
“We were chasing shadows for a long time, it has to be said, and we couldn’t get near them.
“They are up there with the best teams I’ve ever played, with the top of the Premier League, where players come from all over the world, this was the best of one country.
“They were so far ahead of us, truthfully we couldn’t get near them. They always had that extra pass on, that extra man available.”
Amid all of the doom and gloom, one positive ahead of the trip to Torshavn is the possible return of captain Robbie Keane after a bruised Achilles sidelined him against Germany.
Keane said: “The doctor and the physio have done everything they can to try and get me right for Tuesday, so fingers crossed.
“Hopefully, I’ll be fit. That’s all I’m concentrating on. If I can play out there and help the lads as much as I can, great, but it’s important that we all pick ourselves up after the Germany game.”