Pat Summitt Stepping Down as Tennessee Women’s Basketball Coach
Tennessee Athletic Director Dave Hart said Summitt’s effect on the sport was difficult to overstate.
“She is an icon who does not view herself in that light, and her legacy is well-defined and everlasting,” Hart said in the statement. “Just like there will never be another John Wooden, there will never be another Pat Summitt. I look forward to continuing to work with her in her new role. She is an inspiration to everyone.”
Summitt’s struggle with her disease was the focal point of the Volunteers’ season, particularly asthey reached the N.C.A.A. tournament and fell one victory short of making the Final Four. This was inevitable after Summitt made the announcement last Aug. 23 that she was battling the disease.
At the time, she said she hoped to continue coaching for many years and show people it was possible to function normally despite the disease, but it quickly became apparent that Summitt’s ability to do that would be limited.
Most of Summitt’s duties were delegated to her assistants, Warlick, Mickie DeMoss and Dean Lockwood. Warlick, the associate head coach, handled news media interviews. Summitt’s in-game duties became giving instructions to individual players and not coaching the team as a whole, which was Warlick’s duty.
“I feel like Holly’s been doing the bulk of it,” Summitt told The Knoxville News-Sentinel. “She deserves to be the head coach. I’m going to support her. No doubt, I’ll be there for her.”
The team won the Southeastern Conference tournament and dedicated it to Summitt and vowed to get her a ninth national championship. As center Vicki Baugh put it, “We’re playing for everyone who has Alzheimer’s.” The Volunteers fell short, losing to the eventual champion, Baylor, in the Round of 8.
Summitt’s career ends with a 1,098-208 record, with those 8 national championships, 18 Final Fours, 16 conference titles and 16 SEC tournament championships. She won more games than any other basketball coach in N.C.A.A. history.
She coached the 1984 Olympic team to a gold medal and has sent dozens of her former players into coaching. The university said that every one of her players who completed her eligibility at Tennessee graduated.
Warlick is among them, having graduated in 1981 after playing point guard for Summitt. She spent brief stints as an assistant at Nebraska and Virginia Tech before joining Summitt’s staff in 1985.
“I’m very thankful for all Pat Summitt has done to prepare me for this opportunity,” Warlick said in Tennessee’s statement. “She is my coach, mentor, and great friend, and I am honored with the opportunity to continue and add to the great tradition of this program.”