LeBron James the youngest to reach 20,000 points
OAKLAND, Calif. - LeBron James, 28, became the youngest player in the history of the NBA to score 20,000 points when he hit a floater in the lane late in the second quarter at Golden State on Wednesday night at Oracle Arena.
In a symbolic reminder that he is the farthest thing from a one-dimensional scorer, James - who has been assaulting the record books since he was drafted first overall by Cleveland in 2003 out of St. Vincent St. Mary High School in Akron, Ohio - also surpassed the 5,000-assist mark against the Warriors. By doing so, he joined a club that - according to Basketball-Reference.com - has a total of 13 members. James surpassed the 5,000-rebound mark last season, and is now one of 11 players in the 20,000-point, 5,000-assist ,5,000-rebound club.
VOTE: Who's the greatest NBA player of all time?
Thirty-eight players have reached the 20,000-point mark in all, with seven of them active (including James' 37-year-old teammate, Ray Allen, who entered play with 23,336 points). James' 5,000th assist came midway through the first quarter, when he found Dwyane Wade for a dunk that put the Heat up 8-7.
His scoring was versatile as always - a converted alley-oop via Wade from midcourt early, a three-pointer atop the key late in the first quarter that stretched the Heat's lead to nine, and a stepback 17-footer that gave him 17 points and put Miami up 41-29 with 4:24 remaining in the second quarter.
James - who was the youngest player to be drafted No. 1 overall in 2003 at 18 years old, the youngest to win Rookie of the Year, and the youngest to score both 1,000 and 10,000 points - has long since cornered the market on becoming the youngest player in the game's history to achieve such feats. He is marching past the milestones in what is already a remarkable career.
"I'm not really a numbers, milestone guy," James insisted to USA TODAY Sports after the Heat's shoot-a-round at the University of San Francisco on Wednesday. "As they come up on me, I live in that moment. (The points mark) came up on my radar when I needed 50 points. That's when I knew about it.
"I'm just a complete basketball player. I dominate all facets of the game - rebounding, scoring, passing. I do a little bit of everything - defending. I'm not just a one-dimensional guy. It's just a testament to how I was brought up in the game, how people taught me the game. I just try to play the right way."
In terms of perceptions, James' running mate, shooting guard Dwyane Wade, is the one known more for his scoring. Yet Wade, who has 15,632 points in his 10 seasons, said James doesn't get the credit he deserves as a scorer because of his unprecedented versatility. James finished with 25 points, 10 assists and seven rebounds against the Warriors in a 92-75 win.
"When they mention the best scorers in the game, they never really say him as the best scorer," Wade said. "He has so many other attributes that it's hard to mention everything."
"I think what's most remarkable about it is the fact that LeBron came into the league as a complete player," Spoelstra said. "Often times he's a facilitator. He's been criticized for that many times during the course of his time with us, and scoring - while that's just one of the things that he does - he does it as well as anybody in this league.
"And the fact that he's able to accomplish that milestone so quickly shows you how talented he is. He continues to push himself to get to a higher level."