Mayweather vs Pacquiao: Rematch hopes hit by Manny shoulder injury
• Floyd Mayweather beats Manny Pacquiao on unanimous decision • Pacquiao could face perjury charges after failing to disclose injury • Who Mayweather could face in next and final bout • Mayweather v Pacquiao rematch takes major hit as Manny is forced to have shoulder surgery • Exclusive: Pacquiao denied injection, fought with busted shoulder • The extraordinary collection of celebs at ringside in Las Vegas • Boxing correspondent Gareth A Davies's round-by-round scoring • Picture special: all the best photos from the fight
Manny Pacquiao is facing potential prosecution for perjury after it emerged that he failed to disclose a shoulder injury ahead of his fight with Floyd Mayweather in Las Vegas last weekend.
Manny Pacquiao could be out of the gym for six months after surgery later this week to repair a "significant tear" in his right shoulder rotator cuff, orthopedic surgeon Dr. Neal ElAttrache has explained. It would mean a re-match with Mayweather at the earliest in 2016, if Mayweather can be drawn back for a 50th fight.
Here's Alan Tyers's review of the TV coverage in the UK
I'll be signing off shortly, I'll leave you with a final blast of correspondence which, if nothing else, prove that people can all sit and watch the same thing and see something entirely different...
Christopher Biggs tells us: "When Mayweather steps out of his weight class and beats the world champion in their own weight class maybe you will stop hearing the comparisons between the two but as long as Floyd sits protected in the same weight class he's fought for almost a decade no one cares. It's like owning the video game Madden, playing on rookie and going undefeated, looks real good on paper the rest of us (the people that know the sport) know better. I won't even go into the questionable scoring because, like anyone else that even knows a fragment about boxing, the score card is not always right. But at the end of the day he is 48-0 in his weight class, that is an accomplishment, but top five? Watch some real boxing. I forget how many weight classes has Manny moved up to then beaten the world champion? Oh that's right Manny has done it six times. That's why he is still, even after losing, referred to the greatest pound for pound fighter there is. Because he is - he's a man not afraid to take on a challenge, and he's not a coward that sits in the same weight class protecting his belts. Do yourself a favor learn about boxing and then start writing stupid blogs.
Someone that knows more than you.
Frankie Knox adds: "Mayweather is a boxer? Really? Thought he was a professional runner or something.... Cowardly performance from someone who compared them self to Ali...
Then this from Karen...
"Money won. His impeccable form and professionally calculated style are vastly superior to Manny's disheveled flailing with hopeful lands. Money is the true boxer. Manny's a street fighter."
The debate continues to rage. This one from Elute...
"It's a shame to see so many people who don't understand boxing here but it's a mainstream event so it comes with the territory I guess.
"I think Floyd won easily and has always been better than Pacquiao, finally the debate is over, we can all move on and decide where Floyd ranks in the top five of all time boxers.
"I think it's disgraceful that the first thing Manny did was complain about his injury. News flash to all those who aren't well acquainted with the sport, most boxers are carrying some kind of injury into the fight. If it's truly serious the fight will be postponed or cancelled (e.g. broken bone or cut around eyes) but if it's not you continue with the fight and cannot use that injury as an excuse.
"Throughout the promotion there have been amazing double standards involved, saying Floyd has slowed and down due to the manner of his two wins against Maidana whereas Pacquiao is still considered amazing following his loss by KO to Marquez. If Floyd lost and blamed a shoulder he would be ridiculed. I hope we do the same to Manny since the reverse is the case."
Any more for any more? @loftforwords on the Twitter, or clive.whittingham@yahoo.co.uk
We have this from Kathy, respecting Pacquiao for fighting through his shoulder injury.
"A torn shoulder, especially if it has turned into frozen shoulder, is excruciatingly painful. If Manny Pacquiao fought last night with this injury, even more respect for him. Any other person would be screaming and crying from the pain."
And reader John Turner's first novel, which we're serialising for you starting today...
"I stayed up last night to watch the fight and it was everything I expected. The people who are saying 'Pac won!', I guess have never boxed or even watched a boxing bout in their lives, and their knowledge of the sport comes directly from sitting in their living rooms and watching the Rocky Saga. Either that or they are letting their sentimental opinion of Pac cloud their better judgement. What we saw last night was an artist at work. We don't look at a DaVinci and say 'man that Mona Lisa is ugly' we say 'wow it's a DaVnci' because that is what those 16,000 fans at the MGM saw last night, they saw DaVinci painting the Mona Lisa. It's time to just shut up and say 'Wow, I just saw a Mayweather'
"People are crying out about Pac's injury. Do they not know Mayweather has been fighting injured for years? That's why he throws less punches and tags and moves much much more than he even used to. He protects those 180 million dollar hands. He might hit less, but he makes each punch count. So what Mayweather has done is found a way of winning and using his other skills
"His ability to move and out smart. If I know this about his hands, surely Pac and Roach do. They should have known exactly what was going to happen, but it really didnt look like it. People should just realise Manny was welcomed last night to the Mayweather school of boxing. May didn't even have to break a sweat. If you have a bad shoulder Pac, find another way to win. But reality is you couldn't, because your one dimensional and Mayweather is in another dimension.
"It may sound as if I am all Mayweather. Though I have been a Mayweather fan since I first saw him box, I actually wanted Pac to win. The reason; his comments about him being better than Ali. I know it was probably promotion, but he actually believes it.I am sorry Floyd but your not TBE! Your just GOTT ( the Greatest Of This Time). Ali is, and forever will be the Greatest Of All Times."
Judging by the tone and content of some of the non-publishable e-mails we've had... I wish John the very best of luck out there.
An angry soul calling himself Bro (if it is my actual Bro, bring my vacuum cleaner back you thief, it's been six months) writes...
"Are you for real? Your sweetheart hardly threw a punch and you think he won? Did he get points for defending? American boxing has lost all credibility and you should be ashamed to even write in his defense. It's another Nail in the coffin for your arrogant, nationalistic, win at any cost crap."
To clarify... I'm not American, I'm no Floyd Mayweather fan, and I was as bored as everybody else at 05.00 this morning wondering why I'd handed over 20 notes to watch a guy dance. But he did win.
How often have we heard this one, from Patrick Scott, about a Mayweather fight in Vegas?
"They should have had judges from other countries to score the fight. I feel that the judges were in favour of there own country winning the fight. It was a very disappointing fight, Manny engaging and Floyd running, I certainly won't pay to watch Floyd again."
The reader reaction continues to flow in. We've had this...
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Sam Heaton - &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/LoftforWords" target="_blank"&gt;@LoftforWords&lt;/a&gt; Anyone who saw anything other than a Mayweather win doesn't have the faintest idea what they're talking about. A class apart.&lt;/noframe&gt;
...and, entirely the opposite view, from this from Andrew Spurvey...
"I was extremely disappointed in the fight. I disagree that Manny was out-boxed. He got out-danced. Not sure how Mayweather can look himself in the mirror when so many people paid to see a good fight. He's a ballerina not a fighter. This was not a fight worth watching. All Mayweather did was back up for almost the entire fight. I only remember seeing him push forward twice."
Reader Kean Silvester waves into the re-writing of history, Pacquiao won after all debate with fists flailing. Blast us with your opinions @loftforwords on the Twitter, or clive.whittingham@yahoo.co.uk
Some of the comments are unreal, they clearly don't understand boxing. To win on points a boxer has to land more punches in scoring areas than the other in each round and hope the three judges see that (they don't always!). The judges scorecards were fair I thought. Pacquiao was hardly landing and taking jabs to face all fight, Mayweather is a defensive fighter that's his style, people saying he was running are clueless - he held his ground for the most part (more than usual actually) and span off ropes when he had to and it was this tactic that Pacquiao couldn't deal with. He rightly didn't do too much shoulder rolling on the ropes as Pacquiao south paw stance and left hand could have got round the shoulder. Mayweather is a master and a rematch would be pointless. Hopefully Kahn will get his last fight but although I'll be hoping he does it I don't see him winning either.
On the lighter side of the news, how about that Jamie Foxx performance of the national anthem? That was really quite something.
Resplendent in cream, Foxx was billed as a “multi-talented entertainment superstar” to the thousands at ringside and millions watching at home.
Now perhaps it was because everything was, typically, running incredibly late. Perhaps it was because those outside the US, who’d set their alarms for the middle of the night at roughly the time they thought the fight might start, had subsequently had to sit through the thoughts of actor Liev Schreiber and, inexplicably, the Mexican national anthem (long version) among other procrastination.
Whatever the reason, Foxx’s rendition of the Star Spangled Banner didn’t impress. In fact, you’d have been forgiven for thinking the whole thing was a part of his stand-up act.
And this from Deltamars...
Mayweather was fouling Manny at the start, he was running away and he landed almost no clear hard punches. Manny landed by far the better punches, but of course he could hardly get in as Mayweather was constantly running away or holding Manny. The Sky commentating was a biased disgrace in favour of Mayweather. I can not believe everyone is hailing this performance by Mayweather. Tyson has it right, this performance from Mayweather was undwerwhelming. He knew what he was doing delaying the fight until Manny is in old age.
Or, alternatively, this from Julian Day...
Just had to listen to commentators to realise is was a fictional production and the outcome was pre-determined.
The clown that interviewed Pacman post fight was disguising - a bully, a bigot.
The crowd at the MGM voted - and got it right!
And to prove I’m not simply doing that talk-radio trick of throwing out a wild opinion to get you to phone our premium-rate line and tell me what an idiot I am. Here’s the stats from the computer punch scoring system.
Mayweather threw 435 punches, Pacquiao threw 429. So far, so closely-fought. Then it goes a little awry for the Pac-cam: Mayweather landed 148 to Pacquiao’s 81; 267 Mayweather jabs with 67 landed, 193 from Pac with just 18 on target. Pacquiao threw more ‘power punches’ – 236 – but only landed 63. Mayweather landed 81 of 168.
Stuart Mahoney, like myself I have to say, surprised to be waking up this morning to the pro-Pacquiao reaction you can follow below. Hard done to? Close fight? It was as one-sided a victory as you'll ever see (not involving Audley Harrison) surely?
Morning Clive - genuinely baffled here by some of the reactions on your page so far today, how anyone saw that as a Pacquiao win is beyond me. That's about as clear cut a win as it gets. Manny ate right hands all night and though he did land a few, notably that big shot in the fourth, for the rest of the night he was flurrying at thin air or Mayweather's arms and elbows. Max Kellerman summed it up well in the interview with Manny, he was incredulous that Pac thought he won. Not even Manny believes he won, despite what he says. On that note, I was disappointed in his response, I thought he had more class.
Get in touch with your views @loftforwords on the Twitter, or clive.whittingham@yahoo.co.uk
Mayweather will fight again in September. His last bout, apparently - or at least until somebody comes up with a purse as big as last night's again. Oddly, it won't be for a world title, or so he claims...
"Monday, I will relinquish all belts. My last fight will still be a 12 round fight, but it may not be a championship fight."
The commission, meanwhile, says it wasn't aware of any injury or request for a jab until immediately before the fight.
Pacquiao says: "Three weeks before the right I skipped my training for a couple of days for that reason. We went to MRI and there is a tear in my right shoulder."
Trainer Freddie Roach says: "It was getting better and better every day, we thought about postponing the fight but he looked good in the gym and I was happy with his performance. I never want to put a fighter into a fight injured that badly but we were happy."
Mayweather, predictably, unmoved and not keen on the suggestion that there should be a re-match.
It hasn’t even been two hours and once again you’re throwing me straight back into a battle. For years people said 'Floyd is scared.' Tomorrow I want all you guys who said I was scared and wrote negative articles about me… people don’t know me, I love my family, I want the best for my family, I’m an American dream, I worked hard to put my family in a great situation. I’m going to wake up early tomorrow and read all your stories.
Recapping the big news of the morning, Manny Pacquiao's promoter Bob Arum has claimed the Nevada State Athletic Commission refused to allow the Filipino to have an injection into his shoulder before the fight which left him one-handed for the entire 12 rounds.
Arum told the Telegraph: "It's going to take a long time to potentially have a rematch because Manny has a shoulder injury and we are particularly disappointed that the Commission refused to allow what had been agreed. I think Manny is going to need an operation."
Pacquiao said the injury prevented him carrying out his plan, which is a relief because smiling his way through losing the first three rounds leaving him to chase Mayweather for the remaining nine didn't seem like much of a plan at the time.
Well, good morning everybody. Clive Whittingham here, blinking in the morning light after the long, long old night before. Mayweather on points - who would have thought it eh? Proper turn up. I'll take your post-fight, pre-breakfast reaction @loftforwords on the Twitter, or clive.whittingham@yahoo.co.uk on the old e-mail.
Read Oliver Brown's brilliant piece On why Mayweather is a fine pugilist, but his obsession with money and clinical style means he will NEVER be loved.
Here's some reaction from the two fighters - it seems they were both affected by injury.
After watching this fight, how anyone can say Mayweather won this fight on the skill of his boxing could not be further than the truth. If he is such a great "boxer", why whenever Pacquiao was unleashing an attack did he not "Box" his way out of trouble? instead of using last ditch tactics like grabbing and holding opponents , or failing that just run away. The only people who hit and run away are cowards. I think Mayweather chose his fighting technique of avasive, defensive wrestling with the occasional jab is because if he was drawn into an actual toe to toe boxing match, he would probably lose. People might think that's untrue and he would have won by doing that anyway......so why didn't he? People paid a lot of money to see a boxing match between 2 boxers. Only one of them boxed. Just because you avoid losing doesn't mean you win.
This nutshells it, for me. People may not know a lot about boxing, but they know what they like: Email from Ben Lawrence:
II don't know a whole lot about boxing and that's the first full fight I've seen, but I think the points system must be flawed. I think it's pretty obvious who should've won when the decision comes through and an entire packed PUB boos
I felt Paquio was the aggressor throughout the fight while Mayweather was forced into a defensive flight/fight. I felt Manny was the winner of this fight and was robbed of a victory.
Just watched in chch new zealand. Admit I dont know much about boxing. But in the school yard if the guy your fighting punches you in the face more than you do. You win.
I am glad to see that others saw the fight and the horrendous decision the way I did. Manny Pacquiao so clearly dominated all of the early rounds that by the end of the 7th round, I felt certain that Mayweather would need to score a KO to win. Mayweather did not land a single solid punch until the 3rd round, in contrast to the many good shots that Pacquiao got in. Mayweather swung and missed many times, but most often, he was either running away or cringing against the ropes. The only round that was close to even was the 11th. The judges returned a unanimous decision that was the exact opposite of reality. I am absolutely disgusted by this!!!
And yet on the other hand, Here is Jordan. Not that one, persumably.
Let me get something straight. FM won fair and square, I agree that FM didn't throw a lot of punched, but when he did throw punches he landed them almost every time. I think MP is a great boxer but FM won.
Here's that story in full as we have it.
More from Gareth on that developing story.
I am post-fight press conf. Pacquiao, Roach, and Arum here in arena. Pacquiao now admitting that he did have an injured shoulder - a tear -during camp and there was one point at which they might have thought about pulling out. The shoulder then got better, explained the Filipino fighter.
Roach said:"The shoulder was bad and we thought about pulling out but then it got better."
They reckon it was first injured three weeks ago.
Arum said: "The doctor who looked at it thought it was an old injury."
Pacquiao: "By the third round I could feel the pain in my bad shoulder."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Ian Chadband - Mayweather's technically brilliant, the best pfp, defensive master, etc. But he'll never stir the blood, nor be loved. He's the Nullifier&lt;/noframe&gt;
Manny Pacquiao's promoter Bob Arum claimed immediately after the fight that the Nevada State Athletic Commission had refused to allow the Filipino to have an injection into his shoulder which left him one-handed for the entire 12 rounds.
Arum told the Telegraph that the Commission had cleared his boxer to have a painkilling injection for the damaged right shoulder - the same injury which Kobe Bryant suffered from - with Arum clearly deeply unhappy about this decision ahead of boxing's richest ever fight.
"It's going to take a long time to potentially have a rematch because Manny has a shoulder injury and we are particularly disappointed that the Commission refused to allow what had been agreed. I think Manny is going to need an operation."
Hold up. The man Gareth A Davies has got a corker here. Stand by your beds for an exclusive...
Gareth A Davies has been talking to the referee:
Kenny Bayless told The Telegraph "I felt like I was in there with two great champions in there . They carried themselves well when they clinched it was really tight - there were a few minor things I had to tick them off about but they did their jobs. I'm happy with both boxers."
So many emails. I am trying to find a theme and extract a representative sample. William Asbury's is pretty strong:
Anyone one know if requests for refunds for the "fight" are supposed to go to the home address of Floyd Mayweather or his dance instructor? He just ripped off 3 million+ people...each for a bill apiece! AND...the fight was "delayed" so a few more thousand people could surrender last minute payments to watch the next "Dancing With the Stars" champ tiptoe around the ring. Floyd...how bout some "jazz hands" next time? Maybe sing us a song?...how 'bout "Take the Money and Run"?
This is truly the worst match ever...first match I watched full and probably the last one...terrible fight where FM was defensive MP deserved the win... Want a rematch... No fair results!!
Congratulation from Thai Boxing camp Thailand ...It was a good flight but We don't think it's fair decision .. We not standing by anyone side as we know fight is fight.... Doesn't matter what scored was show but as a boxer " Manny Pacquiao is the winner and he did better than Floyd Mayweather " The game is over but people still keep talking about !!!
Why is Mayweather proclaimed the best Pound for Pound in the world? I didn't see any evidence of that in him jumping around,holding down the other guy and always on the defense. I wont pay a dime to see the re-match if there will be any. The only thing I got from that fight is that Mayweather is an entertainer in Boxing while Pacquiao is a genuine fighter. Anyway the fighter was not as great as it was billed most partly down to tactics of Mayweather.
If I may add, that match was like Chelsea(Mayweather) and Barcelona(Pacquiao) and I'm a Chelsea fan. Mayweather is NOT a great boxer,only a good one at finding ways to win no matter how it makes the sport of boxing look bad. No wonder interest in boxing had dwindle since Tyson,Holyfield and Lennox Lewis era. I wont bother watching another boxing match again.
Here is a lovely picture gallery of all the best photos from the fight itself.
Few more emails. There's millions actually, so profuse apologies to anyone whose thoughts we don't get to, and thank you very much for writing/reading/following it with us.
Well I said it, the worst man won. Boring match tho ey? No ear-biting or nothing. First boxing match I ever watched in full...last boxing match I will ever watch in full.
Steve McDonald nails it with a great, pithy, sharp email. Mate, you should be a writer. The pay sucks but it's great if you like watching TV and staying up late.
I can't see how this is good for boxing. The experts speak of genius masterful boxing, but the paying layman sees a man running for 12 rounds with minumum output. The most opulent fight in history swayed too far towards grotesque build up vs on the night entertainment and will push people towards UFC. I've waited 5 years for this fight but couldn't stomach a rematch. Sad times.
I think the game was fair. They both fought professionally except that FM was few steps ahead of MP. He got MP played to his style so I think the win was just his.
This is why boxing is losing its fans. The scoring is not right. You should be given more points for attacking than defending. The fact someone can run from a fighter for most of the fight and win is not right. When I become boxer I will just defend and run and I too can become champion. Not right. your a legend pacman.
What did Oliver Brown learn from the fight? Here are his five things.
Pacquiao never threatened to attack Mayweather with the sustained ferocity that has become his trademark. Perhaps the sixth-round knockout that he suffered at the hands of Juan Manuel Márquez in 2012 was a portent after all, for he looked a diminished force here, landing a slender fraction of his punches compared to his opponent. Trainer Freddie Roach had claimed that he needed to wage a perfect fight to stand any hope of victory, and this was far too flawed a performance to make that possible. He faded badly in the last five rounds as Mayweather, characteristically, identified his every weakness. He is a charming and endearing figure, but his subsequent argument that he won this contest did him scant credit.
Crikey, Omar here didn't think much of it:
The fight was terrible, by both fighters' standards. Paquio did not fight like pacman. Mayweather didn't even live up to his standards. I will not watch either boxer fight again; huge disappointment. Put it like this; de la Hoya mayweather was a better fight and that was bad. Tito de la Hoya was better and that was worst. There goes boxing.
Floyd Mayweather is the greatest fighter of any era. He is in my opinion the best fighter of all times. And has one of the most unique fighting styles I have ever seen.
Let's get some emails. Kasey Rose, you have the nicest name, so you can go first:
Of course it wasn't a fair fight. Mayweather had to LIBEL LIBEL LIBEL. He was kept on the defensive the entire night and got far fewer and far less substantial hits in than Pacquiao. Mayweather is a total wuss.
Julio César Chávez greatest boxing fighter in the world pound 4 pound.He holds records for most successful defenses of world titles (27), most title fight victories (31), most title fights (37), and he is after Joe Louis (with 23) for most title defenses won by knockout (21). Chávez also has the longest undefeated streak in boxing history, 13 years. His record was 89-0-1 going into his first official loss to Frankie Randalland had an 87 fight win streak until his draw with Pernell Whitaker. Chávez also set the record for the largest attendance for a boxing match, with 132,274... (He will never bet this record forever)
Absolutly not.....not enough excitement for me...for 100$$$$ omg.....ill go to a sports bar an take advantage of their t.v. 1st....too much $$$ for that....if it were 60$ sure....
Sorry but the decision was not really right. Manny is right floyd was just turning back, running back , hugging while punching, thats was so cheating. Isn't it?
If they are getting that much money,I want to see blood, going all out brawl kind of things. No playing it safe.
Ram Lal not alone in wishing that they scored boxing by different rules to how they actually score boxing.
I think Manny Pacquiao should of won against Mayweather as Mayweather did not attack whereas Pacquiao cornered him several times. I do not think this is a fair match and I was like to watch a rematch
Oh snap. This does not make great reading for Pac-fans. From the computer punch scoring system.
Wisest tweet of the night so far comes from, who else, Chuck D
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Chuck D - I think when Heavyweights aint fighting you rarely watch slugfests, thats why ppl loved the Hearns, Leonard, Duran, Hagler era Skill &amp;amp; Bombs&lt;/noframe&gt;
The discussion on the TV is now switching to whether Mayweather is the greatest of all time. Undefeated, having beaten every opponent out there. It's easy to make a case that the answer is yes.
Here are some of the scenes post-fight:
I agree with the principle but I think the best man on the night won here.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Julia Ioffe - A friend explains judging in boxing: It's basically like ice skating, except you hit people. &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23MayPac" target="_blank"&gt;#MayPac&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
Floyd probably got away with holding and leaning that a different ref could have been harsher on, but... you know. Fair result, IMHO.
Which of the following was NOT at the fight? Bobby De Niro, Jon Voight, Justin Bieber, Beyonce, Nigel Farage? Click here to find out in our celebrity fight gallery.
The judges had it 118-110 ,116-112, 116-112. The first score is too wide, but I don't disagree with 116-112. I had it 115-113. Would still like to see a second fight - but not if it takes 5 and a half years.
It was a good fight. I got him many times. I saw the punches. I thought I won the fight. He is moving around, it is not easy to throw a lot of punches. I can handle his power. He is not strong like some others. He's not bigger than me, the size doesn't matter, I have fought bigger guys.
Obnoxious interviewer, I thought. "Well we at ringside all thhought the judges got it right." Come on mate. He's just lost a fight.
First off, I want to thank God. I want to think all the fans around the world. This was a hell of a fight. I take my hat off to Manny Pacquiao, now I see why he is one of the guys at the pinacle of boxing. I am truly blessed. Manny Pacquaio is truly blessed. I am a calculating fighter. He is a tough competitor. I had to take my time with him. My last fight is in September.
Charming and inspiring word for his sponsors as well.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Mike Norrish - Mayweather: 'I want to thank my sponsors Hublot, one of the best watchmakers in the world.'So glad I stayed up for this...&lt;/noframe&gt;
Manny accepts it with grace and class.
Warm words and hugs between the fighters at the end. Cheers for Manny, boos for Floyd.
Results as soon as! Carl Froch: "If you understand boxing, you will say that Mayweather totally nullified Pacquiao. That wasn't a spectacle but there was so much technique there." Here's how TV's Jim Watt scored it:
They're out for the last round. The fighters hug at the start of it. Perhaps Floyd's feeling well disposed because he's thinking about the rematch payday. Well, now or never.... or maybe we'll come back in a year's time, who knows. There's a straight left from Manny, but Floyd is dancing out of the way, he's enjoying this, and why not, he's got Pac right where he wants him, this is a gentle cruise home barring disasters. Manny's corner not looking too happy. Manny gamely coming forward. And that's it! Both men celebrating at the end.
Gareth: MP needs a big round. Look at Mayweather take the centre of the ring and flick out the jab. Great left by Floyd. Manny grins after they clinch. How can you not love the guy. Look at Mayweather again. Boxer beating cultured brawler. But Pacquiao went after Floyd there and chased him down to the wire. All the support for Pacman, but Mayweather toyed there. And booed afterwards. Both men with hands in the air. Both champions. I have Mayweather winning this fight. Mayweather 10-9.
Floyd tags Manny right from the bell! He's caught Manny there. But soon the fight resumes its pattern: Manny lunging forward, Floyd dancing out of the way. Manny not throwing enough. One punch attacks aren't going to do it against this counterpunching defensive genius. Left right combo from Mayweather.
Gareth says: "That's interesting. Floyd coming out at the start of the winging right hand. They land. It's to get the judges' attention. He knows it is quite close Mayweather's use of the jab in this fight, to measure his right hand, has been brilliant. Pacquiao still attacking, landing, still disciplined, which he needs to be. He's often much more aggressive than this. Brilliant defence again from FM. Mayweather winning the round with movement and single shots. Mayweather may toy with Pacquiao now - MP has to go for it. Mayweather 10-9
Come on Manny, up that rate. First minute of this round is pretty quiet, but Manny has barrelled Floyd into the corner. But Floyd is out of there like an otter slithering out of a pot of melted Nutella. "He needs to give the judges something to like," says Jim Watt. Manny having a good round though, he is making the running in this one. "I don't think he has got the strength or the fitness to do it. Mayweather has nullified him." CArl Froch makes a harsh assessment.
Gareth disagrees with the commentators: "That left of Pacquiao is thrilling. It brings the fight - and Floyd - very much alive., See that beautiful movement and defence from Floyd on the ropes. So hard to do, so brilliant. Manny the aggressor, Floyd now in winning on points mode. Not lot of punches landed This is going to be very close. Controversy brewing... Pacquiao 10-9
Nice lunging left from Manny gets through. But apart from that hard-charging spell in round four, Manny's been one shot at a time. not able to put enoguh combos together. Think we could get a fishy decision here though, maybe. Floyd not exactly looking to knock his man out. It's classy, it's composed - is it a bit bloodless? Will the judges judge it harshly?
Gareth says: "Floyd with the right hand. Great right from Floyd over the jab - great whiskers from MP. This is a great fight. The puncher/brawler against the stylist. Savour it - they will go down as greats. Great assasault from MP again. Close round but Pacquiao going for it and very much the aggressor. Floyd landed only a few single shots. Pacquiao 10-9"
Manny taking some more risks now. Lands a left, swings wildly and misses now. Jim Watt says: "you have to take risks against FM. You cannot beat him at his own game." Couple of flurries. Pac chasing it in this round but he's not really finding Floyd. Floyd dropping the hands now, starting to large it up a bit, Manny looking the more tired of the two I would say. It's been engaging and Mayeather's defence has been super, but there have only been sporadic squalls of real excitement. Floyd back in calm control in this round.
Gareth: "Winging left, then left uppercut from Pacman but Floyd still setting traps. Notice that straight right land from the ropes ? MP cannot afford to get reckless. Floyd could knock Manny out as he falls in. Couple of great left hooks from Floyd, That's new in this fight. Pacquiao 10-9"
Floyd electric defence again, darting away from Manny. He's keeping Manny at distance in this round. Tags him with three jabs. That's money. A slower round. Carl Froch: "Manny needs to sustain the punch rate and I cannot see him doing that."
Gareth: "Mayweather attacks, uncharacteristically clumsy throwing the right. FM has come out looking to dominate and change pattern again. Lands good right hand. Pacman hunting bobbing looking for left handed attack again. Great left from MP inside the final minute sends Floyd backwards, but he wore it well. Then a left body shot with 12 seconds remaining from Pacman. Another close rd. Mayweather 10-9"
Manny ups the tempo again, as he must. And he manages to trap Floyd in the corner and unloads a flurry. Now he's got him on the ropes, pounding away at the body. Floyd shake his head! Saying, nah mate, not bothered. Floyd gets back out in the centre of the ring and has sort of taken control again, but until he can actually hurt Pacquaio, he is not going to shut him down. And who knows how the judges are scoring all this? I reckon it's 4-2 roughly to Floyd in round at the halfway mark.
Gareth: "We are witnessing the ageing of Floyd Mayweather here. Serious left-handed assault by Pacquioa, hard, hard shots. Mayweather reactions are slowing. He's still dangerous with that right hand and right check hook. Pacquiao 10-9"
Floyd needs, and gets, a quieter round. He's inviting Pac onto him. Manny cannot let the blood get up too much, get knocked out as he charges forward. Manny looking to "box" more in this round rather than the fourth round when he just went at him hard and whaling. Floyd's supporters will have enjoyed that round much more. At the end of the round, the ref tells Mayweather to keep his punches up.
Gareth A Davies: "This is becoming an awesome fight. That assault in the fourth by MP has got Floyd's attention. That round could have gone either way. Floyd early, Manny late. Floyd back in shell. FM warned for holding and hitting. Closest round so far. Mayweather 10-9"
More promising start to this round. Manny is throwing at an incredible rate and he has landed a couple at the start of round four. And now here's a flurry of blows from Manny! pings him with a left, he's into this now and he has hurt Floyd, who is covering up on the ropes. And now he's caught him with a right in the cenre of the ring, this is Manny's best few monents yet. This is more like it for Manny, he's whaling punches on him but Mayweather's defence is very, very good. A huge number of blows but how many of them actually hurt is harder to say. He was working the body good and hard. That's Manny's round no doubt.
Gareth A Davies' verdict: There it is. The power of Pacquiao. The left finally lands from Manny. Floyd is rocked. And again. This place has come alive. Mayweather covers up. Now we have a fight. This is just amazing. PacMan must not get reckless. Pacquiao 10-9.
Off and running again. Manny has barely landed one. Fight settling into a pattern. Pac charges... but Floyd is not there. There's a shot from Manny though, lunging right that glances. Floyd throws a couple towards the end of the round. Mayweather stuck Manny with a low blow in that round, it glanced off Manny's glove.
Gareth A Davies' verdict: This is a slightly more aggressive Floyd than we are used to seeing. It is working veruy effectively. Great jabs, the occasional right hand. Low blow from FM on MP. Come on Kenny, stronger warning needed. Good right to the body from FM. Pacman needs to start landing. Needs a clean combo to change pattern of fight. For me, FM winning this easily. Mayweather 10-9
Manny lunges and Floyd tags him. Slight slip from Floyd, but that was just a footing thing. Manny bringing great energy, but swinging wildly. Manny grabs Floyd. He's managed to back him into the corner but it's more by wrestling than fighting. Pac like a little bull, head down charging. Mayweather defence looking impeccable. Crowd are roaring Manny forward but it's like trying to thump a shadow at the moment. The bell goes and I would say that round was a tie, Floyd didn't really throw that many. Manny threw a lot, but just didn't land. Latoya writes:
"First comment from a lady??? Manny is humble and has promised to do good with all his winnings so I'm cheering and praying with the whole of the Philippines that he wins. Buttttt it's likely that Floyd will take it. I hate it. But Floyd to win.
Gareth A Davies' verdict: Apart from one combination, Pacquiao is being out moved and that right hand of Floyd's looks so dangerous. They are calling for Pacman but this is all FM. Already 5/6 long straight rights. Mayweather really in the mood. Beautiful to watch. Mayweather 10-9
We're off! Finally! Manny coming forward. Floyd looking to counter, to stick. Floyd looks sharp. Floyd lands his first straight right, bit of snap in that, now back to the jap, Floyd is finding his range really well here. Two minutes minute in, Floyd looking the more assured. Another straight right from Floyd. Hmm, I am giving that round squarely to Floyd Mayweather.
Gareth A Davies: "Brilliant first round by Mayweather. Controlled everything: centre of the ring, landed that dangerous right hand twice - the second time just buckling Pacman's legs a little, and ALSO was even setting traps to land a big right by drawing Manny in." Mayweather 10-9
Lot of late money coming in for a Pac knockout. And we're about to fight.
Fighter introductions. Nice mention for Roach. Passionate applause for Manny. Huge roar for Floyd too though. The ref has got them together. "This is the fight that the world has been waiting for. You are both world champions. Good luck and god bless."
The fighters are in the ring. Here's yer man.... LET'S GET READY TO RRRRRRRRRRRUMBLE!
You wouldn't think that Floyd, the American, was at home.
And here comes Floyd Money Mayweather. Remarkable jacket. Loads of zips on it. In case he needs some pin money on the way into the ring? He is flanked by guards, there are quite a lot of boos in among the cheers. He snakes into the ring, this is great fun theatre, proper black hat-white hat stuff.
And here come the fighters. Manny first. Fantastic ring walk. Soaking up the adulation. Stops to take a selfie! Smiles, a man in his element. Into the ring. Down on his knees, head against the post, praying.
Gareth A Davies: "Unreal. Manny Pacquiao pausing for a selfie. That is fitting too. This is, don't forget, the first megafight of the social media era. That's why for me it's one of the most significant fights of all time for me. Manny in the ring. Then the music and the mood darkens. Mayweather is coming..."
A brilliant picture gallery of all the celeb attendees
Gareth A Davies: "These are the Japanese TV guys sitting directly to the left of me -occasionally they are unhappy that I am in their shot in my red paisley shirt. Animated Japanese voices are awesome. I genuinely have never seen so many different nationalities at a fight here working media. Even Mongolia have come for Manny. But I can see that. You ? For the record over 1000 accredited media here. I'm one of the lucky ones bring in here, so close to almost feel the sweat blood and snarls and smells.
The stunning demand for pay-per-view telecasts of the Manny Pacquiao-Floyd Mayweather mega-fight has caused a 45-minute delay of the main event, as broadcasters struggle to get back on air.
Millions of boxing fans in the US who paid as much $100 to watch the fight were experiencing blackouts due to the record demand.
Viewers trying to tune in on cable TV are complaining that they are stuck watching a black screen during the undercard fight - just minutes from what has been dubbed the fight of the century. There are reports the start of the bout has been delayed as technicians try to rectify the problem.
Time Warner, Optimum, DirecTV, Charter, Comcast and AT&T customers all complained of experiencing the same issues - ranging from pixelated screens to screens going to black after the broadcast had started.
The scale of the problem was enough to have telecasters Showtime and HBO hold up the main fight for about 45 minutes.
Many missed some, or all, of the undercard fight, which saw Ukrainian Vasyl Lomachenko defend his WBO featherweight title against Gamalier Rodriguez of Puerto Rico.
MORE ON THAT PPV STORY
Anyhoo, enough of that madness. Here come the fighters.
Wow. Jamie Foxx. "Why use one note when four will do?" says picture editor Alex. He's absolutely pestering that final note, giving it the full Mariah Carey. Feller me lad on the organ is also going beserk, he'll need a bucket of ice for those fingers later.
Philippines national anthem next. And now Jamie Foxx to sing the USA one, accompanied by solo barrel organ, by the sound of it. This is totally amazing and fitting indeed of this enormous spectacle.
And that action is happening in the form of national anthems. We are starting with the Mexican national anthem! Erm ok. It's Cinco De Mayo soon, says MC Michael Buffer.
Hope we're not going to get a selection of national anthems. Somebody alert David Luiz!
Oliver Brown says: "The only fathomable reason why the Mexican national anthem was just played is that this fight is sponsored by Tecate, a Mexican beer. Utterly bizarre."
I mean, yeah... The longer they leave it, the more people might buy it. We could be hear for ages! Hang on though. Action is happening!
They're saying that estimated three million people have bought this. It's a hundred dollars a pop. you, as they say, do the math.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Sports Illustrated - Update: HBO's Mark Taffet told &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/ChrisMannixSI" target="_blank"&gt;@ChrisMannixSI&lt;/a&gt; that &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23MayPac" target="_blank"&gt;#MayPac&lt;/a&gt; could be delayed about 45 min due to pay-per-view issues &lt;a href="http://t.co/a106MaV4Ct" target="_blank"&gt;http://t.co/a106MaV4Ct&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
Okay. So it's delayed. No shocks there. But by how long?
McCrory makes the good point that one of the excellent things about this fight is that, as far as we know, both camps went really well, so we should be seeing the best of both men.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Dan Roan - Apparently so many people trying to buy pay per view here in the US at the last minute, the bout has been delayed&lt;/noframe&gt;
Here's view from my seat. Editor Mike Adamson asked me if I'm excited, I played it cool. The truth is I am buzzing. I love fight sports and I respect what it can - and cannot - do. This is an amazing match up not just of boxers - because Mayweather is a much greater stylist - but a clash of stories cultures, and race. Could not be bigger. Or more diverse. These are the primeval moments the readiness off the ring walk. Let's not rush this...
This fight really has crossed over into the mainstream. My wife has just texted me from the UK: "My prediction - Pacquiao to get a help from the hand of God in round 5 and KO Mayweather." Love ya, babe.
Glenn McCrory says: "Mayweather looks ready. He's warmed up but not sweating. He looks calm. Manny looks pensive."
Manny P has not put his gloves on yet.
"Both of us, Floyd and I, are working hard to put our name in boxing history," Manny said at the final press conference. How will history juge the winner of this? What about the loser? Where do you rate these men in the pantheon of the sport's greats?
Alan - greetings from Dhaka where am sat in a traffic jam "watching" the fight here... Heart says Manny - but expecting the head to win through.. Keep up the good work!
Three-way tie between Bieber, Paris Hilton and gridiron smuggins Tom Brady for most annoying celeb attendee so far.
Stirring video package now, one of those things that the BBC do so brilliantly, and... well... this one isn't quite on the money. VICTORY WILL STIR IN ETERNITY or something. Okay. Never mind that, what does Paris Hilton think about it all?
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: AP McCoy - I can stay awake all night it's not like I've got a job to worry about &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23unemployed" target="_blank"&gt;#unemployed&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23MayweatherPacquaio" target="_blank"&gt;#MayweatherPacquaio&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
Right then. So, the support acts have done their okayish thing. Now for the main event.
Santa Cruz wins it, takes every round on the scorecards, and rightly so.
Ambitions of a 4am start have proved, well, ambitious. The fighters from this undercard bout are still in the ring as the judges sort out the scorecards.
This undercard fight has gone the distance and the unfancied man from Tijuana has done well to make it so. I don't think there should be too much debate about the result.
I am looking forward to seeing that Jake G boxing flick
Shall we have a few famouses?
I want Manny to win, and I think he can...but only if Mayweather has an off night. Come on Manny, kick some tush tonight
Has anyone had any problems with the PPV broadcast? And just as I type that, the following arrives from Oliver Brown:
There are multiplying reports that the pay-per-view in the US (yours for a cool $100 for high-definition) is not working. Apparently the DirecTV customer-service line has already jammed with irate clients. The excuse is that too many people - over three million - have signed up to watch.
There are a decent number of hanger-on celebs attending tonight, you won't be surprised to hear. Here's who they're supporting.
The lad Cayetano is taking a bit of a pasting here. But with only five rounds gone, we've got potentially another 20 minutes in this fight. That would take us to 4am - which is when Mayweather vs Pacquiao is due to start. Hmm.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Mike Norrish - Mayweather: 'I want to thank my sponsors Hublot, one of the best watchmakers in the world.'So glad I stayed up for this...&lt;/noframe&gt;
Cayetano showing good heart and a chin though, and he's managed to get a couple of words in himself in this second round against a significantly quicker and slicker opponent.
Well, fans in the arena who were hoping for a tight undercard contest here might be in for a disappointment. The boy Santa Cruz is all over Cayetano in this first round.
The big fight, and specifically Floyd Mayweather, has prompted a fierce debate about the ethics of a convicted domestic abuser fighting for this crazy big money. Here's The Telegraph's Jim White on the issue:
Over the years many people have tried to get close to Floyd Mayweather. And every one of them – opponents, wives, girlfriends and children – have ended up in the same way: bloodied, beaten and battered. When it comes to Mayweather, anyone who values their personal safety is advised to keep well away. He has fists that hurt. And he is more than happy to use them.
International boxing has long sold itself as a battle between good and evil. The economics of such a construct are simple: the more the public feels committed to a moral dispute, the more money is generated. Generally, it is a sales device; there is usually little to choose in moral outlook between the protagonists. Frankly, neither is ever likely to be in the running when choosing the next Pope. But in the case of the Fight of the Millennium, as today ’s Mayweather against Manny Pacquiao encounter modestly likes to portray itself, there is no question where each fighter stands. This really is a place where the good and the bad are in direct collision. This is a fight where the choice is stark.
Read more from Jim on that issue here
The fighters are in the ring for the final undercard fight. It's Leo Santa Cruz against Jose Cayetano in a 125 pounds contest.
An email from one Royal Duncan:
will like to be specific. I would've love May weather to win, But I think Pacquiao will be out victorious. I await your swift resp.
Thank you for your live updates on the big fight! I haven't got Sky so I am relying on your at event commentary. I actually predict Manny will go down in the first round....... But Manny will go on to Knock out Mayweather and win the fight. It's going to be a totally different fight we are going to see tonight. Both fighters are going in for the fight of there life's and they are both going to switch up there style and we are going to see a spectacular fight and a very high tension explosion of wits and style.......
This is a bit more like it. Clint and Voight.
Hollywood entertainment mag Variety is reporting "Just ahead of one of the biggest fights in boxing history, dozens are taking to Twitter to complain of cable outages and other problems before Saturday’s Floyd Mayweather-Manny Pacquiao fight."
And we've also just had TV pictures of Sting and Donald Trump arriving, but I won't put them up becuase, you know, who wants to look at that?
With an hour to go until the big event, the stars are starting to arrive. Here's top bi-polar spy lady Clare Danish! Well done Clare.
Here's Gareth A Davies with a counterpunch to entry at 02.39.
Two things Al... (I'm in fight mode)... You'll never dress as well as me; and you'd never beat me in a fist fight. Our readers don't know that you, Al, dress like a bistro owner. Btw this 'blouse' has been to Vegas over 50 times.
It's true. It'd be quite a good bistro though, I think.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Sports Illustrated - Update: HBO's Mark Taffet told &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/ChrisMannixSI" target="_blank"&gt;@ChrisMannixSI&lt;/a&gt; that &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23MayPac" target="_blank"&gt;#MayPac&lt;/a&gt; could be delayed about 45 min due to pay-per-view issues &lt;a href="http://t.co/a106MaV4Ct" target="_blank"&gt;http://t.co/a106MaV4Ct&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
Floyd Mayweather has done everything to ensure that he maximises his hometown advantage in Las Vegas. This fight could, and arguably should, have been held at the 110,000-seat Cowboys Stadium in Dallas, which has hosted Manny Pacquiao before, but Mayweather was adamant that he wanted an 11th consecutive appearance at the MGM Grand. His dressing room here is also four times the size of the Filipino's.
Three-punch combo from the classy Lomachenko has left Rodriguez on one knee. He takes the ten count on one knee and this one-way fight is over. Not much of a contest but Lomachenko is a serious operator. Take away a solid first round and a series of low-blows and Rodriguez hardly had a look-in.
For the uninitiated Vasyl Lomachenko has his father's face tattooed on his body. It is called respect. He is also one of the top 5-8 talented movers and boxers I have ever seen. Off night tonight for him. Big time. He is much better than this. Double Olympic champ, with a great story too...
Lomachenko fighting clever and dominant and relentless but without much apparent appetite for a flamboyant finish to this one-sided contest. Hope that's not an omen for the main event....
Rodriguez is on the brink here. He's getting a schooling from a very serious fighter. A straight left to the solar plexus hurts him and then he's dropped onto one knee by a short right hook. Saved by the bell there at the end of round seven.
And here's Floyd from a couple of minutes previously.
Poor old Rodriguez is getting his lunch handed to him. Here, you can do a twitters at me if you like. Here. @alantyers
Just called up to the broadcast room to talk about Manny Pacquiao on ABS-CBN - the equivalent of the BBC in the Philippines. Dyan Castillejo with me a former tennis player is one of the leading anchors. Their Sue Barker. As I said this is bigger than boxing, bigger than prize fighting. Manny Pacquiao is fighting for a people. Huge burden. But he accepts it... It's a huge pressure. 108 million Filipinos watching him tonight ... It is hard having covered Pacquiao's fights since 2007 not to be amazed by his story.
Gosh, that IS a flamboyant blouse. And the Philippines lady is dressed nice, too.
Point docked for the Puerto Rican in round five.
After watching previous fights of Manny Pacquiao over and over again I think he has incredible speed, stamina and power but even with all that I can't see him beating Mayweather. He is a humble guy and he seems genuinely nice and I would love to see Manny come out on top but realistically I can't see that happening. One thing is for sure, this will be an amazing fight. I see blood, sweat and knockdowns from both athletes in tonight's fights but I'm still in favour of Floyd Mayweather. Team Mayweather. Hope you are well Alan, and what are your views on the fight?
Into round four, Rodiguez has tagged his opponent with a couple of low blows. Ref's had a word. The man from the Ukraine getting the jab working nicely and this is rapidly looking like a done deal. A major gulf in class between the two men, Rodriguez is cut.
Mayweather win all the way stronger more competitive and a real fighter none the less pacquio will be a good opponent with a quarter chance of a win.
Hey I can't watch the fight on tv so I'll be tuning in your updates. I hope pacquiao wins! I'm filipino btw.
Mayweather to win. But I hope for the sake of the large filipino crew on the pipe laying vessel I'm working on its a manny win!
Lomachenko starting to get the jab working in the second round.
Solid start from both fighters here, Rodriguez holding his own.
Time for a few of your emails. Glen Allsopp says:
Alan. HUGE typo. Just kidding. Helping keep you awake ;) Really hoping for a Pacquiou victory although the chances are obviously in Mayweather's favour. Would be interesting to see Floyd's reaction when his ego takes a beating from a potential loss.
Of course Manny Pacquiao will win. He is a humble man who humble his self before God. We Filipinos are praying for his success. He is relax and calm why Mayweather is so stress and tense.
I want Manny to win, he seems so confident and I would feel bad if he lost. I also think Pacquiao will win, he's a savage, he'll bruise Floyd's pretty face up! :P
The Ukranian cornermen are complaining to the ref about the height of Rodriguez's belt. "It is a little tight under the armpits," quips that excellent Scottish boxing commentator whose name has temporarily, annoyingly, escaped me. There was a bit of minor murmuring in the build up about Manny Pac's cup, or box as we would call it in the UK, being a bit more protective than strictly necessary. Not that I would consider having your unmentionables thoroughly protected to be unnecessary if Floyd Mayweather was hitting you in or near them. Anyway, it all got worked out.
The lad Rodriguez is pretty keen on God, and has brought along a bible to help him out.
Undercard action as the Puerto Rican Gamalier Rodriguez takes on Vasyl Lomachenko of the Ukraine. WBO Featherweight champion Vasyl is a warm favourite, to say the least.
Gareth A Davies writes from the arena: "Hall of fame referee Joe Cortez tells me that Kenny Bayless will be on it tonight as the third man in the ring.."
I will bring you all the build up and news ahead of the 4am fight. So keep me company by answering the following questions: who do you think will win? And who do you want to win?
Evening all. Alan Tyers here to wrest control of the blog from the mighty Gareth A Davies. Two hours until kick-off.*
The security is tighter tonight than I have known in 17 years of covering fights in Las Vegas. It is taking an age to get in. The MGM Grand is taking 40 minutes to walk through (about 400m), and there are more police at a fight event here than I have ever seen.
In some places there is a very heavy presence and the police will be quick to combat it. I don't want to pre-empt anything happening, but these are the nights when stampedes and fights break out... and... They are keeping all the fans who do not have tickets well away from the MGM Grand Garden Arena. Spot on.
I've just bumped into Amir Khan and he sees Mayweather as being too slick for Pacquiao. Amir, who is in training camp in San Francisco for his fight with Chris Algieri on May 29, says, of course, that he would give Mayweather more problems.
Wayne Rooney's had his say...
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Dan Roan - Apparently so many people trying to buy pay per view here in the US at the last minute, the bout has been delayed&lt;/noframe&gt;
Rory McIlroy admits he has been waiting restlessly for years for this fight but, having secured a pair of ringside seats, the world No 1 golfer is likely to have to give them up, writes Oliver Brown.
The Ulsterman is playing Paul Casey this afternoon in the quarter-finals of the World Matchplay in San Francisco, and could finish too late to make it in time for the predicted 8pm (4am BST) opening bell here in Las Vegas. "I'll probably try to sell my tickets and watch it on a big screen here somewhere," he says. Should he offer them quickly enough on the secondary market, he ought to make over £60,000 for the two tickets.
While the overwhelming majority of boxing veterans and aficionados are leaning towards a Mayweather victory, the public vote is firmly with Pacquiao, writes Oliver Brown from Las Vegas.
A giant screen at the entrance to the MGM Grand shows the fans' betting at 70-30 in his favour. And the groundswell is growing: at 9am local time there was already a 200 metre-long queue through the hotel's casino just to place a bet.
There are those who believe Manny Pacquiao will become president of Philippines one day if he wins tonight... Here's my piece talking to prominent people about Pacman.
And they mean it, look ...
Teddy Atlas the former trainer of Mike Tyson (that's him on the left standing next to me) and a great analyst on the sport of boxing just said a great thing to me. "The event looks great and it's huge. The weigh in was great but that was the only thing for the real boxing fan ($10) - tonight it's so expensive it's just for Wall St it's so expensive.
"It's the only thing that makes me sad about this because the real fans have been paying to see these two for the last six years and helped make this happen."
I'm with Lennox Lewis, the former linear heavyweight world champion, and he says Floyd Mayweather on points but Manny Pacquiao if he can get to Floyd...
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: AP McCoy - I can stay awake all night it's not like I've got a job to worry about &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23unemployed" target="_blank"&gt;#unemployed&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23MayweatherPacquaio" target="_blank"&gt;#MayweatherPacquaio&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
So there has been plenty of intrigue over media credentials. Two of the country’s most prominent female sports broadcasters, CNN’s Rachel Nichols and ESPN’s Michelle Beadle, sounded the alarm early Saturday when each tweeted that they had been banned from covering the fight and had their credentials yanked by Mayweather’s camp. But a spokesperson for the controversial welterweight said the TV personalities had the story all wrong.
• Mayweather v Pacquiao: who are the celebrities backing?
"They have always been credentialed. I dont' know where this story is coming from,” Mayweather spokesperson Kelly Swanson told the Daily News. “Michelle has always been credentialed through HBO. Rachel has always been credentialed through CNN. CNN gets one seat in the arena, they can choose whoever can sit there — including Nichols."
There are a finite number of press seats inside the 16,800-seat MGM Grand Garden Arena and much of the media covering the event will be seated in an auxiliary press area outside of the arena. (Via NY Daily News).
I heard about my arena seat last night. Scalpers tell me it could have sold for $40-$60k. Don't want to miss this one... written too much on it not to see it in the flesh.
Fans of Manny Pacquiao have a new way of showing how much they love the boxing superstar - by eating him.
Or a life-size replica cake at least.
Zach Yonzon, his wife Aila, and six of his staff helped finish the 167cm (66in) chocolate cake on Saturday after working 24 hours at The Bunny Baker cafe in suburban Quezon City.
Yonzon says it was his wife's idea to bake the cake to commemorate the mega-fight against Floyd Mayweather.
"Manny Pacquiao is world class, so we wanted to do something equally world class and the only way to do that is to create a cake that was extraordinary," he said.
He said he based the image of Pacquiao, including a tattoo of a glove on the boxer's left chest, on pictures available on the Internet.
The cake is built around a wooden frame covered in cling wrap. He said parts of the head and the arms and the calves were made of Rice Krispies.
"It will be interesting to get people's reactions cutting and eating Manny Pacquiao," he said, laughing. "My wife said we will start with the torso."
How Mayweather shows off his millions
The fight is expected to go the distance, with odds of 3/10 available and 12/5 for the fight not running to the end of a 12th round.
The 10 best pound-for-pound boxers of all time