Meb Keflezighi Is Back at the Boston Marathon as a Superstar
“I’m trying to be a trailblazer not only as a runner but in the sponsorship category, to redefine how athletes are able to support themselves,” he continued, looking at the watch. “I want to be the Nascar of distance running. I want people to see me as an ambassador, beyond just my performance.”
The partnership with Epson was just one of the many novel sponsorships Keflezighi has accrued since he was dropped by Nike in 2011 and went unsponsored for eight months, a period he still reflects on with visible pain. Fulfilling his goal, he now dresses more like a racecar driver than a marathon runner, his racing singlet and ambassador portfolio promoting a motley billboard of brands: Skechers, which has practically built a franchise around its new star; Sony, and its Keflezighi model Walkman devices; running clubs; energy bars; sports drinks; sunglasses; running equipment; compression socks; beef jerky; and now, even a cellphone company, T-Mobile, led by the avid runner John Legere.
“People thought I was over the hill — they had a shot at me and didn’t want it,” Keflezighi said. “Last year I carried the weight of the nation on my shoulders, and I needed to win. Now tomorrow I’m the one to beat, and I’m ready to race and to show what I can do, for both myself, my country and everyone who has believed in me.”
When Keflezighi talks about running and his increasingly broad appeal, his words invariably take an introspective turn.
“Regardless of where we finish, in the marathon, we all go the same journey,” he said. “Whether we’re different genders, different ethnicities, we are all runners.”
As he prepared for his next public engagement, an event with the rest of the American team, he gathered himself. Walking from his hotel to the finish line with the rest of his team and handlers, he was surrounded by cheering runners. “Go Meb,” they cried. “Go U.S.A.!”
Nearby, at the race expo, runners patiently lined up to take pictures with a cardboard cutout of the grinning champion, positioned before a picture of the marathon finish line.
As Keflezighi passed on Boylston Street, his pants swallowing his small frame, one runner did a double take. “I thought he’d be a lot bigger,” she said. “He looks like a regular guy.”