Canada's Patrick Chan wins gold at worlds on home ice
LONDON, Ontario – After landing two impressive quads during his free skate, Canada's Patrick Chan began to unravel. Following four significant mistakes, including two falls, it appeared his sizable lead in the World Figure Skating Championships would vanish.
Instead, on home ice, Chan, 22, won his third consecutive world championship Friday on the strength of his short program. When he took the microphone and addressed the crowd, he apologized for his error-filled skate. "I'm sorry I didn't get to do a good program," he said. "I wanted to do it so badly."
Other than the adoring Canadian fans in the stands, many felt Denis Ten, who claimed Kazakhstan's first world medal, should have won the title. Ten, 19, finished second, 1.30 points behind Chan's score of 267.78.
Spain's Javier Fernandez, 21, won the bronze, the first world medal for his country.
Ten, who trains in Lake Arrowhead, Calif., under Frank Carroll was thrilled since a medal was so unexpected. He had never been better than seventh at the world championships or Olympics before.
Growing up in Kazakhstan without many rinks, Ten skated outdoors. To keep warm, his mother dressed him in three pairs of pants. "I looked like a cabbage," he joked.
When indoor rinks began to be built in shopping malls, he trained there. "Every Friday, we would have an exhibition," he said. "And perform for all the shopaholics."
Ten was too lost in the pinch-me moment of worlds to even question the results. Others, however, thought he had been robbed. As U.S. skater Johnny Weir tweeted: "My world champion is @Tenis_Den. No question. Congratulations. Everyone should be feeling some Kazakh pride!"
Chan became the first man since Alexei Yagudin (1998-2000) to win three consecutive world titles. At least Chan gave the crowd a short program to remember when he broke the world record with a magnificent skate. "I'm thankful for that beautiful short program I did on Wednesday," he told the crowd.
Even though his worlds ended with a subpar performance, Chan said he wasn't embarrassed by the way he won. "I definitely was disappointed in myself, " he said. "The moment wasn't as good as it could be, nonetheless it was special."
For the U.S. men, Max Aaron, in his first world championships, finished seventh and Ross Miner placed a disappointing 14th. For the first time since 1998, only two U.S. men will compete at the Olympics in Sochi next year. The result was expected; reaching the combined placement of 13 or better needed for three Olympic spots was considered a long shot.
For Aaron, figure skating is a contact sport. On Friday the former hockey player checked himself into the boards during his free skate. Two days earlier, while warming up for his short program he fell hard and banged his head on the wall.
After landing his triple axel on Friday, Aaron caromed into the wall and resumed his shift. "It's like a big hit in hockey," he said. "You hear the crowd and keep going. You feed off of that."
Aaron's ideal rink is a giant frozen pond. Even though he skates at an Olympic-sized rink in Colorado, he even runs into those walls. "I always want a bigger and bigger rink," he said. "I like to use the entire ice sheet. I have it, why not use it all? I paid for it, too. I don't want to use half the sheet."
When the season started, Aaron never imagined it would end with a national championship and the United States' best finish at these worlds. For the climb to continue, Aaron knows he needs to work on his artistry. He acknowledges his skating style is a "little rough around the edges and aggressive," but said that's what distinguishes him from the others. "I don't think many men are like that. I'll take it with me and I'll use it."