French Open: Djokovic completes grand slam collection
Paris (CNN)The first man since Rod Laver in 1969 to win four straight grand slams. The eighth man to complete the career grand slam. The first man to claim the first two majors in a calendar year since Jim Courier in 1992.
Novak Djokovic made plenty of history Sunday when he beat Andy Murray 3-6 6-1 6-2 6-4 in the French Open final.
Djokovic, especially in the past two seasons, never hid how desperately he wanted to win the world's premier clay-court tournament. He had lost three finals, including last year to Stan Wawrinka.
When Murray sent a backhand into the net on a third match point, Djokovic fell to the court on his back. Finally the Coupe des Mousquetaires was his.
The crowd on Philippe Chatrier court roared their approval. Never before in a grand slam final had Djokovic been so loved, although he did get his share of support against Wawrinka 12 months ago.
"I felt that kind of support and love from the people around that allowed me to be sitting here with the trophy," Djokovic told reporters. "That kind of support was very well present at the stadium today."
He duly drew a heart into the clay with his racket, mirroring Gustavo Kuerten's celebration when the Brazilian won the French Open in 2001, and dropped himself in the middle of it. Djokovic got the affable Kuerten's approval, he said, while they were filming videos for a tournament partner.
Serena Williams -- upset by Garbine Muguruza in Saturday's women's final -- came within two matches of achieving the calendar-year grand slam in 2015 and given the Serb's form, who would bet against him being in the same position in several months in New York?
"Whether or not I can reach a calendar slam, that's still a possibility," said Djokovic. "But I don't think about it right now. Right now I just try to enjoy this experience of winning the trophy that I never won before."
Less than two weeks ago, Murray came within two points of losing in the first round to Radek Stepanek, and he was also stretched to five sets by Mathias Bourgue in the second round.
"This is something so rare in tennis. It's not happened for an extremely long time and will take a long time to happen again. Me personally being here, it sucks to lose the match but I'm proud being part of today."
But Murray broke back, not making errors, crunching forehands -- traditionally his weaker wing -- and going for second-serve returns. It was the type of play his backers have long called for, rather than the 29-year-old counter-punching. He claimed 13 of 15 points to build a 4-1 advantage.
Murray blasted a powerful serve down the middle, which was called a fault. But Dumusois inspected the mark and ruled the ball was good. He then, instead of replaying the point, awarded it outright to Murray, saying Djokovic's contact with the ball came after the call and so didn't put him off.
As the set developed, a worrying sign for Murray: Djokovic got his teeth into Murray's service games. Murray has always struggled with his first serve percentage and Sunday it was far too low against the game's top returner, 50 %. In the last three sets, Djokovic won at least two points in each of Murray's service games.
Djokovic's first show of positive emotion came at 4-1 as he successfully chased a drop shot and replied with an angled forehand winner. A fist pump ensued. Another one surfaced on the next point when he broke with a crushing backhand down the line.
Murray, however, got to 4-5 and when he registered the first point, the crowd went wild. Now they wanted more tennis. Suddenly, drama surfaced, a contrast to most of the previous 2 1/2 sets.
"I was close to making it very interesting, but he did well to finish it at the end," said Murray.
The final played under cloudy skies after rain for most of the last week, seconds later, the sun finally came out in Paris. For tennis' current shining light it was only fitting.