James Anderson breaks Ian Botham's England wicket record but century by Jason Holder sees first Test drawn
He did it in the end. On the fifth morning of the first Test, James Anderson equalled Sir Ian Botham’s record of Test wickets for England, and in the evening he broke it with his 384th, but England had no victory to celebrate, only his individual achievement.
West Indies, thanks to the heroism of Jason Holder and their slow home turf, survived a final day of ever-ratcheting excitement with three wickets intact. Holder is the captain of the West Indies one-day side, such is his maturity, but even so, for a lad of 23, in his fourth Test, to bat out more than half of the final day was an astonishing feat.
England could not be faulted for delaying their declaration. They had set West Indies a target of 438 off 130 overs, and that was thanks to a last-minute blast by Jos Buttler. If they had declared even five overs earlier, the target would have been less than 400 and it is not inconceivable – such was the blandness of this turf – that West Indies might have knocked it off for a 1-0 lead.
Where England could be faulted was in the sameness of their bowling: the same sameness, so to speak, which plagued their World Cup. Four right-arm bowlers of similar pace and a couple of off-spinners were ­insufficient, and between them could not take more than five wickets on the last day.
At least Anderson’s record-equalling wicket was a worthy one. Just before 11  am Anderson ran in for the fourth over of his first spell of the day. He had been labouring, truth be told, and his speed had been down on normal, whether because he was tensed up or worn down by England’s fruitless World Cup.
So Anderson needed a bit of help to get over the line, and he received it from two quarters. One was Marlon Samuels, who reached for a widish ball to cover-drive it, instead of exercising the superb restraint that Holder was to do so well later on. The second source was James Tredwell, who fell to his right in the gully to catch the sliced drive.
Anderson did not stop in his follow through. He whirled his right arm around a couple of times – in the opposite direction to which he has bowled nearly 4,000 Test overs for England – before clenching his fists, looking skywards and emitting a celebratory roar.
But the fact is that the West Indian fast bowlers used their new balls more threateningly than England’s did, whether it was because they were faster or pitched a fuller length.
The cheaper make of Dukes ball being used in this series has a prouder seam than a normal Test-standard ball, before it flattens out, and Jerome Taylor and Holder made it swing more than their English counterparts.
Holder came in at 1.09 pm, just before England took the second ball, and put his head down to give Denesh Ramdin the support he needed either side of tea. They are the two present West Indians captains, Ramdin of the Test team, Holder of the ODI team, and together they showed up half of their team’s specialist batsmen.
There was never the remotest chance that West Indies could win after England, in the form of Tredwell and Stuart Broad, bowled so tightly at the start of the fifth day that the target was pushed up from a theoretical 340 off 90 overs to a hypothetical 338 off 82.5. Yet three of West Indies’ top six were out to attacking shots.
Even before Samuels’ loose cover-drive, Devon Smith had launched Tredwell to mid-on. Resuming on 59, Smith had been contained to six runs off 44 balls and could take it no longer. It was just as well that he is too short to meet the eye of Simmons, or the bowling coach Sir Curtly Ambrose, or Holder.
The third self-inflicted dismissal was the worst of all: a horrendous hack by Jermaine Blackwood after he had run down the pitch at Chris Jordan in the over before the second new ball became due – the worst ­possible time to expose a new ­batsman. No doubt the West Indian coaches told Blackwood something very germane.
Shivnarine Chanderpaul did not conspire to bring about his own downfall. But Alastair Cook did – and the cunning plan of the non-turning off-break worked. Chanderpaul asked for Steve Davis’s decision to be reviewed, but Joe Root’s delivery would have hit, not even clipped, leg stump.
Root, an occasional off-spinner who had taken four Test wickets before this game, turned out to be more effective than England’s specialist spinner. Tredwell does not drive the ball into the turf like Moeen Ali does to make the ball bite, but Moeen will have to do a lot of bowling in the nets in Grenada before the second Test on Tuesday to prove he has recovered completely from his side-strain.
After tea Holder was ahead of ­Ramdin in reaching his fifty, and with a high-class back-foot drive off Jordan he went to his highest Test score, passing his previous best of 56. Baulked by Holder, England became desperate for some magic from somewhere, for a stroke of wit or genius – anything to defeat the slowness of the turf.
Anderson was the man to defeat it, to some extent, and Ramdin. He held one up against the breeze and had the West Indian captain caught at first slip off a defensive push. Sir Ian could not forbear to cheer and gave Anderson the thumbs-up with both hands.
In the last hour of 15 overs England had still to take three wickets. All the pace bowlers had a last blast, without experimenting enough: the slower-ball bouncer which they have perfected in white-ball cricket would have been worth a go.
Tredwell was brought back to do what he had only done once in his first 35 overs – take a wicket – but still Holder eased maturely forwards, crushing the spin and England’s hopes, and with a final flourish went to his maiden Test and first-class century. No matter Anderson’s career achievement, Holder had to be the man of the match.
In the end, the torpid turf was the winner, or Test cricket itself.
“Rally round the West Indies!” resounded around the ground at the finish – and they will, now that this new-look West Indies team have lived to fight another day.