Louisville QB Lamar Jackson wins Heisman Trophy
The Heisman Trophy winner was decided before the leaves began to fall — and Saturday night, Lamar Jackson finally was allowed to take it home.
The 19-year-old Louisville quarterback, and the overwhelming favorite to capture college football’s most prestigious individual award, officially was named the Heisman winner at the PlayStation Theater in Manhattan, becoming the youngest-ever recipient.
Jackson (19 years, 337 days), who is five days younger than Florida State’s Jameis Winston was when he won the award in 2013, is the first Louisville player to win and also the fourth sophomore to claim the trophy, joining Tim Tebow, Sam Bradford and Mark Ingram.
“To hear my name called with all those great players, I was overwhelmed,” Jackson said. “Man, I almost cried.”
Sporting a Cardinals-themed red-and-black tuxedo for his coronation, Jackson received 526 first-place votes, totaling 2,144 points. Clemson quarterback Deshaun Watson, one of the biggest preseason favorites to win the award after finishing third last season, was the runner-upwith 1,524 points and 269 first-place votes, followed by Oklahoma quarterback Baker Mayfield (362), Sooners wide receiver Dede Westbrook (209) and Michigan’s Jabril Peppers(208).
Before the season, Jackson was given 100-1 odds to win the Heisman, but he sprinted from relative anonymity to front-runner status with eight total touchdowns in the season’s first game. With unmatched athleticism, Jackson set an ACC record with 51 total touchdowns, amassing 3,390 passing yards, while rushing for 1,538 yards. He became the third player in FBS history to pass for at least 30 touchdowns and run for at least 20 scores.
When Louisville lost its final two games of the regular season, Jackson’s runaway campaign lost a little momentum, leaving him uncertain whether his name would be announced.
“There’s five of us, so not knowing which name was gonna be called, for some reason my chest started pumping very hard,” Jackson said. “My heart started racing. When I heard them say my name, just thank God.”
Incredibly, Jackson was just a three-star high school recruit growing up in Pompano Beach, Fla., and multiple college coaches attempted to dissuade him from playing quarterback at the next level.
As a freshman at Louisville, Jackson threw for 12 touchdowns and eight interceptions, but the dual-threat star evolved into the leader of the nation’s highest-scoring offense, throwing for 1,550 yards more than the previous season, with only one more interception despite 135 more passing attempts.
“When Lamar first got to us you could see he had the tremendous ability and I think that he thought that’s all he needed,” Louisville coach Bobby Petrino said. “The improvement that he’s made since he came to our program is because of his dedication and his hard work and his drive.“If there’s a young man who probably thought in the back of his mind that, ‘I’m gonna win the Heisman Trophy this year,’ it’s Lamar.”
Jackson has every right to think the same next season, when he will be favored to join Archie Griffin as the only two-time Heisman winner.
“The former Heisman winners were telling me to stay hungry and keep going,” Jackson said.