Australian Open: Ana Ivanovic knocks Serena Williams out in three sets to progress to quarter-finals
Serbia's Ana Ivanovic stunned world number one Serena Williams at the Australian Open on Sunday with a 4-6, 6-3, 6-3 fourth-round upset at Rod Laver Arena.
Ivanovic ended the American's 25-match winning streak to reach her first grand slam quarter-final since the 2012 US Open with an inspired display of clean hitting.
"It's amazing. I just tried to play the best I could," a thrilled Ivanovic said in a courtside interview.
"You guys have been amazing. I'm so thrilled," she told the crowd.
Ivanovic, a former world number one, had never taken a set off Williams in their four previous encounters.
A winner at Roland Garros at 2008, she was aggressive from the outset, breaking Williams at 2-2 in each of the first two sets and holding firm in the second to draw level.
A shell-shocked Williams was then broken at 1-0 in the deciding set when the Serbian laced a brilliant return down the line.
With the Rod Laver Arena crowd roaring their support for the underdog, Ivanovic coolly raised three match points and sealed the tournament's biggest upset when Williams missed a return.
Ivanovic will play the winner of Australia's Casey Dellacqua match against Canada's Eugenie Bouchard for a place in the semi-finals.
"It was not easy playing such a champion and I had never beaten her before, but she is just a human and I know that she has pressure on her too," she added.
"So I just went out there and was swinging at the ball and I did that really well."
Chinese star Li Na raced past Russia's Ekaterina Makarova in less than an hour to reach the quarter-finals at a canter.
The two-time Melbourne finalist and 2011 French Open winner was rarely extended in the 6-2, 6-0 win in 59 minutes in warm conditions at the Multi Purpose Venue.
The world number four is now just two wins from her third Melbourne final, and three victories from ending her jinx at the season's opening grand slam.
The 31-year-old led the 2011 final before losing to Kim Clijsters, and last year she was ahead against Victoria Azarenka but dramatically twice rolled her ankle and briefly blacked out.
Li's all-court game was too much for Makarova, and she broke in the third game when the Russian 22nd seed failed to clear the net with a forehand drop shot.
After fighting off break points in the fifth game, she broke again for 5-2 and then sealed the first set with an emphatic backhand winner.
She did not ease up in the second set, breaking immediately with a forehand at the net and again with a sizzling cross-court backhand to go 3-0 up.
The finish line was in sight but Li had to refocus after conceding two break points in the following game, and she aggressively forced two errors from Makarova to maintain her advantage.
Another break for Li made it 5-0 and she finished Makarova off in stylish fashion, coming in to the net and burying a backhand volley deep in the left corner.
Li will play Italy's Flavia Pennetta - who at 31 is one day older than the Chinese player, with both turning 32 next month - in the next round.
"At least she's one day older than me, so I'll play an older player," said Li.
"So nobody will talk about my age."
Pennetta advanced to her first Australian Open quarter-final with a 6-1, 4-6, 7-5 victory over ninth-seeded German Angelique Kerber.
The 31-year-old Italian could do nothing wrong in the first set, moving Kerber around the court and belting winners from both sides to drop just one game in 24 minutes.
Kerber, who lost in the Sydney International final to qualifier Tsvetana Pironkova, took a short break between sets and somehow managed to stay in the match and break the 28th-seed three times to send it to a decider.
Pennetta was broken twice in the third set but rediscovered her rhythm and accuracy to break Kerber three times to advance to her first singles quarter-final at Melbourne Park.