J&K floods: Work resumes after rains halts relief and rescue operations
Srinagar: Relief and rescue operations resumed after a brief halt due to rains in the flood-hit state of Jammu and Kashmir on Sunday where over one lakh people are still awaiting rescue.
The rains which started at 8:30 am in Srinagar but stopped shortly an hour later.
Due to rains and weather conditions, the IAF stopped ferrying relief supplies for short time. The operation resumed at around 11:15 am.
Over 60,000 more people have been rescued from Kashmir valley by Indian Army and NDRF. 
So far 129 people have lost their lives in Jammu region while over 30 people were found dead in Kashmir valley, as per government figures.
“We resumed rescue operations today after rains eased. I think everyone will be rescued in the next few days,” said DIG, NDRF, JKS Rawat.
Rawat further said that over 41,000 people have been rescued by the NDRF in Kashmir so far and relief material is being distributed to the people stuck in the floods.
SS Singh, Deputy Director in Met Department said, “There will be light moderate rains in the state which might stop by today evening. There are no indications of heavy rain.”
SDM, Srinagar, Syed Abid Rasheed Shah that inclement weather will create problems as many people are still on the roads and without shelter. At the same time, Shah said relief operations would continue despite rainfall.
Jammu and Kashmir Chief minister Omar Abdullah had expressed concern over the rising water levels in north Kashmir.
Asked about the extent of loss of lives in the flood, Omar told PTI, "I am hoping and praying that the loss of life will not be as severe as we expect it. Because looking at the situation, the death toll is still remarkably low. I am hoping and praying that it will not be as bad some have been fearing."
He said that "within the constraints of (the number of) helicopters, we are doing the best job possible," when asked if the government was able to rescue enough people in the situation.
"Right now, the focus still remains on rescue operations as 1.5 lakh people are still marooned. Our primary focus is on provision of relief like rations, medicines and supplies they require," he said.
To a query on incidents of stone-pelting and the possibility of involvement of separatists in them, the Chief Minister said "those people are not from Srinagar. They have been coming in from South and North Kashmir and they have been indulging in thefts and law and order situations."
On the possibility of spread of diseases and epidemic after the flood water recedes, he said Kashmir has a history that lives are not lost in floods but in the aftermath of floods.