US snowstorm: Eight dead as wild weather wreaks havoc, causes transport chaos
A massive snowstorm in the United States has left at least eight people dead, stranded motorists and prompted the cancellation flights.
Areas east and southeast of Buffalo, in northern New York state, could receive a year's accumulation of snow or even more in just two days, Erie County executive Mark Poloncarz said.
The deadly storm may see as much as another 90 centimetres of snowfall on Thursday, which could prompt a federal disaster declaration, Mr Poloncarz said.
Temperatures will remain below normal from the Midwest to the east coast until the weekend, with all 50 states recording below freezing temperatures on Tuesday, the National Weather Service said.
A state of emergency and travel bans are in effect across Buffalo's Erie county and authorities ordered people to stay at home to allow crews to clear roads, repair power lines and provide emergency assistance to the most vulnerable.
The National Guard was called in to assist military Humvee vehicles after New York's transportation department worked through the night to rescue stranded motorists and take people to shelters.
"Many communities are still in a very difficult, sometimes paralysed situation," Mr Poloncarz said.
Three of those who died suffered heart attacks while shovelling snow and another person died while using a snowplough.
"We've had six deaths in the area, five of which have been preventable," Erie county health commissioner Gale Burstein said, urging residents to stay at home.
In another case, a 46-year-old man was found in his car buried under about 4 metres of snow.
A 23-year-old man in New Hampshire died in a traffic accident also tied to the storm, state police said. US media reported another death in Michigan.
In South Buffalo, which has implemented a driving ban, 18 snow mobiles were being used to respond to emergency medical calls and rescue stranded motorists, mayor Byron Brown said.
More than 5,000 tonnes of snow have been removed from the area and 100 vehicles have been towed.
Erie county spokesman Peter Anderson said runways at Buffalo Niagara International Airport were open, but that "a lot of flights" were being cancelled because people cannot get to the airport.
New York governor Andrew Cuomo declared a state of emergency for 10 counties, deploying National Guard troops to help residents.
Dave Zaff, a meteorologist from the National Weather Service, said areas east and southeast of Buffalo city received upwards of 1.5 metres of snow.
"That is somewhat of an extreme event," he told AFP.
"From a forecast standpoint, it will be historic.
"The impact alone when you have hundreds of thousands of people stranded, roads closed everywhere, you start to get fatalities.
"It becomes a very memorable event that people will never forget."
A women's university basketball team was eventually rescued after spending more than 24 hours trapped in a bus on a highway.
The wild wintery weather has not caused disruption for Toronto Zoo's giant pandas, with cameras capturing footage of one of the animals "bear-bogganing" while playing in their enclosure.