WordPress VIP Alternative
After building the product for Huffington Post, and owning the product and engineering groups at AOL after we were acquired, it was clear to me there was a huge gap between what the current CMS offering gave the world and what the world needed. Five years later we are at scale, moving the needle and doing to WordPress what Airbnb did to Craigslist.
WordPress, Drupal, and the custom CMS solutions of the world are all independent, non-connected instances that each need to be updated individually. There are over 87 million instances of WordPress alone in the world, and each security upgrade, feature update, and every other single thing has to be updated for each site individually. By contrast, RebelMouse is a social, centralized platform built to keep up with the speed of the tech giants. Our updates are pushed out to all of our sites at once (and sometimes even multiple times a day) with content creation tools integrated directly into social APIs. We can get clients off of clunky CMSs and into the future in a matter of days. Many of our clients have seen page views and unique visitors grow anywhere from 50–300% literally within the first days of launch. We iterate with the times and tell you what's changing in the world, how we've reacted to it, and how it's built into the updates you get from the platform. Our creative agency team trains your teams or takes on special projects.
We create growth with every re-platform. And it doesn't take months, it takes hours or days. We can suck up a WordPress site, optimize its page speed, the user experience, the balance of ads, and how you monetize. We do it in our sleep now. We are simply the best in the world at this and have taken it to another level. You'll grow in SEO, you'll grow in social, you'll grow in return users, you'll grow in the amount your users share, and that will, in turn, grow your total audience. We can set up test environments you send traffic to and show the dramatic comparison. We create growth.
A Better Experience for Readers — Social UX for Media Everybody is building media sites wrong. We make it look simple. All the hard technology is at work behind the scenes. For readers, your content shines, is shareable, and your website becomes a rabbit hole that pulls users into more content that creates more sharing.
It isn't just about publishing. There's a new content life cycle on the internet that leads to fast organic growth at dramatically lower cost. The key is understanding how to use social to your advantage instead of being lost in the noise. RebelMouse is a contagious media company, and the software turns organic growth into an efficient, repeatable, and scalable process.
Your writers, editors, creators, and community deserve tools that make them fast and efficient. It's also important that they follow a process that leads to best practices, so that the CMS itself is training your team with every post as they onboard. Grabbing social content, building listicles and slideshows — RebelMouse makes everything simple, clean, and easy for writers.
But it's also important for you to manage your writers, see their performance, enable them to learn from each other, and help them become data driven. RebelMouse analytics provide you with a clear view of who is performing, what posts are working, and where that content is gaining traction. We also have deep Google Analytics integration, so you can easily add in components, promos, third-party units, and ad units. But most importantly, as they're being added, they are set up in staged environments automatically, and the traffic performance from these tests can be traced back to impact on bounce rate, pages/session, session duration, number of shares, percent of shares per visit, and unique custom goals for your business.
You might have the feeling we could go on a bit longer. We could! This is a passion for us. Come talk to us and let's get growing together.