Cyclones Marcia and Lam approach QLD and NT
Cyclone Marcia has damaged homes in Yeppoon and torn iron from buildings in Rockhampton to the south. And it’s not over yet.
As the tropical cyclone continues to makes its way south we’re beginning to see the trail of destruction its left in its wake.
WHAT WE KNOW:
* Cyclone Marcia has been downgraded to a category 1 system but many residents are facing a damp and dark night with thousands without electricity.
* Power is expected to be cut for several days and emergency services are calling on residents to use water only when absolutely necessary.
* The severe tropical cyclone made landfall as a category 5 cyclone and has left a trail of destruction over Yeppoon and Rockhampton.
*The cyclone was at category 5 when it grazed Yeppoon battering the coastal town with 285km/h winds. It was downgraded to category 3 when it hit Rockhampton in the afternoon.
* Marcia’s destructive core with gusts to 155km/h continued southwards towards Biloela.
* In the Northern Territory, Cyclone Lam made landfall as a category 4 system and has now been downgraded to a tropical low.
One Rockhampton man has told the ABC about the frightening moment when his roof was ripped off his house and support beams started crashing down on him and his flatmate.
“Everything just went,” Phil Tout said.
“I got belted across the back of the head with bits of timber and Christ knows what else.”
A State of Emergency has been declared for parts of the Top End hardest hit by Cyclone Lam.
Minister for Police, Fire and Emergency Services, Peter Chandler says the declared area includes the communities of Milingimbi, Ramingining, Galiwinku, Gapuwiyak and Mapuru Outstation.
“I’ve taken this step to re-establish the normal pattern of life for residents and communities affected by Cyclone Lam,” Mr Chandler said.
“It assists with restoring facilities and services necessary for the normal functioning of communities.”
Rockhampton Regional Council says the Rockhampton Airport will remain closed until further notice.
A serviceability inspection will be undertaken early Saturday morning. There is a possibility that the airport will re-open with a reduced runway length due to wet conditions.
#BREAKING: The Callide Dam’s automatic gates near Biloela have been opened and a massive amount of water is heading towards Jambin. Locals have been asked to evacuate.
Gladstone Regional Council has also warned residents that Awoonga Dam is about to overflow and could flood Pikes Crossing.
Thousands of people are without power in Queensland and are looking at a dark and wet evening.
More than 1000 people have no electricity in Gladstone, where a flood warning has also been issued, and there are also outages in Brisbane, on the Sunshine Coast and other Queensland areas including Biloela, which is in the path of Cyclone Marcia.
Cyclone Marcia has been downgraded to a category one storm.
Gales with gusts to 120 km/h between Rockhampton and Double Island Point tonight, including Biloela, Monto, and Mundubbera.
Abnormally high tides will be experienced between Gladstone and Double Island Point. Dangerous surf is also expected.
There is heavy rainfall between Gladstone and Double Island Point, and is expected to continue tonight and Saturday morning as the cyclone moves south. A Flood Watch is current for the area.
Amateur footage has emerged of the moment the roof of Yeppoon home is torn off by strong winds.
So many surfers in the water at Snapper Rocks in the Gold Coast today.
The Australian Defence Force will support Queensland emergency officials with post-disaster assessment in the aftermath of Cyclone Marcia.
Defence has tasked the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) to dispatch an AP-3C Orion maritime patrol aircraft and a KA350 King Air tactical mobility aircraft to central Queensland to help with wide area surveillance, and to provide high-resolution imagery and analysis of the area impacted by the cyclone.
Rockhamption Airport is under water after heavy rain, which has also closed the Bruce Highway north of the regional city.
Images emerging of the damage in Milingimbi from Cyclone Lam, where residents are without power or water.
Looks like the rain has stirred up the bull sharks in Gold Coast canals.
More than 800 homes are without power in Currumbin and Tallebudgera where flash flooding is preventing Energex crews from repairing broken line in the Gold Coast.
For more live updates in the area, click here.
Photographer Glenn Adamus has sent through some photos of the destruction that Cyclone Marcia caused in Emu Park, which is 21km south of Yeppoon.
Cyclone Marcia has been downgraded to a category 2 system as it heads toward Biloela.
The system sustained winds near the centre of 110km/h with wind gusts to 155km/p
In a press conference Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said Rockhampton hospital had sustained some damage as more details of the cyclone’s tail of destruction emerged.
And Airbnb has launched a special website to help those affected by Cyclone Marcia find a free place to stay.
Queensland SES has received more than 300 telephone calls for help so far since Cyclone Marcia crossed the coastline near Yepoon.
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has assured South East Queenslanders that the current storm system is not like the 2011 weather event
Back in 2011 Cyclone Yasi saw rainfall result in massive flooding of the Brisbane River and Lockyer Valley.
Meanwhile Cyclone Lam has been downgraded to a tropical low at the top end in the Northern Territory.
As Cyclone Marcia moves south the south east of the state is grappling with flash flooding and king tides.
Abnormally high tides expected to keep rising, even though the cyclone is now tracking inland. The BOM warns people living in areas likely to be affected to take measures to protect their property and be prepared to evacuate if advised by the authorities.
Heavy rainfall is already occurring about coastal and adjacent inland areas between Yeppoon and Double Island Point, and is expected to continue overnight as the cyclone moves south. A flood watch is current for the area.
Cyclone Marcia is currently tracking south toward Gladstone but is still maintaining status as a category 3 system at this stage even though it is expected to weaken.
The cyclone watchzone extends from Yeppoon to Double Island Point and inland to Moura, Biloela, Monto, and Mundubbera.
The cyclone is expected to turn to the south-southeast this evening and weaken below cyclone strength by Saturday.
A separate severe weather warning is current south of Double Island Point and inland to the southern Burnett and eastern parts of the Darling Downs and Granite Belt.
Meanwhile in the Northern Territory Cyclome Lam is weakening but is still a category 1 system
with sustained winds near the centre of 75km/h with wind gusts to 100km/h.
It is currently around 15 kilometres west northwest of Bulman and 160 kilometres northeast of Beswick moving at 19km/h.
Cyclone Marcia is still a category 3 system and it’s not over yet as the system tracks south of Rockhampton in Queensland.
Around 40 flights to the northern parts of Queensland have been cancelled out of Brisbane Airport.
But in good news no casualties have been reported since the system crossed the coast.
The system is now heading towards Gladstone but the monsoonal weather pattern is dumping loads of rain with flash flooding widely reported across South East Queensland and northern NSW.
Surf Life Saving Queensland has shut all beaches along the Gold Coast until at least Sunday with other regions further south set to follow suit.
Volunteers have started manning evacuation centres at the Gladstone Entertainment and Convention Centre as Cyclone Marcia continues to track south. The current warning zone extends from Shoalwater Bay to Double Island Point, extending inland to Moura, Biloela, Monto, and Mundubbera.
The system, still currently a category 3 is sustaining very destructive winds with gusts up to 170km/h.
It is currently around 70 kilometres west/northwest of Gladstone.
Meanwhile, further south heavy rains have had an impact on traffic around Brisbane.
The Bureau of Meteorology has delivered another update on Tropical Cyclone Marcia.
The category 3 system is moving south near Rockhampton and warnings for some areas have been cancelled.
Bringing sustained winds of 150km/h and gusts of 205km/h, the destructive core of the cyclone is estimated to be about 5km south southwest of Rockhampton.
Brisbane is beginning to feel the effects too.
Cyclone Marcia has damaged homes in the central Queensland town of Yeppoon, and has torn iron from buildings in Rockhampton to the south.
Marcia was a category four storm when it “grazed” the central Queensland town on Friday morning but was downgraded to category three at around 1pm (AEST) as it hit Rockhampton.
So far there are no reports of deaths or serious injuries in either location.
This house has already lost parts of its roof.
As the category 3 cyclone strikes Rockhampton, we’re starting to see some more of the destruction it left in its path in Yeppoon.
At least three houses on Great Keppel Island have crumbled into the sea as cyclonic winds and waves batter the holiday destination.
Dramatic photos of the island’s beachfront homes have been posted on Twitter, showing the facades and patios of houses washing into the water after Cyclone Marcia hit the central Queensland coast as a category five storm.
Margaret Gearin and about 20 other residents have abandoned their homes to bunker down in the bar area of the Great Keppel Island Hideaway holiday home.
“Three houses have gone into the ocean,” she told AAP.
“The waves are pummelling the Hideaway. The bricks (of the patio floor) have been washed away.” She said it was hard to leave her home but the decision was made because the Hideaway has a sturdy roof.
“What matters in the end is that we’re all OK,” she said.
“It’s starting to get even more wild here.
Tropical Cyclone Marcia has weakened to a category 3 after making landfall as a category 5 system.
After causing damage to homes in the Queensland coastal town of Yeppoon, the cyclone is currently impacting Rockhampton, the Bureau of Meteorology says.
The severe cyclone is set to hit the city with sustained winds of 150km/h and wind gusts up to 205km/h.
Southeast Queensland has been warned of a “major flooding event" as Tropical Cyclone Marcia moves down the coast.
“We’re now concerned as the cyclone degrades right back to a low pressure system it’s going to butt up against the low pressure system atop the southeast so we could have a major flooding event,” Police Commissioner Ian Stewart warned.
The state’s already being drenched. This Sunshine Coast mountain doesn't usually have a waterfall running down its side:
The destructive core of category 4 Tropical Cyclone Marcia, with gusts to 250km/h, is currently headed for Rockhampton.
Wind gusts over 100km/h are already being felt in Rocky, and there are reports of flooding in the city.
We're starting to get some pictures and images of destructive winds and rainfall in Rocky as Marcia approaches, expected to hit the city as a category 3 system.
“My message to all of Rockhampton residents is please stay indoors,” Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said in her most recent update.
“The eye of this storm is headed directly towards you. Stay inside, do not be out on the streets, do not be outside.”
The destructive winds of Tropical Cyclone Marcia have ‘grazed' Yeppoon and are head directly towards Rockhampton.
Providing an update on the cyclone's destruction, Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk reissued her warning for residents to stay indoors and stay safe.
“The eye of Cyclone Marcia is passing by Yeppoon and is heading directly to the path of Rockhampton," she said.
Passing through the coastal town of Yeppoon, Marcia has left more than 33,000 homes without power, the Premier said.
There have been trees down and slight damage to houses, Ms Palaszczuk advised, and a full assessment is expected within hours.
“My message to Queenslanders is this is still a dangerous cyclone, it is still severe,” Ms Palaszczuk warned.
Here's the BoM’s tracker showing Marcia headed straight for the beef capital:
The Queensland government has opened a community recovery hotline as Cyclone Marcia continues down the state’s central coast.
Financial assistance is yet to be activated however the hotline (1800 173 349) will provide useful information about the assistance available, Communities Minister Shannon Fentiman said.
It’s for residents who are not in a life-threatening situation but need information.
Cyclone Marcia is currently travelling over Yeppoon and will make its way to Rockhampton as a category 4 system.
Here are some images of the start of the destruction at Emu Park on the Capricorn Coast.
Two women have been rescued after being trapped in a lift at a hotel in Yeppoon where severe tropical Cyclone Marcia is about to do its worst.
Power outages caused the elevator to get stuck and the two women, Vicki and Faye, were eventually freed after a rescue crew used a car jack to get them out.
Ten reporter Kristina Costalos captured this incredible video of the women being freed.
The Bureau of Meteorology has issued an update on the severe tropical cyclone crossing the Queensland coast.
Cyclone Marcia has been downgraded to a Category 4 system as it approaches the Queensland coastal town of Yeppoon, but the Bureau hasn't downgraded its warnings.
Very destructive winds are still expected near the cyclone's centre of 175km/h with wind gusts of 250km/h.
Marcia is currently estimated at 40km northwest of Yeppoon and 135km northwest of Gladstone moving south at 20km/h.
Wind gusts above 200km/h are expected to impact coastal and island communities between Shoalwater Bay and Rockhampton this morning and afternoon, including the Yeppoon area.
We're starting to see signs of destruction in Queensland where Cyclone Marcia has struck as a category 5 system.
Nine News reporter Jenna Hudson captured this image of a home crumbling into the ocean at Great Keppel Island.
Cyclone Marcia has made landfall north of Yeppoon bringing very destructive winds to the coastal town, the Bureau of Meteorology has advised.
The Category 5 system has crossed the coast near Shoalwater Bay and is moving south bringing gusts of up to 285km/h.
At 10am the Bureau estimated Marcia was 50km/h north northwest of Yeppoon.
The coastal town, expected to bear the brunt of the storm, is in lockdown.
Here's the BoM’s tracking map as Marcia closes in:
Prime Minister Tony Abbott has extended commonwealth support to Queensland as Cyclone Marcia hits the state's coast.
Speaking from a scheduled event in Adelaide, Mr Abbott confirmed he had spoken to the Queensland Premier and said his thoughts were with the people of the Rockhampton and Gladstone area.
“I've been in contact with the Queensland's Premier's office just before coming here to let her know the Commonwealth stands ready to help," he said.
“This is a very serious storm and let's hope we can get through it without too much damage and hopefully without any loss of life."
“Yeppoon must go into lockdown.”
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has delivered a strongly-worded warning to residents of the Queensland coastal town where Cyclone Marcia is due to hit.
Addressing media at Queensland’s disaster coordination centre flanked by police and state emergency representatives, Ms Palaszczuk said residents of the Yeppoon and Rockhampton areas must stay inside.
“We have heard reports that there are still people driving around on the road in these communities," she said.
“You are putting your lives and others at risk. This is a serious situation.
State Police Commissioner Ian Stewart also issued a warning to residents of Rockhampton where the cyclone is expected to hit after reducing to a category 3 event.
“If you’re living in the Rockhampton area, you don't have much longer.”
During the update the Premier warned the storm surge would be up to 3m above high tide and the 16,000 people around Yeppoon were all at risk.
Cyclone Marcia is currently crossing the Capricorn Coast estimated at 75km north northwest of Yeppoon moving south at 20km/h.
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has already begun seeking federal assistance for the Cyclone Marcia clean-up.
Warning lives were risk and 870 homes would be affected, the new premier said she would be speaking to the Prime Minister.
“We need to make sure the federal government is on standby, ready to assist," she said.
Hundreds of residents are bunkering down in the small Queensland town of Yeppoon, which is bracing for a direct hit from one of the most powerful cyclones in Australia’s recorded history.
The core of the cyclone, which is packing wind gusts of up to 285km/h, is starting to affect parts of the central Queensland coast.
In Yeppoon, the winds are building amid a brief lull in the rain, but despite the impending threat there’s still a surprising amount of traffic on the roads.
Here are the latest pics and videos from the area:
Airlines have cancelled a number of flights to North Queensland. The airport remains open
but passengers have been warned of delays.
By the time Cyclone Marcia reaches Brisbane it is expected to reduce to a category 1 event, the SES has warned.
Brisbane residents have been urged to start sandbagging as the effects of Cyclone Marcia are felt. Lord Mayor Graham Quirk said residents in low-lying suburbs should be taking precautions, with the cyclone expected to generate a large storm surge on top of the normal high tide level and torrential rain.
Cyclone Marcia is closing in on the Yeppoon area, currently closer than 90km away.
The category 5 cyclone is currently has picked up in speed tracking at 20km/hr and packing wind gusts up to 285km/h.
The core is predicted to reach Yeppoon within the next hour and move on to Rockhampton.
The coastal town is reportedly receiving horizontal rain ahead of bearing the brunt of the storm.
The two fisherman missing off Fraser Island have been found.
Police said the men aged 38 and 39, one from Maryborough and one from Brisbane, were found safe and well in water at the Northern End of Moonboom.
The Bureau of Meteorology has advised the destructive core of category 5 Cyclone Marcia is beginning to impact the Capricorn Coast.
With gusts of 285km/h, Marcia's core is currently crossing the Capricorn Coast near Shoalwater Bay, the Bureau advised just before 8am (AEDT).
The bureau’s latest update on Cyclone Lam said is was moving inland, south of Ramingining.
It was moving southwest at 9km/h, with Ramingining experiencing wind gusts of more than 250km/h.
“The very destructive core of Severe Tropical Cyclone Lam is now impacting the coast and adjacent inland areas between Milingimbi and Elcho Island, including Ramingining,” the BoM said.
The cyclone was “expected to continue moving southwest and weaken today as it moves further inland over Arnhem Land”.
“Very destructive winds” of more than 230km/h would continue near Milingimbi and Ramingining, before moving inland and weakening on Friday morning.
The Queensland Premier has warned residents of areas to be affected by Cyclone Marcia “do not go outside under any circumstances”.
The Police Commissioner says it's going to be “a complete calamity".
Here's the latest advice from Queensland Fire and Emergency for residents of the Yeppoon and Rockhampton areas.
Queensland's new Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has warned of a “harrowing and terrifying experience" urging Queenslanders to take action repeating “your safety is paramount".
With Category 5 Tropical Cyclone Marcia due to hit the Yeppoon area in the next couple of hours, and expected to move on to Rockhampton at a category 3, the Premier told residents to "take action now”.
“Do not leave it any later," Ms Palaszczuk warned.
“Can I please say to all our residents in Yeppoon and the Rockhampton region your safety is now paramount.
“Do not go outside under any circumstances. Go to the strongest part of your house which is usually the bathroom area.”
Flanked by the police commissioner and emergency authorities, Ms Palaszczuk offered support to the 870 homes predicted to be affected.
“Over the next few hours many Queenslanders are about to go through a harrowing and terrifying experience. We are with you every step of the way. We will be standing by your side."
Police have provided an update on the search for two missing fisherman off Fraser Island.
The two men, aged 38 and 39, were reported missing last night in the waters of the Great Sandy Strait, a 70km sand passage separating the Queensland mainland from Fraser Island, after texting a family member indicating their boat had sunk.
“Hervey Bay Water Police and the Coast Guard are resuming a search this morning for two men reported missing in the waters of the Great Sandy Strait," police said in a statement.
“It is believed the men, aged 38 and 39, one from Maryborough and one from Brisbane, were on a camping and fishing trip in the Great Sandy Strait.”
Yesterday afternoon police commenced a search. A vessel made it to the search area but extremely choppy seas and poor visibility hampered their efforts and a helicopter was unable to be deployed.
The search has now resumed.
The Bureau of Meteorology only has records of four Category 5 cyclones making landfall in Queensland.
Here's a bit of an explainer of just what that means.
Just before 6am (AEST), Marcia had sustained winds near the centre of 205km/h, with wind gusts to 285km/h. It’s estimated to be 110km east northeast of St Lawrence and 130km north of Yeppoon, moving south at 18km/h.
This is the latest tracking map show Category 5 Cyclone Marcia.
Marcia is expected to continue moving in a southerly direction towards the Queensland coast, and make landfall between St Lawrence and Hervey Bay later on Friday.
Just before 6am (AEST), Marcia had sustained winds near the centre of 205km/h, with wind gusts to 285km/h. It’s estimated to be 110km east northeast of St Lawrence and 130km north of Yeppoon, moving south at 18km/h.
Flights have been suspended to and from Bundaberg andcarriers have warned other queensland flights are at risk of cancellation.
The intimidating power of Cyclone Marcia has forced the closure of a cyclone shelter, set up as a safe haven for residents of St Lawrence where she's now expected to hit, amid fears it wouldn't withstand the storm.
The category 5 cyclone is now expected to make landfall between St Lawrence and Hervey Bay around 10am.
That's not what emergency services had hoped. It was originally expected to come straight in on the central Queensland coast but instead has tracked south.
About 90 residents who had been taking shelter there have moved north to take shelter at nearby Sarina.
Two men are missing in a boat off Fraser Island in Queensland’s southeast, ABC reports.
The men were reported missing about 5pm yesterday. Police will resume their search at first light this morning.
First light has hit Yeppoon where cyclone Marcia is now expected to make landfall at 9am.
Tropical Cyclone Marcia is estimated to be located 150km north of the costal town.
Meanwhile Darwin is being smashed by severe thunderstorms as Cyclone Lam has reached the Northern Territory mainland.
The Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) said the category 4 storm crossed the mainland coast between Milingimbi and Elcho Island around 2am (CST) on Friday.
Early Friday morning, BoM said areas affected were Goulburn Island to Port Roper, including Nhulunbuy, Groote Eylandt and adjacent inland areas to Bulman.
Wind gusts in impacted areas are up to 260km/h.
Rescue crews will get a better idea of damage when daylight comes.
Incredible infra-red satellite image from NASA’s newest climate and weather satellite shows TCMarcia tracking towards the coast
What’s the difference between a Category 4 cyclone and a category 5? Here’s how BoM defines the two:
Category 4: Typical wind gusts over open flat land of 225 — 279kmh, capable of causing roofing loss and structural damage, dangerous airborne debris, caravans destroyed and blown away.
Category 5: Typical wind gusts of more than 280kmh, capable of causing extremely dangerous widespread destruction.
The Queensland government has released an updated list of schools closed due to Tropical Cyclone Marcia. Close to 100 schools and childcare services are shut. See the full list here.
The Bureau of Meteorology’s radar shows rain sprawling across the Top End.
Cyclone Lam on its way to the indigenous community of Ramingining, 560km east of Darwin.
A screen grab ofadvice given to residents of Lingstone, Central Queensland. Flooding in the area is expected to reach “approximately 2.5 meters above highest tide level”.
Tropical Cyclone Marcia has been upgraded to a category five storm.
4:20am: This does not bode well.
4:15am: “Abnormally high tides will be experienced this morning with water levels expected to rise above the highest tide of the year on the high tide.”
3:45am: “VERY DESTRUCTIVE winds with gusts greater than 230 kilometres per hour should continue along the coast”.
2.25am: #TCMarcia is creating a dangerous storm tide between Sarina and Double Island Point. (@NewsTalk4BC)
The BOM’s weather stations at Elcho Island and now Milingimbi are no longer returning data, Nine News Darwin reports. Readings stopped at Elcho after a wind gust of 150km/h, Milingimbi’s winds were increasing towards 100km/h when it went offline.
“The very destructive core of severe Tropical Cyclone Lam is continuing to track southwest and is now impacting the coast near Elcho Island,” the Bureau of Meteorology said in an update.
The bureau also warned: “Conditions at Elcho Island, Gapuwiyak, Ramingining and Milingimbi are at a dangerous level — remain in shelter now”.
It is expected to slowly cross the coast and then weaken as it moves over Arnhem Land.
Wind gusts of more than 230km/h will continue over the southern Wessel Islands and the mainland coast near Elcho Island before impacting Milingimbi and surrounding areas into early today.
Strong winds will impact coastal areas between Maningrida and Nhulunbuy before battering inland areas today.
The weather bureau is warning coastal residents between Milingimbi and Nhulunbuy, including Elcho Island, of a very dangerous storm tide which may cause flooding as the cyclone approaches.
Heavy rain may cause flooding of some low-lying areas in the northeast of the Top End.
Severe tropical cyclone Marcia is moving south-southwest, with a category 5 forecast at landfall this morning. Areas Affected: Mackay to Double Island Point, extending inland to Blackwater, Moura, Biloela, Monto, Taroom, Mundubbera, and Murgon (Warning zone). The Cyclone warning from Bowen to Mackay has been cancelled. Intensity: Category 4, sustained winds near the centre of 195km/h with wind gusts to 270km/h. Location: Estimated to be 185km north-northeast of St Lawrence and 245km north of Yeppoon. Movement: south southwest at 7km/h. TC Marcia is continuing to move in a south-southwest direction towards the Queensland coast. The cyclone is expected to continue moving in the same general direction and make landfall between St Lawrence and Gladstone during this morning (around 7am AEST).
12.20am DIARY: As Tropical Cyclone Marcia is upgraded to a category five system, TODAY hosts Karl Stefanovic and Lisa Wilkinson will broadcast live across Queensland with latest information on the storm’s impact from 4am (AEST).
Meanwhile, hundreds of people have been evacuated from a small Northern Territory town as Cyclone Lam makes its way towards land.
Emergency Services have decided that the 430 people in Warruwi on Goulburn Island should be moved to the mainland before the category three system struck.
Eighteen small planes and two helicopters have been shuttling between Warruwi and Darwin today.
10.50pm Tropical Cyclone Marcia has triggered a severe weather warning for north-eastern NSW. Heavy rain is expected in the Northern Rivers district, the Mid North Coast and eastern parts of the Northern Tablelands. More at The Daily Telegraph.
10pm Emergency services have urged the town of St Lawrence to evacuate before Cyclone Marcia hits as a category 5 on Friday morning. @NewsTalk4BC says there is concern there will be a king tide tomorrow in Townsville, according to @crjennyhill. BORN Qld says TC Marcia has begun moving southwest in the last hour.
9.22pm Here’s how the cyclones are shaping up:
Destructive winds are also expected to develop about coastal and island communities between Mackay and Burnett Heads on Thursday night.
The cyclone has rapidly picked up intensity, and was reclassified from a category one to category three system within four hours by the BOM on Thursday afternoon.
The bureau earlier predicted it would be upgraded again, bringing wind gusts of 260km/h at its core early Friday morning just before it makes landfall north of Yeppoon.
“At the moment it has been intensifying far more rapidly than a typical cyclone would,” BOM regional director Rob Webb said.
Marcia is moving at 16km/h and is set to cross the coast somewhere between Mackay and Gladstone on Friday morning.
8.30pm “This is a rare situation for Queensland. We’ve only had two category 5 cyclones to hit the east coast of the state in recorded history,” @Amy_Greenbank (Sky News Australia).
8.10pm: Cyclone Marcia is now due to cross as category 5 (around 8am local time), near St Lawrence in Central Qld #TCMarcia (ABCTV)
8pm The Bureau of Meteorology Qld predicts #TCMarcia will intensify to a category 5 before it makes land.
And this just in from The Bureau of Meteorology NT:
7.48pm #TCMarcia areas affected: Bowen to Double Island Point extending inland to Blackwater, Moura, Biloela, and Monto (Warning Zone) | Adjacent inland areas between Bundaberg and Double Island Point, extending inland to include Mundubbera, Gayndah, and Murgon (Watch Zone)
7.40pm #CycloneLam will make landfall as a Category 4 system, according to ABC24. Cyclone centres have been established for people in Yeppoon, Proserpine and Mackay as #TCMarcia nears (Sky News).
7.32pm Elcho Island update: Power is out on the Northern Territory island. Residents will potentially see destructive winds for another 6-12 hours as the eyeball passes closes to communities. The @BOM_NT’s Ben Suter says Elcho Island is seeing gusts up to 130km/h and could increase up to 230km/h #CycloneLam
7.15pm Sky News Australia reports #CycloneLam will present very destructive winds above 200km/h over Wessel Island and will extend along the coast between Milingimbi and Gapuwiyak.
6.49pm The time to take shelter is now.
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk and the Bureau of Meteorology have warned Marcia’s wind gusts could reach 270km/h when it makes landfall.
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk held a meeting of the Disaster Management Committee at the Emergency Operations Centre in Brisbane’s north on Thursday afternoon where she and several of her new ministers were briefed by emergency authorities.
“It is important all Queenslanders brace themselves for heavy rain,” she said.
“This is a serious event. It has changed drastically since this morning.”
The premier said the meeting’s key point stressed that the safety of Queenslanders was the priority.
“Queenslanders need to be prepared now,” she said.
“This is an important time now not to panic but to make sure you have your preparations in place.”
“Abnormally high tides are expected today and tomorrow, with levels above the highest tide of the year with flooding of low areas likely,” the Bureau said this afternoon.
“Widespread rainfall totals between 100-300mm are forecast, with the heaviest falls expected within coastal catchments. Higher localised falls are possible, as is localised flash flooding.”
There is already no water or power in some Northern Terrority communities, where ferocious gales have already reached 140km/h — with gusts of 190km/h expected later tonight — and hundreds of residents have been evacuated.
At a press conference, the Northern Territory’s acting Police Commissioner Reece Kershaw said he expected Cyclone Lam to make landfall during low tide, but was nevertheless preparing for potential flooding.
“We have a number of teams who will be ready to deploy at short notice,” he said.
Emergency services are going from door-to-door in NT towns, including Maningrida, to warn of gale force winds. Four hundred people have been evacuated so far, 350 of whom have been taken to Darwin.
Earlier this afternoon, supermarket shelves were cleared in Queensland as frightened locals grabbed emergency supplies and bunkered down at their homes or at shelters in hospitals or schools.
Both cyclones are currently expected to make landfall around 3am.
“It has got really bad here now, we are losing trees all over the place,” Diana Roper told ABC News Darwin from a public shelter on Elcho Island.
Warruwi resident Marcustold AAP: “When the lightning strikes, it’s a thump and then everything explodes”.
Coastal residents between St Lawrence and Hervey Bay in Queensland have been warned of a dangerous storm tide, with damaging waves and flooding of low-lying areas predicted.
The Bureau of Meteorology has told households to protect their properties and be ready to evacuate if advised to do so.
Marcia has been intensifying as it moves southwest through the Coral Sea towards Queensland, where it is expected to make landfall between St Lawrence and Bundaberg.
Dangerous surf is expected around the exposed beaches south of Sandy Cape, as well as thunderstorms before the cyclone hits the coast.
Heavy rainfall will develop around coastal and island communities between Mackay and Double Island Point today, with the area already on flood watch.
Meanwhile, the BoM forecasts Lam will reach category four before crossing the coast early tomorrow.
Northern Territory police confirmed today that Goulburn Island, 300km east of Darwin, was being evacuated.
At present, sustained winds near the centre have reached 140km/h, with gusts of 195km/h. Gales are forecast between Elcho Island and Nhulunbuy this morning.
Queensland is expecting its worst weather event in two years, with Marcia bringing with it the threat of wind and rainfall reminiscent of those that brought devastation in the 2011 floods, and again in 2012.
The state is bracing for a hammering with the category-two cyclone bringing floods, a tidal surge and beach erosion which is already being felt ahead of the worst of Marcia.
Beaches were closed along the coast yesterday and sandbagging had already begun last night as the tropical low loomed, and rescue crews are preparing for the worst.
Coastal residents are warned of the dangerous storm tide as the cyclone crosses the coast.
“The sea is likely to rise steadily up to a level well above the normal tide, with damaging waves and flooding of some low-lying areas close to the shoreline,” a BoM statement said.
“People living in areas likely to be affected by this flooding should take measures to protect their property as much as possible and be prepared to follow instructions regarding evacuation of the area if advised to do so by the authorities.”
Queensland Fire and Emergency Services Deputy Commissioner Mark Roche said it was vital for residents to prepare for severe weather now.
“Check your house, in particular the roof, is in good condition, keep branches clear of the house, clean gutters and clear your property of debris,” Mr Roche said.
A major stretch of the Queensland coast will be saturated by heavy rain when the tropical low crosses the coast today.
Residents from St Lawrence, north of Rockhampton, to the NSW border have been warned to expect destructive winds, rough seas and abnormally high tides.
Up to 500mm of rain is expected to fall in some areas over coming days.
But Queensland Fire and Rescue Service Commissioner Katarina Carroll said crews were well prepared.
“We’ve looked at the event from St Lawrence downwards, so we have got swift water rescue staff pre-positioned in many of those areas because we’ve got well over 200 (emergency service workers) trained for this,” she said.
Authorities have repeatedly urged residents not to enter floodwaters.
QFES spokesman Peter Jeffrey said most areas would receive around 300mm rainfall, and warned winds had picked up in the past 12 hours.
“Given the current rate of progress of the cyclone we’ve got some opportunity to make some final preparations,” he said.
“Given the speed the wind is now getting up to there’s still an opportunity to make sure there’s nothing loose around the back yard. Localised flooding is expected so the key message as always is if it’s flooded forget it, it’s too unsafe, you don’t know what’s going on underneath that water.”
Lam is currently rated a Category 4, but is expected to intensify before it hits. The cyclone is already powerful, with wind gusts up to 195km/h.
The cyclone is north northwest of the NT’s fifth largest town of Nhulunbuy where locals have already begun queuing for essentials and emergency shelters are open.
While it is unlikely the cyclone will cross the coast at any major towns, there are a number of Aboriginal communities in the area that could face the full front of the system.
Police have warned people to stay away from waterways, to avoid driving into water of an unknown depth, to stay away from fallen powerlines, and to create their own sandbags out of whatever bags or material is at hand to stave off rising waters.