Tropical Cyclone Lam: Photos emerge from remote Milingimbi community that bore the brunt of storm
Photos have emerged of houses crushed by fallen trees in Arnhem Land's Milingimbi community, which remains without power, water and sewerage after bearing the brunt of ex-Tropical Cyclone Lam.
The 1,000-strong community 440 kilometres east of Darwin endured the force of the storm, which crossed onto the mainland just after 2:00am (ACST) on Friday as a category four system.
It has now been downgraded to a tropical low.
On Friday night the NT Government declared a state of emergency for regions hit hard by the cyclone, including the communities of Milingimbi, Ramingining, Galiwinku, Gapuwiyak and Mapuru Outstation.
The ABC has visited Milingimbi, and while houses escaped full destruction, some roofs have been damaged and services remain cut off.
By Friday afternoon, emergency response workers had not yet arrived in the community.
Hundreds of people sheltered at the local airport during the worst of the storm.
Without any police based in the community, it has been up to local residents to keep the peace during the emergency.
Resident Margaret Lewis said the community needed outside help.
"We need support at this stage, because this is the first time that Milingimbi has [been hit like this]," she said.
Community night patrol officer Michael Lewukal said the community was relying on emergency water supplies located at the airport.
"It's very, very hard to get water, because we have to go to the airport," he said.
"The power is still off, everything is still off.
"We're not happy. We think the storm will come again."
Community resident Matthew Dharrgar was driving around the community picking people up and taking them to the cyclone shelter at the airport as winds started to pick up, where hundreds of people took refuge.
"We don't have a policeman, we just have the local community," he said.
The storm hit the community at about 11:00pm on Thursday.
"Snap, snap, snap, going like this, you know? Making noise, with trees and branches," was how Ms Lewis described it.
She said she has been shocked by the damage.
"I thought it was my area, but it's happened all around.
"Everything is just not the right way, it's just lying there, I just felt sad to be honest."
Ms Lewis said residents would have to resort to traditional methods of lighting fires to cook meals.
Andy Drexler, who manages a store in Milingimbi, which was directly hit by the cyclone, said the winds began picking up at 9:00pm on Thursday.
"By 11:00pm it was getting pretty savage. By 3:00am it was really scary," Mr Drexler said.
"It was pretty horrendous. A lot of rattling tin, trees crashing.
"The howling of the wind was probably the eeriest part. And then rain, just the beating rain. It wouldn't stop."
He said it was a miracle none of the people at the community was badly hurt.
"There's trees down everywhere and trees on a few houses, but not structural damage," Mr Drexler said.
Meanwhile, in Galiwinku on Elcho Island to the north, at least six houses have been destroyed and water, telecommunications and electricity services have been cut.
Dr Lucas de Toca from the Aboriginal health service on Elcho Island said colleagues on the island had told him via email that six houses had been destroyed and powerlines were down, although there were no major injuries.
Mobile phone communications to the island were lost at about 5:00pm on Thursday.
The last vision off the island, taken shortly before this when the cyclone was still intensifying, showed fierce winds bending trees parallel to the ground.
Dr Lucas de Toca said the clinic may run out of generator fuel to remain operating.
Power and water may be out for at least a week, authorities said.
"Reports are still coming in about the extent of damage sustained in the region, however there are initial reports of widespread damage at Galiwinku," police said in a statement.
The director of council services for East Arnhem Regional Council, Ben Waugh, said there was a lot of cleaning up to do at Galiwinku.
"Everyone is safe, obviously a lot of work to be done cleaning up, but everyone is safe," Mr Waugh said.
"Elcho Island was also hit quite hard and unfortunately there was a lot of damage done to power and water infrastructure.
"There was an initial thought that power and water may be out for up to a week."
As the storm system moved inland, decaying to a monsoon rain depression, the Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) warned of the potential for flooding in the town of Katherine.
Despite this, however, the main focus remains assessing the scale of the damage in remote Arnhem Land communities.
Ramingining was another community that experienced the full brunt of Cyclone Lam.
"It was a wild ride there at one stage. It was a bit scary really because the house was really shaking," the manager of the health clinic in Ramingining, Rhonda Golsby-Smith, said.
Bureau of Meteorology senior forecaster Adam Morgan said the storm would continue to weaken during Friday.
He said people should not be tempted to emerge from cyclone shelters while in the eye of the storm.
"It is only a small cyclone, a very small eye, so that time won't be long until the winds pick up again," he said.
On Friday the storm was still considered dangerous, especially in the small communities of Elcho Island, Milingimbi, Gapuwiyak and Ramingining, in Arnhem Land.
"Winds with gusts to 215 kilometres per hour should continue along the coast and adjacent inland areas near Milingimbi and Ramingining, before extending further inland and weakening during this morning," the BoM said.
Ms Golsby-Smith said when Ramingining was in the eye of the cyclone, people emerged from their homes to survey the damage.
Despite downed trees and powerlines, it appeared little damage had been done to buildings.
"Trees are everywhere down. I have about 40 in my yard and I don't think there is one standing. They are all down," Ms Golsby-Smith said.
NT Emergency Services director Andrew Warton said communications in the areas most badly impacted by Cyclone Lam were down on Friday.
"There has obviously definitely been some communication problems overnight and many of those are continuing," Mr Warton said.
"At this point in time there are no reports of any injuries or fatalities."
Before mobile phone communications off Elcho Island failed, residents reported wind tearing trees from the root and throwing them 100 metres.
They also reported some houses had lost their roofs.
The strong winds also caused weather equipment to fail on Elcho Island and Millingimbi, making it harder to estimate the full strength of winds.
NT Chief Minister Adam Giles said Cyclone Lam had caused widespread destruction across Arnhem Land and as well as structural damage, water quality had been affected.
"Many communities are still without power and many do not have potable water," Mr Giles said.
"Until power is restored we are encouraging people to boil that water," he said.
Mr Giles said assessments of damage were ongoing.
"What we know to date is that there has been a significant amount of structural damage conducted on Elcho Island," he said.
"At this stage it would appear that the airstrip is unuseable and we are seeking to have that rectified so that tomorrow we can get flights in there."
On Thursday, hundreds of people from the Aboriginal community of Warruwi were evacuated to Darwin on helicopters and planes.
At the time, authorities estimated up to 5,000 people in remote Arnhem Land Indigenous communities had been directly affected by the cyclone.
In Maningrida, 150km south-west of Elcho Island, all houses not up to cyclone standard were evacuated by Thursday night.