For Metrolink riders, an explosion, then 'everything started flying'
Lustgarten said the crash was recorded by cameras on board the train. The National Transportation Safety Board is investigating the crash. "We support the NTSB's investigation, and this is theirs to look into," Lustgarten said. Nine of the patients injured in the derailment were rushed to Ventura County Medical Center, including the engineer. Bryan Wong, the hospital's chief medical officer, said the engineer suffered injuries to the chest involving his lungs and heart and was conscious when he arrived. "Really, the next 24 to 48 hours will give us the best sense of how he will recover from his injuries," Wong said. "Certainly our hope is that his body rallies and his heart and lungs start to turn the corner." Police said the truck driver was taken to the hospital for observation, and was cooperating with the investigation. "He was very distressed," said Oxnard police Assistant Chief Jason Benites. Metrolink passenger Joel Bingham, 44, was heading to work in Chatsworth in the second car from the front. He was looking out the window when he saw the truck blow up. "It was like the movies," Bingham said. "It exploded when I went by." The Ventura man felt the train run off the rails. Then the lights went out and "everything started flying," he said. He held onto a pole, and felt like a flag being whipped around. "It seemed like forever to come to a stop. It seemed like slow motion." Inside and outside the train, it was dark, and he could smell smoke and fire. "I just went into rescue mode," Bingham said. He said that about a dozen people were in his car. He said he told people to come to his voice, to escape through a safety window he had opened. There were two women with broken arms, he said, and one with a broken shoulder. Ted Maloney, 59, of Oxnard said he was driving to work near the crossing when he heard the Metrolink horn blaring. "He just laid into the horn," Maloney said. "I looked up and it was just a horrendous ball of fire." Maloney drove off the road and sat in his car for a few seconds, staring at the fire. He decided to help. As he ran toward two train cars flipped on their sides, he was met by two farm workers from a nearby strawberry field. They helped Maloney, who has an artificial knee, climb into one of the trains. Inside the train car, he saw a few passengers walking around in "a daze," but most of them were sprawled on the floor. Purses, lunch sacks, laptops and boxes were strewn throughout the train car. "Is anybody bleeding?" he screamed. A passenger yelled back, "Yes, this lady's bleeding." Maloney couldn't find a first aid kit, so he grabbed a sweater, placed it under her head and held her hand. "She called me an angel," he said. "I said 'No, I am just here to help you.'" For the next 15 minutes, Maloney talked to the woman, who had been headed to work in downtown Los Angeles. He tried to keep her mind off her injuries. He said she seemed to have head, neck and back trauma. He gathered her purse and slid it under her arm. He placed her laptop and other belongings next to her. Firefighters arrived and took over. "It seemed like an eternity," Maloney said. Maloney has been in a bus wreck, traffic collision and plane crash. "I can't believe I even did what I did," he said. "People needed help. I did what anybody else would do." The Metrolink train was equipped with new Rotem passenger cars designed to maximize passenger safety. "The injuries came from people being tossed around," said Keith Millhouse, a Metrolink board member. "The Rotem cars received very minor damage. They performed the way they should in terms of collision absorption. This could have been tremendously worse without them." The crossing, which is controlled by Union Pacific, has flashing lights, bells and arms that drop when the train is a quarter-mile away. Two neighbors told The Times that the safety arms at the crossing don't drop when a train is coming. But Metrolink spokesman Scott Johnson said, "All indications are that, at the point of the incident, everything at the crossing including the gate arms and emergency notifications and bells were working properly."