Hundreds of drivers stranded in KY on I-24, I-65
Gov. Steve Beshear has declared a state of emergency for Kentucky for the second time in less than a month.
Some parts of the state have seen 20 inches of snow from the winter storm that started moving through on Wednesday.
“Two significant winter storms nearly back-to-back are rare in Kentucky, and pose a challenge for our emergency management teams, road crews and local emergency responders. This emergency declaration will allow us to deploy any needed state assistance, including National Guard troops if necessary, without delay,” Beshear said in a news release.
Travel in Kentucky is at a standstill on two major interstates because of jackknifed tractor-trailers and stranded vehicles.
According to the Kentucky State Patrol, at one point there were an estimated 600 cars stuck on Interstate 24 from the Tennessee-Kentucky state line all the way to Illinois. 
Todd Keith with the Kentucky Transportation Cabinet said the eastbound lanes of I-24 have reopened all across the state, but the westbound lanes remain closed from mile marker 45 to 65. About 200 cars are still stranded on I-24 West, and a few them are semis.
The National Guard has been brought in to help the stranded drivers but is having trouble getting to them. 
Arslan Pasha, who was traveling from Minneapolis, was stuck on I-24 in the area for seven hours. He said they were low on gas and were getting hungry.
"We were just sitting there kind of worried because we hadn't heard from anyone how long it was going to be like that," Pasha said.
Interstate 65 is also having several disruptions between Bowling Green to Elizabethtown. One driver reported to NBC News that she was stuck on I-65 for 12 and and a half hours.
The Tennessee National Guard moved five units to Nashville to place on standby for wellness checks in case the issues on I-65 in Kentucky begin impacting Tennessee.
Officials are urging drivers to stay off the roads unless absolutely necessary so crews can do their work.