Rain lashes north India, kills 14 people and damages crops
NEW DELHI: Widespread rains battered large swathes of north India on Sunday bringing mercury down by several notches, even as it claimed 14 lives and damaged crops in several regions. Twelve people were killed in Rajasthan due to rain, lightning and hailstorms, which also destroyed Rabi crops in the state while in Uttarakhand two persons were killed in rock-slide triggered by heavy rain. Cold conditions returned to Delhi after the showers as the day temperature plummeted to 19.6 degree Celsius, nine degrees below normal. According to meteorological department, city received 3.6 mm rains till 5.30pm this evening. Minimum temperature was recorded at 16.6 degrees, which was two notches above normal while maximum was registered at 19.6 degree. Yesterday, the maximum was recorded at 27.3 degrees. In Rajasthan, 12 people were killed and as many injured due to rains, lightning and hailstorms in the last 24 hours, officials said today. Scores of cattle also perished in thunderstorms, they said. Six people were killed in Bundi district, two each in Rajsamand and Sawaimadhopur districts, and one each in Bikaner and Ajmer districts, police said. Incessant rains, hailstorm and winter's revival have not only affected normal life but also caused damage to standing Rabi crops in entire Rajasthan, a MeT official said. Fresh bout of snowfall was witnessed in tribal areas and other higher reaches of Himachal Pradesh while rain lashed mid and lower hills. Avalanche threat loomed large over high-altitude tribal areas above 2,500 feet as melting of snow and glacier movement could accelerate in next few days. The mighty Rohtang and Kunzam Pass, Pin Parvati valley and Chitkul and other high-altitude tribal areas received 10 cm to 20 cm of snow while Keylong and Kalpa recorded 3 cm and 2 cm of snow. The high-altitude tribal areas reeled under biting cold wave conditions with minimum temperatures ranging between minus 12 and minus 18 degrees. Keylong and Kalpa in Lahaul and Spiti and Kinnaur districts recorded a low of minus 5.9 degree and minus 2 degree, followed by Chamba 1.0 degree. Tourist resorts Dalhousie, Manali and Shimla recorded 2.6 degree, 4.4 degree and 5.3 degree respectively.