Cyclone Nathan threatening Queensland coast again
Queensland's far north is bracing for Cyclone Nathan for the second time in a week.
The storm intensified to category 2 on Wednesday morning, generating wind gusts of up to 130km/h at its core.
Residents from Coen to Cardwell are expecting heavy rain and winds as strong as 200km/h by the time the system makes landfall on Friday.
But Cook Shire mayor Peter Scott said he was most worried about the prospect of a storm surge adding to already high tides.
The Bureau of Meteorology predicted Nathan would be a category 3 cyclone when it hit Cooktown, about 170 kilometres north of Cairns.
Cr Scott said fortunately most of Cooktown was high enough to avoid tidal flooding but the suburb of Marton would likely be under threat along with Ayton and Wujal Wujal on the Bloomfield River.
On Wednesday morning BOM forecasters extended the cyclone watch area north to Coen and further inland.
The district disaster management group is due to meet on Wednesday in Cairns to plan the region's response.
Already the State Emergency Service has deployed about 20 volunteers, and electricity network operator Ergon Energy has brought in extra generators.
Cr Scott encouraged residents to check gutters for any debris strewn around by Cyclone Nathan's first pass and make use of sandbags available from council depots if needed.
"Apart from that it's the same old story," he said. "Look for a safe place to shelter. If your home was built after 1985 that's the best spot.
"Make sure your neighbours or any elderly people are well prepared, [and have a] cyclone kit.
"We're hoping it's going to be short and sharp but you never know, things might develop and sit out there and churn away so you can't take anything for granted."
At 10am Wednesday, Cyclone Nathan was about 425 kilometres east of Cooktown and heading southwest at 4km/h.
It's expected to intensify to a category 3 system by Thursday morning.
Bureau of Meteorology spokesman Jess Carey said the cyclone was forecast to make landfall near Cooktown on Friday morning as a high-end category 3 storm.
"That will be close to 200-220km/h near the centre but you'll still be getting quite strong winds, gusts up to 110 kilometres extending up to 150km/h from the centre of the cyclone," he said.
"Even if you're not getting a coastal crossing on top of you, you're still going to get quite strong winds within 150 kilometres of the eye either way.
"They're pretty strong winds. we're not talking Cyclone Pam winds, which was closer to 300km/h gusts but certainly those sorts of winds are very significant and to be respected by the local community."
There were clear skies and relatively cool temperatures across the far north on Wednesday, with winds and rain set to rise from Thursday afternoon.