Cyclone Nathan preparations under way
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says preparations are well under way as the state's far north braces for the arrival of Cyclone Nathan.
Ms Palaszczuk says the cyclone, which on Thursday morning was about 300km north northeast of Cooktown, was expected to hit the coast between Cooktown and Cape Melville as a category four system about 2am on Friday.
"Can I please stress to everyone this is a serious situation, but we do have the rest of the day to prepare," Ms Palaszczuk said from the state's emergency services headquarters in Brisbane on Thursday.
"The other good news is that we do not expect it to coincide with high tide."
Ms Palaszczuk said residents in the Hope Vale and Cooktown regions needed to start their cyclone preparations immediately.
The bureau would update the cyclone's movements every hour, she said.
Its latest update said Nathan was packing sustained winds near its centre of 140 km/h, with gusts of up to 195 km/h.
A cyclone warning remains current from Lockhart River to Port Douglas, extending inland to areas including Laura and Palmerville.
Cyclone Nathan would be a small system but it would "pack a punch", according to Bureau of Meteorology regional director Rob Webb.
Mr Webb said category-three strength winds would continue whipping the coast up to 30 kilometres around the core of the system.
"We are also suggesting people around about 140 kilometres around the cyclone may get some form of damaging winds as the winds gradually reduce away from the cyclone," he said.
"We expect given the size of the cyclone that it will decay quickly over land."
Ms Palaszczuk said the category-four rating meant the cyclone would be severe and urged residents to remain in their homes.
"Once dark falls that is a time that people should stay off the roads, stay in your homes because your safety and your family's safety is absolutely paramount," she said.
She said about 950 people in Hope Vale and 2,300 people in Cooktown were in Nathan's firing line.
The premier said she was confident state agencies were well resourced despite a clean-up still occurring in the aftermath of category-five Cyclone Marcia, which struck Queensland's central coast last month.
The system is likely to drop back to a low pressure system by the time it drops into the gulf on Saturday, and forecasters say there's a chance Nathan could re-intensify into a cyclone again.
"Anywhere across the cape can expect a short period of heavy rainfall and damaging winds as this cyclone makes its way inland and back out over the water," Mr Webb said.
Don't miss important news stories. Like us on Facebook.