Germanwings crash: service held for victims near impact zone
Victims of disaster mourned as former girlfriend of plane’s co-pilot Andreas Lubitz says he wanted ‘do something’ history would remember him by
A religious service was held on Saturday morning at Digne-les-Bains in the French Alps near the site of the Germanwings plane crash, as it emerged that police have found a number of drugs used to treat psychiatric conditions during a search of co-pilot Andreas Lubitz’s home.
A senior investigator told German newspaper Welt am Sonntag: “The 27-year-old was being treated by several neurologists and psychiatrists.” The investigator added that Lubitz was suffering from severe burnout, adding “this became apparent from papers in the pilot’s personal files”.
Around 40 gendarmes and other alpine searchers are still combing the roughly two-hectare site where the Airbus A320 crashed. The second black box, the flight data recorder (FDR) has still not been found.
The operation had to be halted temporarily on Saturday because the sun was blinding the helicopter pilots who are relaying searchers into the zone and removing bags of remains and evidence out.
The father of a British man who was killed in the Germanwings plane crash said their family does not want to know the pilot’s motive for intentionally flying into a mountain.
In a prepared statement given in the nearby town of Seynes-les-Alpes, Philip Bramley urged airlines to look after their best pilots. His son, Paul, 28, was one of 150 people who were killed.
Bramley said it was clearly “the act of a person who at the very least was ill”, but added: “If there was a motive or a reason, we do not want to hear it – it’s not relevant. What is relevant is it should never happen again. My son and everyone on that plane should not be forgotten ever.”
Bramley said: “I believe the airlines should be more transparent and our finest pilots looked after properly. We put our lives, and our children’s lives, in their hands.
“The people of France have helped me and my family in every aspect. The police, doctors and nurses have put their arms around us and helped us though this unbearable time. The French people can be proud of the army of volunteers who have helped us.”
The German government announced on Saturday that a national memorial service for all victims of the flight will be held on 17 April at Cologne Cathedral, with all relatives of those killed in the crash invited to attend along with Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel, and president, Joachim Gauck.
This follows a service held on Friday evening at St Lambertus Basilica in Düsseldorf, organised by the Catholic and Lutheran churches.
On Saturday, German media reported that Lubitz wanted to do something history would remember him by.
Lubitz had hidden a sicknote declaring him unfit to work on the day of the disaster before flying the Düsseldorf-bound plane into a mountain in the southern French Alps, killing all 150 people on board.
According to the German newspaper Bild, a former girlfriend of Lubitz, identified only as Maria W, said he had told her last year: “One day I will do something that will change the whole system, and then all will know my name and remember it.”
She added: “I never knew what he meant, but now it makes sense.”
The flight attendant, 26, said the pilot, who took a break in his training due to reported “burnout syndrome”, had suffered nightmares and his behaviour had scared her.
She told the paper: “At night, he woke up and screamed: ‘We’re going down!’, because he had nightmares. He knew how to hide from other people what was really going on inside.”
In a separate interview with Bild, Frank Woiton, a Germanwings pilot who flew with Lubitz, said he had left him alone in the cockpit on previous occasions.
Woiton said: “He spoke of his training and talked of how happy he was. He told me he would soon start flying long distance routes and become a captain. He flew well ... that’s why I sometimes left him alone in the cockpit to go to the toilets.”
As legal experts said that the airline’s parent company, Lufthansa, could face compensation claims for hundreds of millions of dollars, Düsseldorf prosecutors said they had found the torn-up doctor’s note covering the day of the disaster – Tuesday 24 March.
“Medical documents were found that indicate an ongoing illness and appropriate medical treatment,” the statement said. “The circumstance that torn-up current medical certificates – also pertaining to the day of the act – were found, supports, after preliminary examination, the assumption that the deceased hid his illness from his employer and his professional circles.”
No suicide note or claim of responsibility had been found, the prosecutors said.
Legal experts said that on the evidence that has emerged so far, which suggests the co-pilot may have had a history of depression and psychiatric problems, the airline would find it difficult to prove that the crash was not its fault.
“To avoid paying unlimited compensation, they have to show the crash was not due to negligence, omission or a wrongful act either by them or by their servants or agents,” said Clive Garner, the head of aviation law at Irwin Mitchell, which has represented passengers’ families in similar cases.
“We should be cautious, of course. But in reality, based on what we know at this point, they are not going to be able to establish that. Whether it was a deliberate act or negligence, they’re going to be liable for a large sum of money.”
Garner said the sums involved could be substantial. “It depends on the families’ circumstances – how much the passenger earned, how many dependants there are,” he said. “But seven-figure claims per family are by no means unusual.”
Germanwings said later that it had not been aware of Lubitz’s sicknote. “Germanwings would like to clarify that no medical note was presented to the firm for this day,” it said in a statement.
Families of those killed in Tuesday’s crash have already been given an immediate payment of €50,000 (£36,600), and it is estimated the total compensation bill could reach €21m.
The Montreal Convention, signed in 1999, awards a maximum €145,000 damages per person, which comes to €21m in damages for the 144 passengers, Le Monde reported.
On top of the compensation they are likely to get, families of those killed in the Germanwings crash could sue the airline for negligence, leading to even larger claims. The families of the six crew members could also receive similar compensation, but if negligence is not proven the crash will be logged as a “workplace death”, which has different levels of compensation.
On Friday, Bild said the Lufthansa flight school in Phoenix, Arizona, had designated Lubitz “not suitable for flying” at the time.
The newspaper said he spent 18 months receiving psychiatric treatment. He was forced to repeat his flying classes several times because of depression, before he successfully finished his training. In 2009 he was diagnosed with a “severe depressive episode”, Bild reported. Süddeutsche Zeitung said the sicknote in question was written by a psychiatrist in Rhineland.
Germany’s federal aviation office (LBA), which administers pilots’ licences, has reportedly asked Lufthansa for Lubitz’s files, and said it would pass them on to the French investigators.
In France, Patrick Touron, the deputy director of the criminal research institute at the national gendarmerie, gave a press conference near the crash zone on Friday.
“We have sent out an urgent medical-legal team to start identification and we have a team working on the site to recuperate the bodies, parts of bodies or biological matter, depending on the circumstances, so we can proceed with the identification of the victims,” Touron said.
“The air disaster was so devastating that we have not found a single body intact. We have found parts of bodies and biological matter that are currently undergoing postmortem examinations.”
Several airlines have said they will implement the “rule of two” in the cockpit to avoid a pilot being left alone on the flight deck.
German airlines introduced the rule with immediate effect on Friday. The German Aviation Association (BDL), which represents the airline industry, released a statement saying that the airlines had voluntarily agreed to introduce the rule “following the tragic accident in France”.
Two authorised members of the flight crew must now be in the cockpit at all times. The BDL’s statement said the measure had been taken in coordination with the German transport ministry and the federal aviation office.
Airlines in Europe are not required to have two people in the cockpit at all times, unlike the standard US operating procedure, which was changed after the 11 September 2001 attacks to require a flight attendant to take the spot of a briefly absent pilot.
easyJet was the first airline in the UK to announce it would implement the rule from Friday. “The safety and security of its passengers and crew is the airline’s highest priority,” a spokesperson said.
The Australian government is also reviewing aviation safety procedures on its airlines. Carol Friday, 68, and her son Greig, 29, were both from Australia and killed in Tuesday’s crash.
Transport minister Warren Truss has briefed the national security committee of cabinet on the situation with Australian airlines. He said there needed to be careful consideration to ensure that changing existing procedures didn’t create other potential vulnerabilities.
Qantas and Virgin are understood to be conducting their own safety and security risk assessments of cockpit procedures.
Some experts said even two was not enough, and called for rules to require three.
“The flight deck is capable of accommodating three pilots and there shouldn’t ever be a situation where there is only one person in the cockpit,” said James Hall, a former chairman of the US National Transportation Safety Board.
Others questioned the wisdom of sealing off the cockpit at all. “The kneejerk reaction to the events of 9/11 with the ill-thought reinforced cockpit door has had catastrophic consequences,” said Philip Baum, the London-based editor of the trade magazine Aviation Security International.
Adverts for flights on Germanwings aircraft, with the slogan “Get ready to be surprised”, were taken down from the London underground network hours after the plane crashed in the Alps.
Germany is understood to have contacted Transport for London (TfL) almost immediately after the incident to request the adverts be removed.
Germanwings confirmed it had halted all marketing in the UK, and that online campaigns had been removed.