12 areas declared natural disaster zones
Twelve areas around Sydney and Newcastle have been declared natural disaster zones after the devastating storms and floods that hit the NSW coast on Monday. 
Maitland, where at least one person was killed on Wednesday when their car was swept away, and Dungog, where three elderly people were killed in flash flooding on Tuesday, are among 12 local council areas declared natural disaster zones on Wednesday night by Federal Justice Minister Michael Keenan and NSW Emergency Services Minister David Elliott.
Cessnock, Gosford, Great Lakes, Lake Macquarie, Newcastle, Pittwater, Port Stephens, Singleton, Warringah and Wyong also qualify for disaster assistance.
People affected by the storms and floods can access personal hardship assistance payments from Wednesday, Mr Elliott said.
"This assistance will ensure people have access to food, clothing and personal items in the immediate aftermath of the storms and floods. 
"It will also provide assistance for accommodation and the replacement of essential household contents, such as bedding and furniture, and structural repairs to homes damaged by the storms and floods."
Local councils will also have access to funding for counter disaster operations including sandbagging and repairing damaged infrastructure.
"This assistance will help ease the financial burden on councils associated with undertaking these vital operations to ensure essential infrastructure is repaired.  This is critical to communities returning to normal functioning as quickly as possible," Mr Elliott said.
The funding is provided by the federal and state governments.
"The Australian and NSW governments recognise the need to provide swift and effective assistance to help communities and families deal with and recover from these storms and floods," Mr Keenan said.
"Natural disasters such as this can be unpredictable and I commend the efforts of emergency services personnel and the resilience displayed by affected communities during this difficult time."
The Australian and NSW governments will continue to monitor the situation and extend assistance to other areas as required, he said.