body of woman recovered after car swept away in Maitland
The body of an 86-year-old woman has been recovered from the floodwaters into which her car was swept near Maitland on Wednesday morning. 
Police Inspector Brian Tracey said the police divers had told him there was zero visibility in the water and that they had to feel their way to the car.
Divers searched the car and believe the elderly woman was travelling by herself. 
The woman's 66-year-old son maintained a vigil by the water throughout the day, but just after 7pm any hopes of his mother's recovery were dashed when paramedics brought out her body on a stretcher.
The woman was making her way from Gilleston Heights to Maitland when she manouvered around a stalled car and veered into the floodwaters. 
Bystanders rushed to her aid but had to be rescued themselves as conditions deteriorated. 
The 86-year-old woman's death brings to four the death toll from the storms that have lashed Sydney, Newcastle and the Illawarra.
The  woman had driven from Gillieston Heights into Maitland and was returning when the tragedy happened, Inspector Tracey said.
The small silver hatchback had joined a procession of cars trying to cross  flooded Wallis Creek on Cessnock Road shortly before 9am when a red Falcon in front of it stalled. 
Witnesses say the hatchback tried to go around the stalled Falcon, but it was quickly caught in the fast flowing waters.
About a dozen people ran into the water, but the car was swept away, sinking nose first, and went bobbing into the main body of water.
Anthony McAndrew, of Gillieston Heights, who had been in the car that stalled, dived in and swam after the floating car. His vehicle was also swept away. Three men on the opposite bank also dived in.
A district fire officer yelled out to the occupants of the car to wind down the windows. She said the passenger door opened and she called out to close it. A rear passenger door then opened and she called on the occupants to close it but the car sank within seconds.
"I yelled at them to swim for it as they started to sink but they didn't," the fire officer said. "I had been on shift all night and I had just come across there myself. I rang my captain and told him I had aquaplaned across and I told him to block the road."
Peter Gray, a deputy captain of Fire and Rescue NSW, said police, ambulance, fire and SES crews, using helicopters and boats, began searching for the submerged cars.
Inspector Tracey said the men who had jumped into the waters in the attempted rescue had been accounted for and did not require hospital treatment.
At the same time as the search mission was being undertaken, rescue workers brought a young mother and her seriously ill four-month old baby across the water in an inflatable boat. They had come from Cessnock and were taken to Maitland Hospital in an ambulance.