Papua New Guinea rocked by 6.8 magnitude earthquake a day after 6.7 tremors
A powerful earthquake shook Papua New Guinea in the South Pacific today, just a day after another tremor rattled the region.
The 6.8 magnitude quake struck south west of the town of Kokopo in the north east of the country, according to the U.S. Geological Survey. An expert has warned the tremors could be foreshocks ahead of bigger seismic event.
The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center said hazardous tsunami waves were possible within 190 miles of the epicentre, but the risk passed shortly thereafter and the advisory was lifted. 
There were no reports of damage or injuries, said Chris McKee, assistant director of Geophysical Observatory in the capital, Port Moresby. 
The area closest to the epicentre is sparsely populated, and it was unlikely the quake caused any structural damage, he said. 
A 6.7 magnitude earthquake hit the same region on Thursday, but there were no reports of serious damage.
'This is the second earthquake that has occurred in that region over the last two days,' co-director of the Joint Australian Tsunami Warning Centre Daniel Jaksa said.
'The previous one was about 10 kilometres to the south east of this particular epicentre. It's a very uninhabited region off the island of New Britain.
'The earthquake was a measure of 7.1, so that's about 30 times smaller than the earthquake in Nepal.'
Mr Jaksa said earthquakes of similar magnitudes that occur within 24 hours were not common, and cautioned there was a possibility the tremors could be foreshocks ahead of a bigger seismic event.
'The probabilities of another earthquake in that region actually increases with an event like this, but it's one of the most active earthquake zones in the world,' he said.
'Unfortunately this is completely unpredictable. Certainly the potential is there for a larger event to occur but a lot of the time, it doesn't.'
Papua New Guinea sits on the Ring of Fire, the arc of seismic faults around the Pacific Ocean where earthquakes are common.