Aid agencies issue urgent appeals for Nepal relief
(CNN)A week after a magnitude-7.8 earthquake killed thousands in Nepal, the government said Saturday that chances of finding survivors buried in rubble are "extremely slim."
"It will be a miracle if anyone is found alive," Home Ministry spokesman Laxmi Dhakal said. "But we have not completely given up yet and are continuing to look."
As of about 8:30 p.m. (10:30 a.m. ET) Saturday, the casualty toll stood at 7,040 with 14,398 injured, according to Nepal's National Emergency Operation Center.
On Saturday, a magnitude-5.0 earthquake was reported near Pokhara, about 180 kilometers (122 miles) west of Kathmandu, increasing fears of more casualties, said the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs ( UNOCH) .
INDIA: "An elderly street vendor in New Delhi is seen talking on a smartphone. Home to a population of almost 1.3 billion people, India is already the world¹s third largest market for smartphones." - CNN's Harmeet Singh @harmeetshahsingh
JAPAN: Neon Madness! Robot Restaurant in Tokyo's Shinjuku Kabukicho district. Photo by CNN's Will Ripley @willripleycnn
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES: "This is not an easy gig. Washing windows by hand in Abu Dhabi. All 90 floors." - CNN's Jon Jensen @jonjensencnn
MCB CAMP PENDLETON, CALIFORNIA: "During the crucible they only get 3 meals over the 54 hours and 2 periods of 4-hour sleep sessions. The rest of the time are constant physical and mental challenges, culminating in an 8-mile hike up 'the reaper,' where they officially become Marines at the top of the mountain." - CNN's Samantha Bresnahan @instasam22
ICELAND: Located in a lava field, the Blue Lagoon geothermal spa is one of the most visited attractions in Iceland. Photo by CNN's Christian Streib @christianstreibcnn
CUBA: "A horse drawn carriage in Cienfuegos travels past a billboard calling for an end to US sanctions on the island. Cuban government propaganda still paints the US as a hostile force but officials here have said they welcome President Obama's visit to the island next month. Almost every Cuban I know is excited for the long delayed thaw in relations that is happening before their very eyes." - CNN's Patrick Oppmann @cubareporter
LEBANON: Beirut's river of garbage... The country cancelled plans to export its trash to Russia last week, sending Beirut's six-month garbage crisis back to square one with rubbish piling up in the streets, riverbeds and countryside. Photo by CNN's Mohammed Tawfeeq @mtawfeeq , February 24.
HONG KONG: Hong Kong is looking a little brighter these days with 25,000 LED roses "planted" along its waterfront. Each rose consists of an LED light encased in seven layers of waterproof petals. The art installation marks the first overseas stop of a world tour of Light Rose Garden, by South Korean creative agency Pancom. Photo by CNN's Brad Olson @cnnbrad , February 22.
HONG KONG: "Goldfish seller bagging his wares in preparation for the evening rush hour. Goldfish have been around for about 1500 years and are considered to have been domesticated in the Song Dynasty around 1000 years ago. They are said to bring luck and so are very popular among Chinese people, who place great value on being lucky (who doesn't)." - CNN's Brad Olson @cnnbrad
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES: "Even if nobody else loves me, I can take comfort in the fact that camels do." - CNN's Nicol Nicolson @nicolnic
PARIS: Eagles of Death Metal founders Josh Homme and Jesse Hughes ahead of the band's return to the stage in Paris, three months after the Paris attacks left 89 of their "friends" dead at the Bataclan. "It's much more than just a show," says Hughes. Photo by CNN's Bryony Jones @bryonysjones , February 16.
MEXICO: "A little chapel to Our Lady of Guadalupe is lit at an empty taxi stand in Mexico City. She is the patron saint of Mexico and one of the most revered saints in Latin America." - CNN's Miguel Castro @sambassando
CUBA: Waiting for ballet class in Centro Habana. Photo by CNN's Patrick Oppmann @cubareporter , February 13.
MEXICO: Sister Cindy from Lima, Peru is filming her visit to Mexico -- following the Pope. She will sing with her band before the mass in Juarez. "I told my community back home my challenge will be to get a selfie with Pope Francis", she giggles. Photo by CNN's Miguel Castro @sambassando , February 11.
SYRIA: A portrait of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad lies in a burnt our building used by government forces in the Old Town of Aleppo. Photo by CNN's Fred Pleitgen @fpleitgencnn
NEW HAMPSHIRE: "Sophie the dog has given up on staying up late for the first vote in the New Hampshire Primary. In the background you can see the ballot box for the town of Dixville Notch. Voting starts at midnight and wraps up pretty quick -- after all -- 9 people get to vote in this town." - CNN's Khalil Abdallah @madcameraman , February 8.
TANZANIA: A curious onlooker at Kariakoo market in Dar es Salaam. Photo by CNN's Gisella Deputato @gisellacnn
HONG KONG: "Burning incense at Wong Tai Sin temple. People want good luck for the new year and this is where they come to get it." - CNN's Brad Olson @cnnbrad , February 3.
EGYPT: Annie Sultan is Egypt's rising belly dance star. The former professional ballerina wants to revive the golden age of the dance. But she struggles with Egyptian society's perception of her new found profession. Photo by Dana Smillie @danasmillie for CNN.
AUSTRALIA: "It was early 2010 when we first met Novak Djokovic for CNN Open Court. Tonight he wins the Australian Open for a 6th time and still is a pure classy gentleman. Two hours after winning, he still sits and talks to journalist after journalist, each time answering every question with enthusiasm and honesty. Congrats Novak...hope there are more to come." - CNN's Paul Devitt @devocnn , January 31.
IRAN: Students from the Meygoon Ice-Climbing School use ice axes to climb a frozen waterfall. Photo by CNN's Fred Pleitgen @fpleitgencnn
CHINA: "Chinese longshoremen berthing a monster container ship the 'Benjamin Franklin'. She carries close to 18000 containers. If you laid that many out end to end it would stretch 68 miles, about 100 km. It's loading up with stuff in the Port of Xiamen and will head to Los Angles. It will be the biggest container ship to dock in the US." - CNN's Brad Olson @cnnbrad , January 30.
NORWAY: "Sometimes the world just gives you a little pinch...Photo shot whilst reporting on the 'Arctic asylum' route, where refugees are using Norway's remote border with Russia as a staging post into Europe." - CNN's Joe Sheffer @joesheffer
The United Nations estimates that more than 3 million people are in need of food assistance -- nearly half of those need it immediately. Emergency funding of $415 million is needed, the United Nations said.
Supplemental feeding is necessary for 200,000 children and pregnant or lactating women in the country. And therapeutic feeding in needed for some 15,000 children with severe acute malnutrition, and 70,000 more with moderate acute malnutrition.
Access remains a key obstacle, particularly outside the Kathmandu Valley -- some villages can only be reached by helicopter, which are a limited. Debris management will be required for humanitarian supplies to reach remote areas.
Shelter is the most critical need, along with food and water. The United Nations estimates that a half million homes have been destroyed across the country including 90% of the houses in Gorkha and Sindupalchowk districts. There is a desperate need for tents, tarpaulins and blankets. In some areas, there are reports of as many as 100 people sharing a single communal tent.
A total of $61 million in humanitarian pledges, commitments and contributions has been provided for earthquake response so far, according the UN's most recent situation report.
But much more is required.
The pace of assistance needs to be sped up in order to reach affected populations before the monsoon season starts, the report says.
On Friday, the U.N. humanitarian affairs chief, Valerie Amos, joined with the European Union's Commissioner for Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Management, Christos Stylianides, to ask for $415 million for immediate humanitarian relief from the international community. Amos and Stylianides traveled to Nepal to help coordinate the humanitarian response.
"I am heartened and encouraged by the generosity and solidarity shown to date," Amos said in a statement. "But I am also conscious of the urgent need to provide emergency shelter and basic goods and services to people affected as the monsoon season approaches. So many people have lost everything."
UNICEF has also launched an appeal for $50 million to support its humanitarian response.
"The earthquake has caused unimaginable destruction," said Rownak Khan, the UNICEF deputy representative in Nepal. "Hospitals are overflowing, water is scarce, bodies are still buried under the rubble and people are still sleeping in the open. This is a perfect breeding ground for disease."