Ana to Soak North Carolina, Virginia Monday
Ana has weakened, but will still continue to soak the eastern Carolinas through Monday.
Ana became the first named tropical system of the 2015 Atlantic Hurricane Season Thursday night and was first classified as a subtropical, or hybrid storm.
This means that it had some warm, tropical features and some cool, non-tropical features. However, early Saturday morning, Ana became fully tropical and a stronger tropical storm.
Ana made landfall at 6 a.m. EDT Sunday as a tropical storm along the coast of South Carolina, almost midway between Myrtle Beach and north Myrtle Beach. Interaction with land forced Ana to weaken to a tropical depression less than eight hours later.
Despite weakening, Ana is still expected to deliver soaking rain across eastern North Carolina and into southeastern Virginia through Monday.
Ana's leftover moisture will also spread into some coastal areas of the Northeast.
A few downpours will reach Delmarva. Parts of the mid-Atlantic Interstate 95 corridor and southeastern New England may also receive some a shower or thunderstorm from the diminishing tropical system prior to it heading out to sea.
The risk to lives and property will be low for land areas, due to Ana's weak state. However, there are some risks for people remaining on land and significant danger for those venturing in the surf or heading to sea in small craft.
Rainfall averaging 2-4 inches with locally higher amounts in southeastern North Carolina and neighboring parts of the South Carolina coast will raise the risk of flooding on roadways and low-lying areas. Even if flooding does not occur, the downpours will dramatically reduce visibility for motorists.
As of early Sunday afternoon, rainfall totals since Saturday morning topped four inches at North Myrtle Beach, South Carolina.
While soaking rain persists, the threat for damaging winds and rough seas is diminishing as Ana weakens.
RELATED: Six Ways to Prepare Now for Atlantic Hurricane Season Latest Statistic on Ana How Common are Atlantic Tropical Storms in May?
Seas averaged 10-14 feet offshore of the Carolinas on Saturday evening. Since Ana's landfall early Sunday, wave heights have decreased.
However, seas will still remain rough and hazardous for operators of small craft and anyone who attempts to enter the water from the Carolinas to the Delmarva Peninsula.
"[Ana] will be a storm for people to think of what they need to do for hurricane preparation for the upcoming season," AccuWeather.com Tropical Expert Dan Kottlowski said.
AccuWeather.com Chief Long-Range Meteorologist Paul Pastelok is monitoring the Atlantic Basin for additional development later in May.
"It is possible a tropical system will slowly take shape in the Gulf of Mexico during the third week of May along the tail end of a front with high pressure to the north," Pastelok said.
AccuWeather has released its summer forecast for the U.S. and will release its Atlantic Hurricane Season Forecast for 2015 on May 13.