Houston, Texas, Hit by Unprecedented Flooding; Seven States At Risk
Flash-flood watches and warnings were issued across seven states early Tuesday as an unprecedented downpour of torrential rain triggered "extremely dangerous and potentially life-threatening" conditions in Houston.
More than 30 million Americans were told to brace for dangerous thunderstorms — including flooding, hail and possible tornadoes — as meteorologists warned the weather that has centered on Texas and Oklahoma since Saturday could expand to other areas.
Michael Walter, a spokesman for Houston Emergency Management, confirmed three deaths Tuesday afternoon, raising the death toll to 11. At least 12 people were still missing, and countless more were evacuated amid the deluge that has inundated Texas and Oklahoma with record-breaking floods since Saturday.
In Houston, more than 80,000 people were without power and the flood waters closed roads including Interstate 10 and Interstate 45. Houston was among 24 counties where Texas Gov. Greg Abbott declared a state of disaster on Monday.
Houston Intercontinental Airport smashed its all-time record for most rainfall in one day on Monday — its 4.34 inches almost doubling the previous milestone set in 1946.
"The rain just kept coming, and coming, and coming," said Ashley Aivles, a 25-year-old call center worker who struggled to make it back to her home in a Houston suburb early Tuesday.
"I lived here during Hurricane Ike [in 2008] and this was a close second. We've had really bad rain in the past but this was something else," said Aivles, who said many of her co-workers were still trapped in the office.
Around 200 basketball fans remained trapped inside the city's Toyota Center at 4 a.m. local time (5 a.m. ET), having watched the Houston Rockets' playoff win over the Golden State Warriors.
Asif Noorani, a 22-year-old student, took his chances and left the stadium after the game despite a warning on the Jumbotron to wait until the storm passed.
"We didn't realize it would be that bad," he said. "We were just about able to make it home."
Lightning triggered blazes including two-alarm fire in the Memorial area of the city, officials said.
All Houston METRO rail and bus services were canceled until the flood waters receded and conditions were deemed safe by the city's Office of Emergency Management, the transportation service announced at 4:20 a.m. local time (5:20 a.m. ET).
The Houston Independent School District also announced that classes would be delayed by two hours.
Target employee Joshua Cooper said he and a dozen workers were stuck inside a store after become surrounded by the waters.
"We are basically an island right now," the 24-year-old told NBC News. "There's no way for us to get out. The waters are so high that we have a bayou that's basically a lake and buses are getting stuck on the roads."