UPDATE: 11 Dead in Goil filling station fire ... Number Could Go Up
Some 11 people have been pronounced dead, while several others are injured in last night’s Goil Filling Station raze at the Nkrumah Circle in Accra.
The number could go up, security officials say.
The filling Station, close to the main Nkrumah Circle branch of the Ghana Commercial Bank was completely razed down by fire in an havoc that lasted several hours.
A joint team of security personnel from the Fire Service, NADMO, and military, tried for hours to access the location but to no avail as the road leading to the location was flooded.
The fire, which started some few minutes past 10pm Wednesday evening, spread to nearby structures.
The incident is happening after a heavy downpour in Ghana’s capital Wednesday left thousands stranded. The rains, which fell for well over three hours caused heavy vehicular traffic.
While most parts of the capital including the Nkrumah Circle has been declared a “no go area’, several residential and office buildings have also been left wrecked.
A Producer for Kasapa FM‘s morning show, Kojo Preko Dankwa, told us he was stuck at one place for close to two and a half hours.
Government has called for calm. A statement signed by Minister of Communications, Edward Omane Boamah reads:
The traffic situation has worsened on some roads, and fast flowing rainwater is also impeding vehicular movement on some others. The Achimota sub-station has been affected by the floodwater, leading to an emergency cut in power supply to a number of communities, which were otherwise not programmed to go off tonight. Residents are informed that personnel of the Ghana Armed Forces, the Ghana Police Service, the Ghana National Fire Service and the National Disaster Management Organisation have been deployed to intervene and provide emergency services to affected persons. The general public is kindly advised to avoid fast moving rainwater, and areas they know have big drains. Stay on higher ground, where necessary, to prevent loss of life. Should you require the urgent attention of any of the security and emergency services, please call any of these numbers: 0299005011 0299005084 0299005086 0299500099 192 Please remain calm, restrict your movement as much as possible as we work assiduously to address this national emergency.”