Chan-hom Weakens, Flood Threat Remains
After slamming the eastern coast of China and bringing heavy rain to the Korean Paninsula, Chan-hom will bring heavy rain to southeastern Russia through the beginning of the week.
Chan-hom made landfall at 4:40 p.m. CST (4:40 a.m. EDT) Saturday in Zhujiajian Township of Putuo District in the island city of Zhoushan, according to Xinhua News Agency. Zhoushan is located south of Shanghai.
Chan-hom was tracking to the north-northeast at that time, sparing the rest of eastern China from a direct landfall. Chan-hom accelerated to the northeast, spreading heavy rain across the Korean Peninsula Saturday night into Sunday.
The combination of cooler water and disruptive wind shear will cause Chan-hom continue to rapidly weaken. Land interaction caused Chan-hom to weaken further as it crossed North Korea. This only lessened the magnitude of its damaging winds further.
Widespread life-threatening flooding and mudslides will remain a serious concern across North Korea as rain from Chan-hom continues into Monday. Rainfall of 75-125 mm (3-6 inches) has already fallen and additional rainfall of 25-75 mm (1-3 inches) can fall through Monday. Pyongyang is one city at risk for the inundating rain.
Rainfall across South Korea was much less compared to the countries northern neighbor.
While far from the devastating gusts that Chan-hom was producing at its peak, wind gusts of 65 to 95 kph (40 to 60 mph) threaten to cause some tree damage and sporadic power outages along the west coast of the Korean Peninsula, near and south of where Chan-hom moves inland.
As Chan-hom loses its tropical characteristics, flooding rain will target places near the far eastern border of Russia and China early in the week. Widespread rainfall of 25-75 mm (1-3 inches) is expected in these areas with a few locations seeing 125 mm (5 inches).
On the heels of Chan-hom is Typhoon Nangka which will pose threats to Japan and South Korea during the upcoming week.
Meteorologists Adam Douty, Eric Leister, Anthony Sagliani, and Dave Samuhel contributed to this story.