Typhoon Soudelor: Fourteen dead as storm hits China after lashing Taiwan
Fourteen people have been killed in eastern China and four are missing after parts of the country were hit by the heaviest rains in a century brought by a weakening Typhoon Soudelor, state media reports.
Twelve of the casualties were reported in and around Wenzhou city in the province of Zhejiang, where downpours caused mudslides and several houses collapsed on Saturday night, Xinhua news agency said.
It added that in the neighbouring city of Lishui, two people were also killed.
Wencheng county saw downpours of 645 millimetres in 24 hours, the heaviest rains in 100 years, after the typhoon made landfall on Saturday night, the news agency said.
About 1.58 million people in Wenzhou city were affected by the typhoon, Xinhua said, estimating direct economic losses at 4 billion yuan ($870 million).
China's National Meteorological Centre (NMC) predicted Soudelor would be downgraded to a tropical depression as it moved further inland.
At least 250,000 people were evacuated from the coastal provinces of Fujian and Zhejiang ahead of the typhoon's arrival.
The storm cut power to some parts of the eastern coast and damaged crops, state media reported.
Typhoon Soudelor killed six people and injured hundreds in Taiwan, where millions continue to be left without power.
The typhoon ripped up trees and triggered landslides across the strait where damaged electricity lines knocked-out power to a record 4 million households.
Almost half a million homes were still without power on Sunday, Taiwan Power said, as blocked roads hampered efforts to restore supplies in some areas.
Taiwan lifted its typhoon warning on Sunday, but the weather bureau warned of further heavy rains in the south.
Its death toll rose to six after an eight-year-old girl who went missing on Thursday after being swept out to sea with her mother and twin sister was found dead.
Her mother and sister, caught in the strong waves on the east coast, were the first victims of the typhoon.
Some 379 people were injured in the storm, which saw rivers break their banks under torrential rain and towering waves pound the island's coastline.
Other victims include a firefighter in southern Pintung county and a man in the coastal town of Suao who was hit by a falling billboard.
Dramatic images showed an elderly man who was buried up to his waist in another mudslide being hauled out by emergency workers in the picturesque hot spring area of Wulai, just outside the capital Taipei.
Another man, aged 83, died after being buried in the mudslide.
There were also unconfirmed reports of another death in southern Kaohsiung, where a man was said to have been hit by a falling tree.
One mountain village in Taiwan's northern region of Taoyuan was left almost submerged in mud.
"Flash mudslides surged into the village. About 10 of the homes were half buried but people were evacuated last night and are in safe shelters," a spokesman for the Taoyuan fire agency told AFP.
Tatung township in eastern Yilan saw the most rain, with more than a metre falling since Thursday.
"I've never seen such a powerful typhoon in my 60 years of life," one elderly woman in eastern Taitung told Formosa TV.
China's NMC said Soudelor made landfall on Saturday evening in the Xiuyu district of Fujian Province.
Earlier, it predicted the storm would arrive in China as a category one typhoon and continue to weaken as it moved inland.
"When it makes landfall in Fujian, it will be significantly weaker, basically the strength of a typhoon or severe tropical storm," the government agency's chief forecaster Qian Chuanhai told state television.
But Soudelor was still packing winds of up to 144 kilometres per hour as it crossed the strait between Taiwan and mainland China.
Tens of thousands of households had lost power in Quanzhou city, state broadcaster CCTV reported.
More than 300 trains linked to Fujian have been cancelled, while China's three biggest airlines have also scrapped more than 60 domestic flights.
Fujian and Zhejiang provinces had ordered nearly 60,000 fishing boats to return to port, according to local officials.
The typhoon has already dumped more than 200 millimetres of rain in just over 24 hours in some areas along China's eastern coast.