Tropical Storm Erika kills 20 in Dominica
Are you in the path of the storm? Please share images with CNN if it is safe to do so.
(CNN)The physical damage to Dominica is worse than first thought and the emotional toll from Tropical Storm Erika, which killed at least 20 people on the tiny Caribbean island, is substantial, the nation's Prime Minister said Friday night.
"Rest assured, my brothers and sisters, you are not alone in your period of mourning in your period of pain, in your period of suffering and anxiety," Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit told the nation. "We are in this together and help is coming your way."
The storm has passed and was assaulting the Dominican Republic and Haiti on Friday night. It left behind swamped villages, eroded away roads and washed-away homes.
Some people were still missing, Skerrit said.
The Prime Minister, who was in Saint Lucia when the storm first hit, deflected criticism that the government didn't issue proper warnings to its 70,000 citizens.
"There is no need to indulge in blaming others for what has happened in Dominica," he told the nation. He said forecasters had been focused on the larger islands in the Caribbean and Florida.
Skerrit said the task of repairing Dominica's "dramatically affected" infrastructure would come later, estimating the cost would run into tens of millions of dollars and would set the country back two decades.
"Usually you have damage in one particular area, but this time around it is island-wide," Scotland said. "It is a difficult challenge ahead for Dominica."
"We don't know how much land it's going to go over," Scott said at a news conference Friday. "We don't know how much water we're going to get."
As of 8 p.m. Friday As of 8 p.m. Friday , Erika was about 25 miles southeast of Port-au-Prince, Haiti, according to the U.S. National Hurricane Center. Haiti and the Dominican Republic were getting heavy rain, the hurricane center said.
The storm was expected to produce rainfall of 3 to 6 inches -- with a maximum of 10 inches possible -- across the Dominican Republic, Haiti, the Turks and Caicos Islands, eastern Cuba and the southeast Bahamas through Saturday.
The latest forecast track has it passing over Cuba then skirting the western coast of Florida on Sunday and Monday before the center makes landfall on Monday afternoon. Erika is expected to become a tropical depression as it moves over central Florida and heads into Georgia.
"It's been very disorganized, so models have had a hard time getting a handle on where exactly this storm is going to go," she said.
the hurricane center said, The storm is expected to weaken Friday evening, the hurricane center said, with little change in strength through Saturday night. After it hits warm ocean water between Cuba and Florida, it should intensify. But, during that time it could also dissipate, CNN senior meteorologist Dave Hennen said.
on his Facebook page Skerrit, Dominica's Prime Minister, posted photos on his Facebook page of roads washed away by muddy floodwaters and a video of a raging river spilling over its banks and swamping cars in a built-up area.
Natalie John Natalie John , chief executive officer of Dreamy Weddings & Tours Inc., said her staff and friends in Dominica "aren't doing so well."
An employee on Dominica told her that a friend's family was missing after their house was swept away, she said.
At least one of Dominica's airports was badly damaged. Photos of Douglas-Charles Airport on the Prime Minister's Facebook page showed a flooded runway and a small plane with water up to its doors.