Japan flooding: 2.8 million advised to evacuate
Joso, Japan (CNN)Japan advised almost 3 million people to evacuate after heavy flooding killed seven people and left at least 15 missing in the eastern region of the country.
At least 27 people have been injured across 10 prefectures since floods inundated parts of eastern Japan after a tropical storm, the Fire and Disaster Management Agency said.
Rescue operations continued in the city of Joso, one of the worst-hit areas, although floodwaters are receding, it added.
A total of 2.8 million have been advised to evacuate, the agency said.
A military helicopter prepares to land on the roof of an apartment building during a rescue mission in the city of Joso in Ibaraki prefecture on Saturday, September 12.
People paddle a boat on a flooded road in Joso, Japan, on Friday, September 11. The sun came out a day after floods washed away houses and forced people to rooftops waiting for rescue.
A truck and a house are damaged in Joso on September 11.
A man wades through a flooded street in Oyama, Japan, on Thursday, September 10, after heavy rain pounded the region for two straight days.
Floodwaters fill streets in the town of Koshigaya, near Tokyo, on September 10.
Rescue workers transport evacuees through the streets of Oyama on September 10.
People wait to be rescued as houses are submerged in Joso on September 10.
A car makes its way through a flooded street in Oyama on September 10.
People and dogs wait for rescuers in Joso on September 10.
A hotel building plunges into floodwaters at a mountain resort in Nikko, Japan, on September 10.
People await help while vehicles are overturned and submerged in Joso on September 10.
In Miyagi prefecture, there were two deaths, including a woman found dead in her floating car. In Tochigi prefecture, north of the capital, Tokyo, three deaths were reported. Two more bodies were later found in Ibaraki prefecture, according to police.
Rescue teams in the Miyagi city of Osaki battled to save residents Friday after a section of a levee containing the Shibui River broke.
In some areas during the past two days, residents were forced to their rooftops, desperately awaiting rescue by military helicopters.
The raging brown floodwaters spawned from Tropical Storm Etau, which has dumped more than 60 centimeters (2 feet) of rain over some areas since Monday.
Add several weeks of near-daily downpours as the rainy season lingers, and swaths of eastern Japan are now deluged.
"Tochigi Prefecture is facing a grave danger and is in an emergency situation," Japan Meteorological Agency spokesman Takuya Deshimaru said. "It is experiencing unprecedented downpour."
In Joso, Japanese forces helicopters landed on the roof of a shopping center Friday, where dozens of people had been stranded overnight.
In a rare break from the rain, the sun allowed floodwaters to visibly recede, but many roads remain impassable. Drivers who attempted to brave the inundated streets were forced to abandon their vehicles.
Most of those reported missing were in the city.
Rescuers in an amphibious vehicle took Hitoshi Hirose and his wife, Richiko, to the area near their flooded home in Joso on Saturday. Their house was destroyed but their pet dog survived -- hungry but unharmed.
the failed reactors in Fukushima TEPCO, the company that operates the failed reactors in Fukushima where the tsunami caused one of the biggest nuclear accidents in history, said it detected slightly tainted "rainwater flowing out into the ocean" from the site this week.