Henri to Fuel Flooding Rain, Damaging Winds From Spain to UK
Once-Tropical Storm Henri will combine with another storm in western Europe to usher in heavy rain and locally damaging winds to the region Wednesday.
Henri raced across the northern Atlantic before hitting the brakes upon arrival in Europe on Tuesday. Henri's remnants interacted with a large low pressure system and the combination created a powerful storm that will then track toward the United Kingdom through Wednesday.
"While heavy rain remains a threat to the United Kingdom, the worst now appears to bypass the region to the south." said AccuWeather Meteorologist Anthony Sagliani.
Heavy rain slammed into northern Portugal and northwest Spain on Tuesday. More rain spread into western France.
Farther north, rain, some heavy, will spread across the United Kingdom on Wednesday.
Strong thunderstorms are expected from France, Belgium, Netherlands to western Germany, including the cities of Paris and Amsterdam.
The main threats from these storms will be damaging winds, hail and heavy downpours. An isolated tornado cannot be ruled out.
Rain amounts of 1-2 inches (25-50 mm) will fall in western France and southern England.
Flash flooding will threaten western France and southern England, but the threat will not be widespread.
Outside of these areas, rainfall will be widespread across northwestern Europe, though rainfall will largely be less than an inch (25 mm).
In addition to the heavy rain, locally damaging winds will blast across western Europe as the remains of Henri slam into the region.
"Strong winds will sweep across western Europe, especially south and east of the track of the storm," said Sagliani.
Winds will sweep across the northern parts of Portugal and Spain into western and northern France through Wednesday and move into Belgium, the Netherlands, western Germany and Denmark on Thursday.
Winds will generally gust up to 60 mph (95 km/h).
The peak of the wind is expected to come into Wednesday. This is when isolated power outages are expected along with downed tree limbs. Strong wind gusts could bring travel delays on the ground and through the air.