Hajj stampede: Saudi Arabia orders investigation into Mina crush that killed more than 700 people
Saudi Arabia's King has ordered an investigation into a stampede at the annual Hajj pilgrimage that has left at least 717 people dead and 800 others injured.
The crush in Mina occurred as two large crowds passed each othermoving to and from a site where pilgrims throw stones at three pillars, symbolising the stoning of the devil.
It was the second deadly accident to hit the pilgrims this month, after a crane collapse in Mecca killed more than 100.
It occurred despite a multi-billion-dollar upgrade to facilities and the deployment of 100,000 members of the security forces.
King Salman has ordered "a revision of the plans" for Hajj organisation so that pilgrims can "carry out their rituals in complete safety", the official Saudi Press Agency said.
A Saudi minister blamed the pilgrims for the tragedy and said they had not followed Hajj rules.
"Many pilgrims move without respecting the timetables," health minister Khaled al-Falih said.
"If the pilgrims had followed instructions, this type of accident could have been avoided."
Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Nayef, who chairs the kingdom's Hajj committee, ordered an investigation, and King Salman said he wanted the results quickly, SPA reported.
Footage of the aftermath of the tragedy showed bodies in piles, surrounded by discarded personal belongings and flattened water bottles.
In some areas rescue workers laid bodies in long rows on stretchers, limbs protruding from beneath white sheets.
Mohammed Mustafa is on the pilgramage and said people were still coming to terms with the tragedy.
"It's every Muslim's dream to be here. So to get this news is heartbreaking," he told the BBC.
"You don't know if one of them is going to be your friend or family member. Or even if it's no-one you know, it's bad enough."
The civil defence service said it was still counting the dead, who included pilgrims from different countries.
Iran announced that 131 of its nationals were among the dead, and accused Saudi Arabia of safety errors.
"The Saudi government should accept the responsibility of this sorrowful incident," Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said in a statement posted online.
"Mismanagement and improper actions have caused this catastrophe."
A DFAT spokesperson said no Australians had been affected at this stage.
"The Australian Embassy in Riyadh is in close contact with Saudi authorities who have advised that at this stage no Australians have been affected by this tragedy," the spokesperson said.
The stampede began at around 9:00am (local time), shortly after the civil defence service said on Twitter it was dealing with a "crowding" incident in Mina, about five kilometres from Mecca.
Hundreds of thousands of pilgrims had converged on Mina to throw pebbles at one of three walls representing Satan, for the last major rituals of the Hajj which officially ends on Sunday.
Interior ministry spokesman General Mansur al-Turki said the stampede was caused when "a large number of pilgrims were in motion at the same time" at an intersection of two streets in Mina.
"The great heat and fatigue of the pilgrims contributed to the large number of victims," he said.
Temperatures in Mina had reached 46 degrees Celsius that day.
A Sudanese pilgrim in Mina said this year's Hajj was the most poorly organised of four he had attended.
"People were already dehydrated and fainting" before the stampede, said the man, who declined to be named.
People "were tripping all over each other", he said, adding that a Saudi companion had warned him that "something was going to happen".
After the incident helicopters patrolled overhead and ambulance sirens wailed as the injured were rushed to hospitals.
At one facility, a steady stream of ambulances discharged pilgrims on stretchers.
The disaster came as the world's 1.5 billion Muslims marked Eid al-Adha, the Feast of Sacrifice, the most important holiday on the Islamic calendar.