'Stay in Your House': Officials Warn Residents During Unprecedented '1,000-Year' Floods
Seven people had already died in weather-related incidents across North Carolina and South Carolina since Thursday, according to authorities.
A woman who drove around a flood barrier in Spartanburg drowned in the standing water Thursday, Sherri Iacobelli, a spokeswoman with the South Carolina Department of Public Safety, told NBC News. And three more people have died in separate weather related traffic incidents in South Carolina since Friday, according to the state's department of public safety.
Michael Wukela, 36, didn’t have a choice but to venture out. The Columbia Mayor’s Office employee had to head into the emergency operations center, but told NBC News, “I’m going on official city business. People should stay indoors. Do not drive.”
“I’ve never seen anything like this in Columbia,” Wukela, who has lived in the city since 2006, said. “And I lived in Florence during Hurricane Hugo.”
Ethan Nunn, from North Carolina, also drove through South Carolina Sunday, with the goal of getting to a Foo Fighters concert in Atlanta, Georgia. “For an hour, hour and a half, we were in pouring rain, very windy, the roads were flooded,” said Nunn, who was celebrating his 21st birthday.
Nunn said he and his friends were detoured by police in Columbia where the group saw “a car where the water was up to the window.” Nunn said he and his friends made it safely to Georgia and didn’t plan to travel back home until Monday.
Columbia resident, Portia Bell, on the other hand, wasn’t taking any chances. The 46-year-old said she’s lived in Guam and California — and living through other extreme weather events has taught her to stock her apartment because driving isn't worth the risk.
“I’m used to being in areas where you have to be prepared for acts of God like this," Bell told NBC News. "But the flooding — this is the first time I’ve seen flooding like this and flooding so close to me."
The downpours and "catastrophic" flooding were expected to persist not only in South Carolina, but along the east coast through the night Sunday, according to the National Weather Service. Part of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware and Virginia were under coastal flood warnings on Sunday.
In a Delaware town on the shore, firefighters had already rescued two people from truck that got caught in floodwaters Saturday, according to NBC Philadelphia. In New Jersey, the floods dislodged an entire house from its pilings in a low-lying town, according to NBC New York.
The effects of the storm could be felt long into the week. "A lot more damage is still yet to be done," NBC News meteorologist Bill Karins said on MSNBC. "The rivers are going to be a problem in this area for days to come."