Rain From Weakening Koppu Still Lingers in Philippines
Koppu, also known as Lando, has killed at least 12 people in the Philippines according to the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council of the Philippines. Even in a weakened state, Koppu will continue to bring life-threatening flooding to the northern Philippines through Wednesday.
Koppu developed into a typhoon early on Friday morning local time and strengthened through the end of the week, reaching super typhoon status late on Saturday evening, an intensity similar to that of a strong Category 4 hurricane in the Atlantic Ocean.
Very early Sunday morning, Koppu made landfall near Casiguran, Aurora, on the eastern coastline of Luzon with damaging wind gust to 241 km/h (150 mph).
Koppu slowly tracked westward across northern Luzon through the weekend before turning north along the west coast of Luzon early this week. The combination of a powerful and slow-moving typhoon resulted in a disastrous situation for residents and communities in its path across northern Luzon. Life-threatening conditions will persist across northern Luzon through Wednesday as Koppu drifts northward.
While the threat for damaging winds has ended, life-threatening flooding will remain a major concern for northern Luzon as the weakened tropical system pulls away.
In Baguio, over 1,000 mm (40 inches) of rain had fallen by Tuesday morning, local time. The heaviest rainfall has ended for the city but additional rain is expected through Wednesday.
“A total of 300 to 600 mm (12 to 24 inches) of rain is expected to be widespread,” AccuWeather Meteorologist Adam Douty said early this week. Such rain has already triggered severe and life-threatening flooding and mudslides.
Sagada, Candon, Vigan City and Laoag City are among areas that will continue to get some heavy rainfall through Wednesday.
Streams and rivers will remain raging waterways resulting in flooded neighborhoods and land, roads and bridges can be impassible from the flooding leaving villages cut off from outside aid for several more days.
Koppu did remain far enough to the north for Manila to escape the worst of the impacts; however, downpours did bring 50-75 mm (2-3 inches) of rain to the city through Tuesday.
As Koppu moves away from the northern Philippines, it is expected to track northeastward and away from Taiwan.
Now that the storm has weakened to a tropical rainstorm and will likely continue to weaken, wind will not be a factor with the system as it impacts Taiwan.
As Tropical Rainstorm Koppu drifts to the north over the next couple of days, there can be locally heavy rain in Taiwan into Thursday.
AccuWeather meteorologists think the greatest threat for flooding across Taiwan will occur in the eastern part of the island.
Taking a northeast track, downpours will spread into the southern Ryukyu Islands on Wednesday night into Thursday.
As Koppu moves farther north, it will encounter stronger wind shear near Taiwan and the southern Ryukyu Islands which will prevent the storm from re-intensifying and the storm could even dissipate. Because of this, any impacts to the southern and central Ryukyu Islands will be limited to occasional downpours.
By the end of the weekend, Koppu will be pulled northeast away from the Ryukyu Islands and into the open Pacific Ocean. The storm will struggle to survive with the wind shear, but some of the lingering moisture may make it into southern Japan later on Sunday or Monday.
Behind Koppu is Typhoon Champi, currently the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane. Champi has weakened since strengthening to a super typhoon on Sunday night local time.
Champi crossed the northern Mariana Islands on Friday with wind gusts around 130 km/h (80 mph).
While Saipan was battered by Champi, Guam was far enough south to miss the worst of the cyclone. Even so, wind gusts of 65-80 km/h (40-50 mph) were common along with downpours.
The latest indications point toward this system curving to the north, then northeast well away from Japan. However, Iwo Jima will be in the path of this typhoon around the middle of the week. If Champi maintains its strength, damaging wind and flooding rain will slam the small island.