Construction scaffolding collapses near Minute Maid Ballpark; several injured
Several people were injured after scaffolding collapsed Friday morning at an unfinished building in downtown Houston.
The incident happened about 11:10 a.m. at 500 Crawford near Congress at a building under construction across the street from Minute Maid Park.
"All I heard was a thud and that's when the scaffolding fell. I rushed toward the window to see what was happening and everything was falling apart," said Eric Valdez, an 18-year-old plumber who was working inside the building along with his father and a friend named Juan. 
"It was pretty bad. I'm just blessed that I get to see another day."
All of the construction workers inside have been accounted for, said Capt. Ruy Lozano, spokesman for the Houston Fire Department. Six construction workers were rushed to area hospitals. 
Details of the injuries to other workers were not known, Lozano said. "They are not life-threatening, but they are serious."
Firefighters sifted through the debris to look for other potential victims. HFD specialists used specialized equipment to scan the building for any potential weaknesses or inner movement that could cause a secondary collapse.
Uninjured workers were staged inside the lobby of the Houston Astros' ballpark.
HFD had about 30 trucks at the scene, including several heavy-rescue units. 
"We heard a loud echo, like a crash," said Tina Sharkey, who works at a building nearby. " ... But by the time we ran out, the scaffold had already collapsed. The construction workers came running out. Everyone was focusing on trying to find out how many people were on the scaffold and where they were located once the scaffold collapsed.
"The main focus was toward the middle part because a lot of the guys were hearing 'Help! Help! Help!' The people that were around started pulling the fence off the building trying to get to the workers."
Marla Johnson, 59, works in a building next door to the construction site. She said she parks her car under the construction scene every morning but "a voice" told her not to on Friday. 
When the scaffolding fell on the spot where her car normally might have been parked, her co-workers ran from the building, fearing that she had been trapped inside.
Co-workers told her they saw a black car clip the side of the scaffolding, causing the collapse, before driving off. Neither HFD nor HPD have confirmed that incident.
The new complex there, owned by The Finger Cos., was expected to have 397 units.
The Finger Cos. is a decades-old Houston-based apartment developer that's built thousands of units across the city. The company was a pioneer of a new wave of downtown residential development with its One Park Place apartment tower just west of Discovery Green park.
"We are monitoring the situation very closely and working alongside authorities as we try to determine the cause of this accident. In the meantime we are grateful for the first responders on the scene and praying everyone is okay," a spokesman for the company said Friday.
Dale Lezon and Nancy Sarnoff contributed to this report.