Hurricane Patricia: Storm downgraded after making landfall in Mexico, flooding and landslides possible
Hurricane Patricia, the most powerful tropical storm measured in the Western Hemisphere, is rapidly weakening after hitting Mexico's coast, tearing down trees and forcing thousands to evacuate.
Mexican authorities said Patricia has so far caused less damage than expected, but has warned its citizens and people in the area to remain vigilant.
Although the storm's winds have weakened, heavy rains from the hurricane have the potential to cause flooding and landslides.
In a televised message, president Enrique Pena Nieto said the threat from the hurricane remained.
"We can't yet lower our guard," he said.
"I insist, the most dangerous part of the hurricane is yet to enter our national territory."
Authorities relocated coastal residents, evacuated tourists, closed sea ports and schools in several states before Patricia made landfall in Jalisco state as a category five hurricane before weakening.
By Saturday Patricia had weakened to a tropical storm, the US National Hurricane Centre said, with maximum winds of 80 kilometres per hour.
The storm had grown into the strongest hurricane ever recorded hours before reaching the coast, raising fears it would bring death and destruction across the country.
But almost five hours after landfall, Mr Pena Nieto addressed the nation on television, saying that the first reports "confirm that the damages have been smaller than those corresponding to a hurricane of this magnitude".
Jalisco governor Aristoteles Sandoval said there had so far been no reports of deaths, however, Oxfam Australia chief executive Helen Szoke said the full extent of the damage could not yet be known.
"People talk about the eerie feeling of the calm before a storm, but it is the silence that follows when telecom networks go down that is most disconcerting," she said.
"We have heard very little about the evacuation of poor and marginalised communities, and this is a big concern."
More than 6,300 people were in shelters in Jalisco after being evacuated.
The hurricane crossed the shore at the town of Emiliano Zapato in the state of Jalisco, Mexico's meteorological service said, packing maximum sustained winds of 270 kilometres per hour, according to the NHC.
The NHC said the hurricane was expected to be downgraded to a tropical storm over the next several hours.
"Whichever way you turn, there's debris," Juan Michel, a hotel manager in the resort of Barra de Navidad to the northwest of Manzanillo, said.
"We've never seen anything like this."
Before making landfall, the hurricane peaked with winds of 325 kilometres per hour, more powerful than the 315-kilometre-per-hour winds of Super Typhoon Haiyan, which left more than 7,350 dead or missing when it struck the Philippines in November 2013.
Before the hurricane's arrival, shops shut in the tourist resort of Puerto Vallarta, north of where Patricia made landfall, and shop owners attached duct tape to their windows for protection.
"I've had to give away tape to people who weren't prepared," frame shop owner Ramiro Arias said.
Tourist Fi Wills is staying in the resort town and told the BBC she was sitting out the storm in her hotel.
"[Everyone was] very organised. Everybody [was] calm. Staff were superb and everybody sort of pulled together really," she said.
"The weather now, we've been very, very fortunate, we just appear to have some rain.
"We haven't been given much information, however, the staff are coming to our rooms. They've told us to remain in our rooms until advised otherwise."
Some 7,000 foreign and 21,000 Mexican tourists were in Puerto Vallarta ahead of the storm, Jalisco state tourism secretary Enrique Ramos Flores said.
Federal officials said 3,500 people were evacuated from Puerto Vallarta by bus and plane.
A Red Cross facility turned into a shelter for 109 people in Puerto Vallarta, including Americans, Canadians and Italians.
"I had the bad luck of being at the wrong place in the wrong time," said Gian Paolo Azzena, a 26-year-old Italian medical school graduate.
"I found out that a hurricane was coming thanks to a craftsman. I thought it was a joke."
A handful of people waited at a bus station before service ended at midday, while others bought water and loaded vehicles with jerry cans of fuel.
In Colima, villages around the Volcano of Fire were emptied over concerns that ash that accumulated during recent volcanic activity could combine with water to produce landslides.
Patricia is expected to dump up to 51 centimetres of rain over five western Mexican states, which could produce life-threatening flash floods and mudslides.
The National Water Commission said Patricia was "so big and intense" that it could cross the entire country, dip into the Gulf of Mexico, and make landfall in the United States.
Jalisco, Michoacan, Colima and Nayarit states are expected to get the equivalent of 40 percent of their annual rainfall in the next 48 hours, the water commission said.
Mexico faces the double threat of Atlantic and Pacific tropical storms during the hurricane season, which ends at the end of November.