SA bushfire: Allan Tiller identified as 69yo victim killed in Pinery fire
The 69-year-old man killed in a bushfire that swept through South Australia's Mid North has been identified as Pinery man Allan Tiller.
A 56-year-old woman from Hamley Bridge has also been confirmed dead and at least 13 people have been taken to hospital.
SA Premier Jay Weatherill said the fire had destroyed 16 homes and 22 "significant buildings" as well as dozens of cars and machinery.
However, he said they were interim figures and expected the numbers to increase.
Mr Weatherill said SA Ambulance Service had treated 30 people for various injuries, including for burns and smoke inhalation.
He said 16 people had been taken to hospital and five were in a critical condition.
Mr Weatherill said the number of those who had died or were seriously injured in the fire remained unchanged.
"On behalf of my Government and the community of South Australia I extend my condolences to their families and all those who knew and loved them," he said.
No-one is believed to be missing as a result of the fires.
A post on Twitter described Mr Tiller as a "loved uncle" from a farming family who died fighting the fire.
Mr Weatherill said the State Government was ready to provide relief grants for families affected by the fires.
Cash grants will be paid to the value of $280 per adult, $140 per child up to a maximum of $700 per family.
The grants are available from the relief centres, which have been set up at Gawler, Balaklava and Clare.
Bereavement grants will also be made available.
Mr Weatherill said about 200 CFS firefighters and 50 appliances were involved in the effort to contain he fires.
He sent his "heartfelt" thanks to all the firefighters tackling the blazes.
Two strike teams from Victoria are already on the ground, and Mr Weatherill said he expected a total of 300 personnel from Victoria to join the firefighting effort.
The State Emergency Service has set up a base for the Victorian firefighters at Nuriootpa High School.
The cause of the fire is still unknown, but Mr Weatherill said initial investigations suggested it was not deliberately lit.
Thousands of homes still have no power, and may be without it for some time as SA Power Networks work to reach fire-affected areas.
Mr Weatherill said emergency services were working quickly to open roads, but urged residents from the area to check for closures.
Country Fire Service chief officer Greg Nettleton said the fire had burnt through about 85,000 hectares so far, and the 200km perimeter of the fire was now 60 per cent contained.
He said steady progress had been made on the fireground and crews would work through the night with the focus being on a section of difficult terrain on the fire's edge.
"Our preliminary estimate is we've probably got about 60 per cent of the fire contained, however I might add that that is in the areas where it is easy to do that," Mr Nettleton said.
"That's in particular where crops are associated and there is no heavy timber.
"At this stage our priority areas are now to the north-east of the fire."
Fire activity remains around many townships including Owen, Hamley Bridge, Tarlee, Freeling, Wasleys, Kapunda, Greenock and surrounding areas.
The fire has affected an area that is bounded approximately by Roseworthy, Kapunda, Mallala, Owen and Riverton.
Conditions have improved for firefighters battling the blaze.
Yesterday afternoon crews were facing wind gusts of up to 80 kilometres per hour (kph) at Roseworthy amid 34 degrees Celsius heat.
Today the temperature has dropped to about 17C with wind gusts between 30 and 40kph.
Mr Eden said the perimeter of the fire was blacked out.
"By the air, the news is getting better and better," he said.
"The perimeter of the fire is well and truly blacked out, we are continuing to ensure a number of hot spots, particularly up in the north-eastern corner, where there is some taller timber, are cleaned up this afternoon."
Mr Eden said fire crews from Victoria, some of who have already arrived, will then take over to give respite to local crews for three days.
"Our intention for this fire is that at the time of handing it back to the locals, which at this point we hope is in three to four days' time, once the CFA has completed their deployment to us, we hope we can hand that back to the local community with no fire activity on the fire ground whatsoever."
Several schools have been closed and others are open but will not be running a full service.
Mallala farmer John Lush lost all of his wheat crop and millions of dollars of farming equipment in the fire.
He said that even though he was well-equipped, he could not save all his property.
"We've got a big machinery shed that we are in line with and the gutters on that are 25 feet off the ground and the flames were coming over the top of that shed so it was just horrific," Mr Lush said.
The blaze started at Pinery about midday on Wednesday and travelled 50 kilometres in just four hours.
An appeal has been set up by the State Emergency Relief Fund Committee.
The SA Pinery Fire Appeal has been set up for cash donations to help those affected by the fire.
People can make donations to the appeal online, via cheque or in person at any Commonwealth Bank branch.
Police have also set up a Register.Find.Reunite site for anyone affected by the fires.
A bushfire recovery hotline has been established, the number is 1800 302 787.