Floodwaters claim 3, another person missing as rain pounds D-FW
Floodwaters claimed at least three lives as more than 5.5 inches of rain fell Thursday and Friday, making 2015 the wettest year in North Texas history.
A fourth person was reported missing in high water and presumed dead.
In Garland, the body of 29-year-old Benjamin Taylor Floyd was found in a submerged car early Friday after he apparently tried to drive through high water, a Fire Department spokesman said.
It wasn’t clear how long the Wylie resident’s vehicle had been underwater when a search-and-rescue team was called about 8:30 a.m. to check on it on Campbell Road near Brand Road.
In Johnson County, the body of Sandra Jones, 33, was found after her car was washed off the road by waters flowing 10 to 12 feet over the banks of Rock Creek west of Burleson.
Near Mansfield, the body of 48-year-old Jose Vargas was found after Johnson County sheriff’s deputies tried to rescue him along with two other people who were in a pickup that was swept into the water overnight. There were no indications the two survivors were injured.
A Tarrant County sheriff’s deputy narrowly escaped death after she and a bystander tried to save a 70-year-old woman from a submerged vehicle in Burleson.
The deputy, Krystal Salazar, was swept away about 1 a.m. Friday on Oak Grove Road, near Interstate 35W, and survived the swift-moving water for nearly two hours by clinging to a tree.
The 70-year-old driver, whose name was not released, had not been found late Friday, and the search for her body was suspended until Saturday morning.
In Dallas, Fire-Rescue personnel handled 27 water-rescue calls after vehicles stalled in high water, but no injuries were reported in those incidents. Crews also responded to 83 traffic accidents.
Two children died after an SUV speeding on rain-slick U.S. Highway 175 in South Dallas rear-ended a car carrying a family of five.
One-year-old Aylin Cervantes-Oliver and 12-year-old Yahir Cervantes-Oliver of Newark, Texas died after they were ejected from the car. Their parents and another child were treated for minor injuries.
The SUV’s driver, 23-year-old Kelvin Walker, was being held at the Dallas County Jail and may be charged with manslaughter. The Sheriff’s Department is investigating whether alcohol may have played a role in the crash.
With more rain in the forecast, KXAS-TV (NBC5) meteorologist Rick Mitchell urged people to be cautious.
“They need to treat all these flood warnings and watches with great respect because the ground is saturated and even additional light rain will continue to cause problems,” he said. “Especially when the sun goes down, you can’t tell if the road has a lot of water on it.”
Jamie Gudmestad of the National Weather Service said with Friday’s rain, 2015 has become the wettest year on record in North Texas, with more than 56 inches. The previous record, 53.5 inches, was set in 1991.
Two to 4 more inches may fall this weekend as bands of rain are expected to continue through Sunday morning.
The precipitation was carried by a cold front that pushed temperatures down from 65 to 42 in a matter of hours Friday morning.
The normal high for November is 64, but Saturday is expected to reach only 39. By Monday, though, temperatures should be rising again into the mid- to high 50s.
KXAS-TV (NBC5) and The Associated Press contributed to this report.