SA bushfire: Hamley Bridge community mourns Janet Hughes, who helped provide firestorm refuge
A woman who died in a fierce bushfire north of Adelaide this week had just opened a public building to offer refuge to local families during the fire emergency.
Janet Hughes, 56, unlocked the institute building at Hamley Bridge and then left, but got only a short distance from the lower north town before she got trapped by the flames.
The bushfire, which started at Pinery on Wednesday and is now contained, destroyed or severely damaged at least 87 homes, South Australian Premier Jay Weatherill has confirmed.
He said that number was likely to increase once an analysis of the fire ground was completed.
A second person killed in the bushfire, Allan Tiller of Pinery, had been fighting the blaze on a farm when he died.
Mr Weatherill said about 90 people have been treated in hospital and five remained in a critical condition.
Ms Hughes' tragic death is being keenly felt in the tiny Hamley Bridge community.
Local cafe and gallery owner Wendy Williams said she was in shock to have lost her friend of several years.
"I can't believe it, I still can't fathom that she's gone," she said.
"She was a lovely person, she was a customer of mine ... but she was a friend as well.
"She was in my cafe two or three times a week, so I did see her a lot. She was in for her usual family gathering for coffee on the weekend."
Ms Williams said Ms Hughes had been working with other locals to organise the annual Christmas celebration in the town.
"She was a very community-orientated person. She was working on the Christmas parade party with us," she said.
"She had worked on the Christmas parades for Hamley Bridge a few years ago and she had just recently come back onto that.
"She's been involved in the community groups for a long time."
The cafe operator said everyone in the town was struggling to deal with the tragedy.
"People just can't fathom it, they can't get over it, can't believe it," she said.
The other fire victim, 69-year-old Allan Tiller, was described by friends as someone who was always doing what he could to help others.
Mr Weatherill said about 450 insurance claims amounting to $61 million had been lodged so far and he expected that number to "substantially rise".
"We also know that there have been extraordinary losses of livestock and wildlife," Mr Weatherill said.
"Tens of thousands of chickens and estimates of something like 27,000 livestock.
"These are enormous numbers and it's great sadness associated with the loss of those animals' lives."
About 200 firefighters remain on the ground to put out any flare ups, mop up and continue to blacken the remaining fire ground.
This is expected to take between four and seven days.
All the roads within the fire ground are now open, but emergency services have asked the public to be mindful that emergency personnel are still working in the area.
Federal Minister Christopher Pyne said the Commonwealth would cooperate with the State Government to offer emergency relief.
Cash grants of up to $280 per adult, and $140 per child, to a maximum of $700 per family are available to those affected by the fires.
Emergency accommodation is also available for individuals and families unable to return to their homes.
Personal and financial counselling is also available for those suffering the effects of the fire.
Relief centres are open at Gawler, Balaklava and Clare.