Weakening Melor to unleash flooding rain in Luzon, Philippines, into Thursday
Melor, also known as Nona in the Philippines, will continue to bring heavy rain to the Philippines into Thursday.
The cyclone has already claimed at least 11 lives, according to Agence France-Presse.
Melor made initial landfall over Bulusan, Sorogon, in southern Luzon at 4 p.m. local time on Monday afternoon as the equivalent of a Category 4 hurricane.
Since making its fourth and final landfall in the Philippines on Tuesday, weakening has continued and Melor, now a tropical storm, will eventually become a post tropical low west of the Philippines in the coming days.
Despite its weakening, flooding rain will remain likely into Thursday across Luzon.
In advance of Melor, more than 740,000 people were evacuated in northern Visayas and southern Luzon, according to the Philippines Government.
Melor has caused the cancellation of schools and universities in areas impacted by the cyclone while also leading to numerous travel delays and flight cancellations.
Rainfall amounts will top 300 mm (12 inches) in the hardest hit areas of the western Philippines, especially across the higher terrain of western Luzon. This heavy rainfall combined with the rugged terrain of the region will result in an elevated threat for life-threatening mudslides.
Rainfall totaled over 175 mm (7 inches) in Masbate City and 150 mm (6 inches) in Legazpi City as the cyclone tracked through the central Philippines on Monday.
Heavy rain inundated parts of Mindoro on Tuesday and Wednesday with rainfall totaling over 250 mm (10 inches) in Calapan City.
The heaviest rainfall shifted northward across Luzon into Wednesday night with more than 275 mm (11 inches) reported in Cabanatuan City as rain continued to fall.
Manila has been impacted by the typhoon as well. While the strongest winds bypassed the city, heavy rain caused flooding in some parts of the city.
Rainfall has already totaled 100-200 mm (4-8 inches) in Metro Manila with more rain expected into Thursday morning.
Melor's slow movement just west of Luzon will keep Manila and neighboring areas in the highest threat for downpours into Thursday.
After blasting the Philippines, Melor is expected to weaken further as it turns southwestward into the South China Sea later this week.
Another potential tropical system will follow in the footsteps of Melor later this week. This tropical threat will bring another round of heavy rain to the Philippines as early as Thursday or Friday.
This time, the heaviest rain is expected to be farther south impacting the southern half of the Philippines regardless of whether development occurs.