New York governor orders homeless into shelters during freezing cold
New York Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo on Sunday signed an order requiring communities statewide to take homeless people from the streets to shelters when temperatures reach freezing, saying he was ready for a legal challenge from anyone who thinks “people have a civil right to sleep on the street and freeze to death.”
Cuomo (D) said the executive order, which will take effect Tuesday, will protect the state’s growing homeless population.
The order came as temperatures in parts of New York state were dipping below 32 degrees. It calls for police departments and social services agencies to move people into shelters, including those reluctant to go.
The legality of the order was questioned by Karen Hinton, a spokeswoman for New York Mayor Bill de Blasio (D).
“We support the intent of the executive order, but to forcibly remove all homeless individuals in freezing weather, as the governor has ordered, will require him to pass state law,” she said in a statement. “This executive order adds no legal or financial resources to New York City’s programs to assist the homeless and merely requires all New York state localities follow many of the same requirements as New York City to shelter families and individuals in need in freezing temperatures.”
In an interview with WCBS-AM, Cuomo said he is ready to go to court, if necessary, to defend his order against any constitutional challenges.
Federal accident investigators are considering beginning another search of the wreckage of a freighter that sank in October in an attempt to locate the ship’s black box.
Tom Roth-Roffy, the lead investigator for the National Transportation Safety Board, told the Associated Press that a weeks-long search found one of El Faro’s missing decks but not the mast where the ship’s voyage data recorder was attached. The agency on Sunday released the first images of the ship in its final resting place.
“There were no human remains found whatsoever, and no personal effects whatsoever,” Roth-Roffy said. “I think we found one boot.”
El Faro sank Oct. 1 after losing engine power and getting caught in a Category 4 hurricane while sailing from Jacksonville to San Juan, Puerto Rico. There were 33 mariners aboard and no survivors.
Roth-Roffy said the NTSB would need to start a second search of the wreckage 15,000 feet below the sea if it wants to find the data recorder, which would have recorded the captain’s final transmissions. They are still determining whether and when such a search would occur.
Four bodies of missing canoeists found: Four bodies have been recovered after canoeists were reported missing in southeastern Wisconsin, police said. Four people went out in a canoe about 3 a.m. Sunday on Mill Lake in Walworth County, they said. The search began after friends noticed they hadn’t come back. East Troy Police Chief Jim Surges told WITI-TV that three bodies were recovered quickly, while the fourth body was recovered by divers. A canoe was also found.
Couple killed by in-law identified: A man and a woman killed by a former in-law in a murder-suicide at a Southern California cemetery were a married couple from North Hollywood visiting a grave, authorities said. Police in Ontario said Misak Minasyan, 60, and Hripsime Minasyan, 59, were shot by Karapet Kalajian on Saturday at Bellevue Memorial Park. City News Service reported that Kalajian, 71, had been married to the dead woman’s sister. Investigators said Sunday that Kalajian was distraught because Jan. 3 is the fifth anniversary of his wife’s death. Detectives said Kalajian killed himself after killing the couple.
Forest Service reviewing Nestlé facility: The San Bernardino Sun newspaper reported that the U.S. Forest Service has begun an environmental review of Nestlé Waters North America’s bottling operations in the San Bernardino National Forest in California. Nestlé was sued in October by environmental and public interest groups who allege the Swiss-based company is operating its Strawberry Canyon facility on a permit that expired in 1988. The groups say the drought in California combined with the bottling operation is affecting area wildlife. Nestlé has applied to renew its permit and can continue to operate while that application is pending.
Hit-and-run victim dragged six miles: New Orleans police said a driver apparently hit a pedestrian in the city’s French Quarter and dragged the body more than six miles, crossing a Mississippi River bridge to the other side. Police said a driver found the disfigured body about 3:30 a.m. Friday in the road leading from the bridge. A police Facebook posting says investigators think the body is that of an unidentified pedestrian hit in the French Quarter. It says witnesses told investigators that a black sedan with tinted windows struck the man and drove off. Officer Garry Flot, a police spokesman, said in an email Sunday that police don’t have further leads to the car or driver. Police posted surveillance-video photographs of the car on Facebook, seeking the public’s help in the case.