Tropical Cyclone Stan: Pilbara towns brace for destructive winds as system looms off WA; red alert issued
West Australian residents in the north-west Pilbara region are bracing for potentially damaging wind gusts and heavy rain as Tropical Cyclone Stan makes landfall early on Sunday morning.
A red alert, the highest warning level, has been issued for people between Port Hedland and Wallal, including Pardoo, Eighty Mile and Wallal.
The cyclone is currently a category two system, but is expected to become a category three when it crosses the coast near Port Hedland in the early hours of Sunday morning.
It is moving slower than expected, giving it time to intensify as it approaches land.
Stan is not expected to directly hit populated areas, but, as Neil Bennett of the Bureau of Meteorology says, it is likely to bring heavy rainfall and strong winds.
"As it comes across as a category three — and quite a strong category three — it will take some time to weaken to below tropical cyclone status, so we're still expecting it to be producing some heavy falls even when it makes land," he said.
He said if the cyclone hung off the coast for longer than predicted, it could gather more strength.
"Current modelling suggests that that intensity, category three, would be the highest level, but we will be monitoring this one very very closely as we do with all of them."
Stan is expected to bring winds with gusts up to 200 kilometres per hour near the cyclone centre, likely somewhere between Wallal and Port Hedland, and nearby residents have been stockpiling food and seeking shelter.
Pardoo Station manager Eric Galancho, who came to the Pilbara from San Francisco, said a cyclone for him was "quite an experience".
"I feel confident in the sense that I've got a lot of good people around me who have been through this before," he said.
Bureau of Meteorology duty forecaster Nadine Baillard said storm surges may pose an additional threat.
"It will depend on the time that it crosses the coast as to whether it's high tide or not but residents between Bidyadanga and Whim Creek, which includes Port Hedland, are specifically warned of the potential of a dangerous storm tide.
"We could see some damaging waves and dangerous flooding in that area."
Stan is the first cyclone of the season for Australia.