Construction crane collapse in Manhattan kills David Wichs
One minute David Wichs was an average New Yorker on his way to work. But moments after rounding Worth St., he was killed — the victim of a giant crane that crushed him to death.
The 38-year-old mathematical genius began his Friday with a routine he’d done a thousand times before — an early morning exit from his Upper West Side brownstone, a 35-minute commute to the Chambers St. subway stop, and a five-minute stroll to his office in Tribeca.
Except this day, Wichs, a computer trader, never arrived.
A massive crane — capable of lifting 330 tons and with an operating arm that stretched 565 feet — toppled over in a horrific accident that sent debris flying and left a half-dozen cars mangled. Its violent downward arc crushed the hardworking immigrant from Prague to death.
As sirens wailed, the capsized base of the Bay Crane lay heavily on its rooftop at 60 Hudson St. Its long arm stretched across a path of mayhem along Worth St. near West Broadway.
Witnesses and construction workers rushed to aid the injured, but there was nothing anybody could do for Wichs, who was killed instantly.
A few blocks away, his co-workers were filtering into what should have been his destination: the 11th-floor office of Tower Research Capital on Broadway, where Wichs, a head trader and longtime employee, was viewed as affable and well-respected.
“When I walked in, I heard all the ambulances and fire trucks and sirens going off. You get to work and you start talking about that, joking about that,” said one grief-stricken colleague who asked to remain anonymous.
“And then you hear somebody died. And then you hear it’s David, and everything became really serious after that. It was shocking to everybody. Very, very shocking,” the man added.
Another co-worker, David Faucon, said Wichs was “genuinely nice in a way that was really stunning. It was a real tragedy.”
Wichs lived near Zabar’s on 81st St. with his wife, Rebecca Guttman, an associate attorney with powerhouse law firm Proskauer Rose. The two were married on Jan. 20, 2013.
“He was an angel, an absolute angel,” said a man who would only identify himself as the family rabbi.
“He was a wonderful, wonderful person. He was the best, the absolute best, and that's what makes this tragedy that much greater,” the rabbi said, as he left Wichs’ Upper West Side brownstone.
Wichs and his wife belong to the Kehilath Jeshurun synagogue on E. 85th St. on the Upper East Side, where services for him will be held Sunday.
Rabbi Elie Weinstock said the family was reeling.
“It’s a terrible tragedy to lose such a young man like him. Right now it’s just too much to process,” he told the Daily News.
Wichs’ sister-in-law Lisa Guttman said the math whiz immigrated from the Czech Republic as a teen and worked his way to a degree from Harvard University.
“He really created a life for himself. He literally took every opportunity he could find,” Guttman told The Associated Press.
Wichs was fatally struck by the falling crane as he stood close to a parked car owned by Thomas O’Brien, 73.
O’Brien had just dropped off his daughter for an appointment and was still in the car at the time, law enforcement sources said. He miraculously survived with only a head wound — although his car took a beating.
Another bystander, Dawn Kojima, 45, was struck in the head and leg by falling debris. Both Kojima and O’Brien were taken to local hospitals, along with a third bystander who sustained minor injuries.
Mayor de Blasio, who rushed to the scene, said it was incredible more people weren’t hurt.
“This is a very, very sad incident. We lost a life. But if you go out into the street as I did and see what happened here, thank God it was not worse,” the mayor said.
The crane crash occurred as construction crews — worried about the 20 mph winds and snow — tried to bring the machine’s boom down for safety reasons, de Blasio said.
“This incident occurred literally as they were lowering the crane to secure it,” the mayor noted.
The earth-rattling boom caused by the tumble brought 10 court officers running from a nearby courthouse on Thomas St., and ruptured gas lines and water mains around the neighborhood.
Lt. Jason O’Connor, on his second day in charge of the courthouse, was the first to spot Wichs in the rubble.
“I checked the man for signs of life. Unfortunately, he had no pulse,” O’Connor said.
He saw O’Brien, dazed and holding his hand to his wounded head, trapped in his mangled car. The 34-year-old court officer tried to lift a section of the crane with no success.
“Twelve elephants .. couldn’t have moved it,” O’Connor said.
Members of the Sergeants Benevolent Association, headquartered nearby, covered Wichs’ body with a blanket, said president Ed Mullins.
City inspectors had been at the crane’s work site Thursday to supervise as the machine — a crawler crane — extended its huge boom to lift items to the building’s rooftop.
The crane was installed at 60 Hudson St. on Jan. 30, Mayor de Blasio said.
Numerous city agencies were investigating the cause of the collapse and de Blasio ordered all 376 crawler cranes currently operating in the five boroughs to be secured.
The massive Bay Crane machine hit a building and leaned on some power lines as it fell.
Operator Kevin Reilly, 56, was cooperating with police and took a Breathalyzer, which tested negative for alcohol, sources said.
But the operator, who lives in Port Jefferson, does have three drunk driving arrests from the 1980s, sources said.
FLASHBACK: ANOTHER DEADLY CRANE COLLAPSE ON UPPER EAST SIDE IN 2008
Manhattan is no stranger to devastating crane collapses.
In November, the steel arm of a balky mini-crane dropped onto a construction safety coordinator on E. 44th St.
In 2008, a crane plunged onto a construction site on East 91st St., taking the lives of operator Donald Leo and construction worker Ramadan Kurtaj.