Fiji braces for Tropical Cyclone Winston, hundreds of evacuation centres activated
Hundreds of evacuation centres have been activated as a powerful category five cyclone lashes Fiji's outer islands, with winds of up to 230 kilometres per hour.
Severe Tropical Cyclone Winston is heading westward and has already hit areas in the Lau group of islands as it tracks towards more populated areas.
The cyclone was about 175 kilometres north-north-east of Suva, the capital, at 1:00 pm (local time), travelling at 25 kilometres per hour.
The storm was carrying average winds of 230 kilometres per hour, with gusts of up to 325 kilometres per hour, Fiji's Meteorological Service said.
Virgin Australia and Jetstar have both cancelled services in and out of the country.
Fiji's Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama urged Fijians to prepare themselves for what he described as a "terrible event".
"We cannot afford to be complacent," he said.
"And I am especially concerned that some people in urban areas of the country in particular do not appear to have heeded the warnings about the seriousness of the threat we all face."
Forecasters say there is a chance the cyclone will whip up very strong wind gusts around the capital.
"That is a possibility that we cannot eliminate right now, that is the reason for us issuing a hurricane warning in terms of swells and heavy rain," Fiji meteorologist Misaeli Funaki told the ABC.
Fiji's second-biggest island Viti Levu had already begun to feel the effects of Cyclone Winston's winds, with the eye of the cyclone about 50 kilometres south of the town of Savusavu.
National Disaster Management Director Akapusi Tuifagalele told the Fijilive news website 758 evacuation centres had been prepared.
"We are prepared to face a very strong cyclone and are urging people all over the country to be prepared as well," he said.
"Our officers are stationed in every part of the country to assist our people and evacuation centres have been set up for people who may be at risk in their respective homes."
Mr Tuifagalele said people were urged to take necessary precautionary measures at the earliest opportunity.
Trees have been brought down and there are fears storm surges and flooding expected in the second largest island to the north will claim lives.
"The potential for devastation is high and there is a very real risk that people will lose their lives," Neville Koop from the Na Draki Weather Service in Suva warned.
He said there was likely to be substantial damage to properties in what could be the most powerful cyclone in recorded history to hit Fiji.
UN humanitarian agency UNOCHA said it was ready to support the disaster management office if required.
Save the Children Fiji CEO Iris Low-McKenzie said the storm could pass over the international airport at Nadi.
"This would make humanitarian response all the more difficult we have international agencies, particularly our partners at Save the Children Australia, New Zealand that are ready to support us," she said.
"Should the airport be damaged it would delay response and make it quiet difficult for us to respond quickly."
She said people were preparing for the worst.
"People are really taking the warnings that have been coming through very seriously," she said.
"Yesterday, the markets were full of people stocking up on food and water and so that's really, really good to see that people are taking the warnings seriously because this is going to be a serious cyclone."
Hurricane warnings have been issued for Vanuabalavu, Yacata, Mago, Cica, Tuvuca, Nayau, Koro, Gau, Vanuavatu, Taveuni, Qamea, Laucala, Ovalau, Wakaya and the southern half of Vanua Levu.
Storm warnings are in place for Lakeba, Oneata, Moce, Komo, Namuka, Ogea, Moala, the rest of Vanua Levu and nearby smaller islands, Viti Levu, Yasawa and the Mamanuca group.
The cyclone passed by Tonga's Vava'u as a category two storm earlier this week, before turning and strengthening to pass the same island group as a category four.
About 10 houses were lost on Vava'u, Tonga's Emergency Management Office said, with partial damage to 200 more.