Long Island Plane Crash Kills 3
At Harvest House, a independent-living retirement home with eight residents run by the Sisters of St. Dominic, Sister Mary Butler said she heard a noise while she was working at the computer. “You hear things, but you’re not quite sure,” she said. “You think it’s a big truck going by.”
Then she looked at the front yard of the home, where what appeared to be a piece of carry-on luggage had landed, and not far away, she saw a woman’s pocketbook. A piece of the aircraft landed near the driveway, she said.
Police officers knocked on the door to tell them what had happened and then searched the property. Hours later, Sister Butler said in a telephone interview, she could still hear helicopters flying overhead and saw investigators at work on the street.
Sue Gold, who lives nearby, said she was not at home at the time of the crash. But she could tell as she left work on Tuesday afternoon that something was wrong; her job is near a Nassau County police precinct station house, and she saw a string of police vehicles, fire engines and ambulances heading toward the area.
“I was thinking something might have happened at the high school,” she said.
As she got closer to home, Ms. Gold said, she saw fire engines with their ladders extended so that investigators could climb up and survey the debris area. Her street was blocked off, so she had to park around the corner and was escorted in.
A piece of the wing had crashed into her neighbor’s roof, she said, and a passenger seat had fallen in a yard. She also saw golf clubs strewed about.
Ms. Gold said she was troubled by the crash, but she was also relieved because no one on the ground was hurt. “We feel terrible for the people who lost their lives,” she said. “It could have been a lot worse. You have to understand, it’s a major thoroughfare. There are so many school buses that go down the street at all times.”
On Tuesday evening, as investigators were still scouring the area, Ms. Gold waited eagerly for her husband to get home. She had tried to go see a friend who lives nearby, but the police told her to stay on her property. Still, she said, they made sure she was not by herself for too long.
“I did not want to be inside the house alone,” Ms. Gold said.
“Stay here,” she said a police officer told her. “We’ll stay here with you.”