Downpours to linger across Carolinas as Bonnie meanders along the coast

Despite no longer being a tropical storm or depression, Bonnie will induce daily showers and thunderstorms across the Carolinas into the middle of the week.
Bonnie became the second named tropical system of the 2016 Atlantic hurricane season during Memorial Day weekend.
The storm made landfall as a tropical depression just east of Charleston, South Carolina, on the Isle of Palms, around 8:30 a.m. EDT Sunday.
Weak winds high up in the atmosphere combined with a lack of systems moving in from the west will allow Bonnie to sit and spin near the coast for several days.
Into Wednesday, daily opportunities for wet weather are expected across North and South Carolina as a result of the slow movement of the rainstorm.
“Across the eastern Carolinas, drenching showers and thunderstorms will be produced daily as Bonnie crawls eastward across the region into midweek,” according to AccuWeather Senior Meteorologist Kristina Pydynowski.
Areas along the immediate coast could be socked in with clouds and occasional rain into midweek.
Farther inland where the sun breaks out for a time, storms are expected to erupt and may become locally strong and gusty.
Pydynowski added that an isolated tornado or two can also be spawned in some of the strongest thunderstorms.
RELATED: AccuWeather hurricane weather center 'Cold blob' to be a wild card in the 2016 Atlantic hurricane season How to avoid rip currents this Memorial Day weekend
Those spending time outdoors will want to seek shelter inside at the first rumble of thunder.
Any downpour can quickly cause flash flooding due to the saturated nature of the soil.
Motorists should never attempt to drive through a flooded roadway as it can put the driver, occupants and potential rescue workers in a life-threatening situation.
It may take until Thursday before a system moves in from the west and begins to push Bonnie’s moisture out to sea.
Even after Bonnie departs, additional rounds of showers and thunderstorms are expected to continue across the Carolinas into the weekend.
The area around the northwestern Caribbean Sea bears for tropical development during early June.