A night of wild weather for WA, tens of thousands without power
The state government has warned residents in Perth and the South West that they are in for a difficult week, as the state braces for another severe storm front.
More than 100,000 households remain without power and many face being cut off for the rest of the week, after yesterday's storms caused the most extensive damage to the state's power network in its history.
Western Power crews are working around the clock to restore power to as many homes as possible before another cold front hits at midnight tomorrow, bringing with it winds of up to 125km/h - equivalent to a category two cyclone.
Emergency Services Minister Troy Buswell described the recent weather events as "unprecedented" and warned this week is set to be a difficult one for the state.
WA recorded its fourth strongest wind gust on record, 146km/h, on Sunday.
Residents are being urged to clear any debris on their properties and be prepared with a torch and battery-powered radio.
While Western Power was still working to reconnect homes and businesses affected by yesterday's storms in the WA's south, the new storm front moving across Geraldton has started knocking out power in areas of the Midwest.
"This next front is going to cause us some significant problems," Western Power spokeswoman Miriam Borthwick told WAtoday.
Jetties were blown away and boats ripped from their moorings at Port Bouvard, with similar damage reported at Mandurah and Rockingham.
Wind gusts consistent with a category two cyclone lashed the South West of the state, with the Busselton Jetty recording gusts in excess of 135km/h late yesterday. Bunbury recorded winds in excess of 110km/h, while the highest gusts of 139km/h were recorded at Cape Naturaliste.
Another cold front was passing through the city this morning, bringing winds of up to 91km/h at Jandakot airport.
About 60 sets of traffic lights are out across the metropolitan area, and dozens of homes have been damaged by fallen trees and flying debris.
Did you take any photos of damage at your home or in your suburb? Email us here.
In its latest statement at 11.30am, Western Power said the call centre received more than 100,000 calls last night from across the state.
The extensive damage to the Western Power network is the worst in its history, with 161,000 customers without power at the height of the storm yesterday.
The Western Power network has sustained damaged from Geraldton to Ravensthorpe, covering a network of more than 300,000 square kilometres and involving more than 90,000 kilometres of power lines.
Hundreds of power lines, streetlight wires and household service lines were brought down by flying debris last night, while about 50,000 homes have had their power restored since the peak of the storm.
The worst impacted areas are to the south of the metropolitan area, as well as Baldivis, Mandurah, Bunbury, Busselton and Margaret River.
Mandurah, Meadow Springs and Pinjarra still have 21,000 customers without power.
Western Power Ms Borthwick said all available staff and contractors had been called on to help restore services.
"Some houses could be off for a week," she said.
"We now think that this is the most extensive and widespread damage the network has ever experienced from one single storm. "We have about 1500 jobs on the system that need attending to - several hundred power lines ... (and) individual customer home wires that have been brought down."
Who will be fixed first?
Western Power says it is prioritising the repair list according to public safety, damage that can be quickly fixed and public services.
"Our priority at the moment is around public safety so our process is to identify [the] damage that represents a risk to public safety and we work to secure those risks to prevent people from being injured," acting chief executive officer Paul Italiano told ABC Radio.
"Then we work towards restoring the things that can be done reasonably quickly and simply and the crew is equipped to do it. That's how the 60,000 [customers had their power restored] overnight.
"The rest of it goes towards things like prioritising hospitals and support group areas."
Ms Borthwick urged people to stay away from fallen parts of the network and avoid pools of water.
Ms Borthwick said towns where major services such as hospitals were impacted by power outages had their power restored first, including Ravensthorpe, Bremer Bay and Denmark.
"It is still possible there are some power lines that have been brought down that are live, that we haven't been able to get to yet... so please keep out of puddles... for the next 24 hours," she said.
Western Power will hold a meeting this morning, but Ms Borthwick said they would not bring extra workers over from the eastern states.
She said the issue was around availability of machinery, rather than a lack of workers.
The clean-up will continue today as the state prepares for another violent storm in the next 48 hours.
Western Power and State Emergency Services crews worked through the night to restore power and assist affected homeowners.
The damage extends further into the state's South West to Margaret River, with Bunbury, Busselton and Margaret River all severely impacted by the storm.
Since late yesterday, Western Power has been requesting customers only report hazards to its incident report line, and to refrain from reporting power outages.
Western Power is urging those without power to relocate with family and friends.
According to the statement, Western Power has positioned staff, known as 'wire watchers' at known hazards, but is continuing to urge people to stay away from fallen power lines or poles.
More than 150 State Emergency Services from the Fire and Emergency Services Authority from 18 units worked throughout the night to help the community after the storm hit.
By late last night, more than 535 calls for help were made to the SES, mainly from the South West and Lower South West regions of the state.
Allen Gale from FESA told ABC Radio that the SES was "fairly well placed" to deal with the influx of calls to the hotline expected this morning, as more people woke to discover damage at their homes.
He urged people to be patient, with volunteers working on a priority basis to assist repairing properties.
"Be patient with us, you don't need to ring back, we will get to you when we can," he said.
Main Roads has reported that 60 sets of traffic lights are out across the metropolitan area.
The Perth to Australind train service was cancelled yesterday and this morning due to litter on the tracks.
David Hynes from the Public Transport Authority said that while buses would be slowed by the heavier traffic and dangerous road conditions, trains were still running but not on schedule.
He said it was not known when the Perth to Australind service would resume.
Showers are expected to ease later today, with the chance of a squally morning thunderstorm. This will be accompanied by fresh and gusty north-northwesterly winds, stronger near coastal regions.
But according to the Bureau of Meteorology, there is the risk of another heavy storm tomorrow, with showers and squally winds.
Tomorrow, showers are set to increase with gusty westerly winds and isolated squally thunderstorms between Jurien Bay to Bremer Bay.
The bureau said widespread damaging winds and locally destructive gusts are possible with this strong cold front.
A severe weather warning remains in place for people in, near or between Bremer Bay to Lake King to Israelite Bay, including Perth.
The strong cold front will pass over the south of the state today.
By midday, the potential for squally winds and damaging wind gusts will be over an area south from Bunbury to Corrigin to Esperance.
By late afternoon, the squally winds and damaging gusts will be confined to an area south of Walpole to Lake King to Israelite Bay.