Boat explosion in Bali injures 20, kills one
Twenty people were taken to hospital for injuries sustained in a boat explosion, which killed one other passenger, on Thursday, according to the Denpasar Port Health Office (KKP).
The explosion occurred at 9:35 a.m. local time just after the Gili Cat 2 speed boat departed from Padangbai Port in Karangasem, Bali, for several destinations, including Gili Trawangan in Lombok, West Nusa Tenggara.
KKP’s Padangbai office coordinator Putu Swardiana said the incident happened only 200 meters from Padangbai Port.
“Witnesses saw smoke emanating from an area near the boat’s engine. It was reported that a liquid tank exploded,” he told The Jakarta Post.
Putu further said the Gili Cat 2 was carrying 35 passengers, all were foreign citizens.
He said 15 victims were taken to Penta Medika clinic in Manggis village, Karangasem, around three kilometers from Padangbai Port. Five other passengers were taken to Manggis community health center (Puskesmas) while one other was rushed to Klungkung Hospital after sustaining a fractured backbone.
“One female passenger taken to Penta Medika clinic died. We have not yet identified the victim but it is suspected that she is a German citizen,” said Putu, adding that all victims at Penta Medika clinic had been referred to several hospitals in Denpasar.
Karangasem Police chief Adj. Sr. Comr. Sugeng Sudarso said police were currently investigating the cause of the incident. “The police’s forensic laboratory personnel have been dispatched to the incident’s site,” he said.
Four crew members were on board when the incident occurred. They comprised boat captain Totok Wasito, engineer Sugiarto and deckhands Nyoman Supartika and Kadek Kris. (ebf)
Under investigation: Police have sealed off the Gili Cat 2 speed boat after an explosion on the vessel injured 20 people and killed one on Sept. 15. (JP/Ni Komang Erviani)
Correction: The article's previous edition contained an error. We reported the name of the boat as the "Gini Cat 2". Its proper name is the "Gili Cat 2", which we have corrected. -Editor