Winter Storm Stella has moved out of the Northeast after dumping 3 to nearly 5 feet of snow in some areas, paralyzing several major cities, knocking out power out to half a million and crippling air travel for thousands.
A new top snow total was reported Thursday morning: The Bolton Valley Ski Area in the Green Mountains of northern Vermont east of Burlington reported a storm total of 58 inches of snow.
The powerful storm killed at least 16 people, grounded more than 6,000 flights and shut down several major cities, including New York City and Boston.
Airlines were working to return to normal operations Thursday.
Sixteen deaths have been attributed to the storm:
The storm prompted Gov. Andrew Cuomo to declare a state of emergency Tuesday for all of New York's 62 counties, including New York City. He also directed non-essential state employees to stay home from work, reports the AP.
Wednesday he announced that he is sending 100 large plows and 100 members of the National Guard to assist in snow removal in the state's southern tier region. 
The storm grounded more than 3,000 in the New York City area alone, stranding hundreds of passengers, and nearly all New York City mass transit systems had delays, suspensions and cancellations. Most returned to normal by Wednesday morning, although the Metro-North Railroad continues to operate on a modified schedule into and out of New York's Grand Central Terminal Wednesday as it recovers from the snowstorm, the AP reports.
Two homes under construction near the beach in the Far Rockaway section of Queens collapsed during the storm. No injuries were reported, the fire department told the AP.
Gov. Chris Christie declared a state of emergency Monday ahead of the storm. With plunging temperatures threatening to freeze roadways on Wednesday, Christie said he wanted the state to be prepared for the worst.
“I want the storm to be completely out of here before we lift the state of emergency,” Christie said.
Roughly 1,000 homes and businesses remained without power Wednesday night, according to AP. 
Parts of Atlantic City and other towns in southern New Jersey experienced significant tidal flooding. The tide reached 7.8 feet in Atlantic City Tuesday morning, just shy of the 8-foot threshold that can lead to major flooding. Route 322 in West Atlantic City was shut down, as were some smaller streets around the area, AP also reports.
A couple of wind gusts were clocked at 62 mph on the Jersey Shore, according to weather.com meteorologist Chris Dolce. 
(MORE: What to Know About Stella)
Icy conditions Wednesday caused a vehicle to slip off Route 1 near Creek Road and slam into a snow bank in Chads Ford Wednesday. Two people were injured, reports the AP.
On Tuesday, a 23-month-old child in need of a heart transplant was escorted on an 80-mile trip from East Stroudsburg to Danville by state snowplows and troopers through the storm, the governor said.
Several avalanches were reported, including one that shut down Route 92 in Wyoming County, according to emergency management. 
A day after the storm, about 19,000 National Grid customers in Massachusetts remain without power, reports the AP.
Around 40 percent of departures and 17 percent of arrivals were canceled at Bradley International Airport as of 6:30 a.m. Wednesday, according to masslive.com. 
"Passengers should check with their airline on their individual flight itineraries and rebooking options," airport officials said in a statement. 
In Hingham, a family of four was displaced after a tree fell and smashed through the roof of their house, according to CBS Boston. No one was hurt in the incident.
In Longmeadow, a Department of Public Works employee died after the truck he was driving was struck by an Amtrak plow train, 22News reported. Longmeadow Town Manager Stephen Crane told 22News the employee was clearing the road leading up to the tracks when the crash occurred.
Gov. Dannel P. Malloy lfted a statewide travel ban in the state Tuesday afternoon, according to CBS New York.  He said state agencies would re-open for business Wednesday and credited the travel ban with helping crews remove snow on state roads.
The governor also said there were 38 wrecks during the road travel ban.
Hundreds of school districts are closed in the state or opening late Wednesday, according to NBC Connecticut.
Virginia State Police spokeswoman Corinne Geller told the AP troopers responded to at least 150 crashes and disabled vehicles statewide. She says many of them were in northern Virginia. No serious injuries were reported.
Dominion Power reported more than 41,000 customers without power around the state, including more than 36,000 in the Richmond area.
About 8,500 National Grid customers found themselves without power Tuesday, and schools were closed throughout the state, reports the AP.
No one was hurt when high winds knocked over a state-owned wind turbine at a Narragansett beach.
Maryland State Police said troopers responded to 101 crashes, none serious. 
At the height of the storm, more than 20,000 homes were without power.
Before targeting the East, Stella wreaked havoc in the Midwest, killing two and causing hundreds of wrecks.
Nearly 70 vehicles were involved in collisions on Interstate 41 in Washington County Monday, WISN.com reports. There were five or six crashes in the southbound lanes, one of which involved 46 cars. Minor injuries were reported. 
Wisconsin officials also said 12 cars and five tractor-trailers were involved ina pileup Monday that occurred in the northbound lanes of I-43, WBAY.com reported. Three people had minor injuries, but no deaths were reported. The interstate was shut down between Highways 42 and 23 after the crash.
In Minnesota, more than 400 crashes were reported Sunday, one of which was a pileup that shut down Interstate 694 in Fridley.
In Iowa, snow-covered highways caused dozens of accidents in multiple counties, but no deaths were reported, according to the Associated Press.
More than 1.1 million Michigan DTE Energy customers lost power at the height of the storm.