Cyclone Debbie reaches category four, thousands in low-lying Mackay areas told to leave
Tropical Cyclone Debbie has intensified to category four and is expected to hit the north Queensland coast on Tuesday morning, the Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) has warned.
At 3:55am, the Bureau predicted Cyclone Debbie would make landfall as a category four tropical cyclone between Ayr and Cape Hillsborough, north of Mackay, late on Tuesday morning.
Destructive winds of more than 125 kilometres per hour were already occurring about the Whitsunday Islands, and thousands were without power in Cannonvale, Airlie Beach and parts of Mackay.
BOM forecaster Brett Harrison said Cyclone Debbie could reach category five.
"At this stage we can't rule out a category five system during the coming hours," he said.
Join ABC News on Facebook Messenger to follow breaking news on Cyclone Debbie.
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said it was "going to be a tough night".
"My priority is for Queenslanders to be safe, right up and down the coastal communities that are in the zone," she said.
"Please now reassure your children, go to the safest place in your house — the most secure.
"We are in the stage now where some communities are already in lockdown, so they should not move.
"I want to reassure you that in the daybreak once the storm has passed, we have emergency response personnel there ready to assist you and your families."
Ms Palaszczuk said the BOM had advised it could take up to 18 hours for the cyclone's core to pass.
"This is a destructive cyclone," she said.
"Please do not go outside, don't risk it, please don't risk your life or risk the life of a loved one — stay indoors."
Bruce Gunn from Emergency Management Queensland said the situation was changing rapidly.
"People in the path of the core of the cyclone can expect many, many hours of sheltering," he said.
"Remember that the lull in the winds may be the eye of the cyclone and the destructive winds will return from the opposite direction, so be very careful about going outside."
More than 25,000 people were advised to move from low-lying areas in Mackay by midnight, with fears incoming Cyclone Debbie could cause inundation of up to 2.5 metres above the high tide level.
The BOM has warned the storm will be the worst since Cyclone Yasi in 2011, and Ms Palaszczuk said it was "bigger than Marcia" — the category five system that hit Queensland in 2015.
Queensland Police Service Commissioner Ian Stewart said residents in Mackay's low-lying areas needed to be moved by midnight.
"The range of inundation may be as much as 0.8 metres above highest astronomical tide [HAT] or worst case scenario 2.5 metres above HAT," Commissioner Stewart said.
"We're asking people who can move out of those low-lying areas to move now.
"We'll do everything we can through the emergency service to try and support and assist residents ... we will also be getting messages to help the vulnerable."
Mackay Regional Mayor Greg Williamson said 25,000 text messages were sent out on Monday to residents in low-lying areas.
"The text says 'based on the latest information we're advising you to seek refuge with friends and relatives on higher ground'," Cr Williamson said.
"As a community we've been here before. Now it's up to us as a community to come together to make sure we're looking after one another, to make sure we get through this severe weather event that's just about on our doorstep."
Mr Williamson said it was not a forced evacuation.
"If you get this text you should seek refuge. We can't forcibly evacuate you but we're advising you this needs to happen," he said.
On Monday evening an emergency alert was issued by Mackay Regional Council that advised residents in the areas of North Pioneer, South Pioneer, Louisa Creek, Armstrong's Beach, Dunrock, Ball Bay, Freshwater Point, Grasstree, Half Tide and Seaforth to evacuate immediately.
Queensland Fire and Emergency Services (QFES) Commissioner Katarina Carroll said although the latest cyclone tracking map indicated Cyclone Debbie had moved south, residents in Townsville, Ingham, Cardwell and surrounding areas should not be complacent.
"Conditions have now deteriorated in some of the cyclone warning areas and soon it will be too late to leave your home," she said.
"If an official evacuation order has not been issued for your area, the best option is to stay indoors and shelter in place until the cyclone has passed.
"As the cyclone approaches, turn off all your electricity, gas and water and unplug all appliances, bring your family to the strongest part of the house and ensure your emergency kit is close by.
"If the building you're sheltering in begins to break up, immediately seek shelter under a strong table or bench or under a heavy mattress.
"Stay inside until you have received official advice that the cyclone has passed. Some people are not aware of the calm eye of the cyclone and mistakenly venture outside thinking that the threat has passed.
"Keep up to date with the movement and severity of the cyclone by listening to your local radio and watching the BOM website."