Hundreds of homes evacuated after Grenfell fire
Hundreds of residents of four London tower blocks have spent the night in emergency accommodation after they were told to leave their homes amid fire safety fears.
The blocks in Camden, north London, containing up to 800 households, were evacuated late last night following news that similar cladding was used on the Chalcots Estate to that which spread the Grenfell Tower fire in Kensington earlier this month.
Council leader Georgia Gould said that, following checks, insulation was found to be safe but external cladding on the blocks "was not up to the standard that we wanted and was not fire retardant".
She added that the "really, really difficult decision" had been made to evacuate the blocks while urgent fire safety work is completed.
It is thought the work will take three to four weeks.
"We realise that this is hugely distressing for everyone affected and we will be doing all we can, alongside the London Fire Brigade and other authorities, to support our residents at this difficult time," Ms Gould said.
"The Grenfell fire changes everything - we need to do everything we can to keep residents safe."
Ms Gould added: "I know this is difficult but...I don't believe we can take any risks with our residents' safety and I have to put them first.
"We know it's a scary time but we'll make sure they're safe."
Responding to mounting criticism over Camden's handling of the evacuation, Sajid Javid, the Communities and Local Government minister told Sky News: "After the Grenfell Tower tragedy, it is vital we carry out checks and make sure people are safe.
"The the local fire safety authority found alongside the cladding problem, which is a serious problem, multiple fire safety failures, including, for example, insulation of gas pipes, fire doors missing, plywood above doors and that's what makes Camden different and why the decision was made to evacuate."
Asked why non-cladding fire risks had not been picked up in previous checks, Mr Javid said: "I ask myself that question. These are multiple fire safety check failures. These are things ... that have nothing to do with the cladding, such as fire doors not being there, auto door closers not being there ... you even had with these towers situations where some of the internal walls were breached.
"You've asked a very good question as to why did this happen in the first place. Why, how could this building have passed fire safety checks? How could it have been given the green light when clearly there were breaches of the fire safety code?"
Mr Javid said there would have to be a long-term review of safety regulations, stating: "That has to happen. In a country like ours, one of the richest countries in the world, in the 21st century, these kind of things absolutely should not be happening." :: NHS told to check cladding on all buildings
By the early hours of Saturday many residents had been sent to a rest centre at Swiss Cottage Library before council workers allocate them accommodation in hotels or, if possible, with family and friends.
Around 83 people have refused to leave their homes, according to the council.
In a statement issued at 1.24am, a spokesman for Camden Council said: "So far we have secured hundreds of hotel beds for Chalcots residents.
"We're encouraging all residents to stay with friends and family if they can, otherwise we'll provide accommodation.
"Swiss Cottage rest centre is nearing capacity so we've secured more space at the Camden Centre King's Cross.
"Specialist staff are on the ground to assist residents with care needs. Pets are also welcome at both rest centres and hotel accommodation."
The Chalcots estate has five tower blocks - four 22 storey blocks and one 18 storey block. Blashford Tower, which is the shorter block, did not have to be evacuated as initially stated.
Taplow resident Shirley Phillips said she had no sleep on Friday night after she was unable to secure a place in a hotel.
She told Sky News: "They called me a few hours ago and said they had a hotel for me at the Holiday Inn in Camden Town. But when I got there they said there had been a mistake, someone else had taken the room.
"They say the earliest they can get me somewhere is tonight, but it's not 100%."
Other residents said the evacuation was an "over-reaction".
Edward Strange said: "We've had two fires here since the cladding was put on and both fires didn't spread so I don't see what the problem is.
:: Where has unsafe cladding been identified?
Bob O'Toole from the residents' association said he had only been told about the evacuation about an hour earlier, adding: "We want to keep the residents safe - we don't want any more disasters".
Fire safety expert Stephen MacKenzie told Sky News: "I think (the council has) done the sensible thing in this case.
"I'm at a loss as to why Theresa May has not convened (emergency committee) Cobra today to get emergency arrangements led by central government to support local authorities, to give the residents the necessary reassurance and address this issue."
A London Fire Brigade spokesperson said: "London Fire Brigade have been working at the Chalcots Estate with Camden Council. Following extensive joint visits and inspections the Brigade advised that there were a number of fire safety issues in the buildings and recommended that residents should not remain in the buildings until these issues are resolved.
"Camden Council have acted on this by evacuating and providing the residents with alternative accommodation so that remedial works can go ahead as quickly as possible.
"London Fire Brigade officers will continue to work with Camden to put in place measures to improve safety for residents in these buildings."