Magnitude-6.7 earthquake rocks Greece, Turkey, killing two people on island of Kos
A powerful magnitude-6.7 earthquake has killed two people, injured about 200 and caused a small tsunami after striking near Turkish and Greek tourist destinations in the Aegean Sea.
The quake, which struck at 1:31am local time (8:31am AEST), was located off the south-western coastal city of Marmaris in the Mugla province, according to the US Geological Survey (USGS).
It was close to two tourist hubs in Turkey, Bodrum and Datca, and the Greek island of Kos in the Dodecanese Islands archipelago.
On Kos, a wall collapsed on a building dating to the 1930s and crushed two men from Turkey and Sweden who were at the bar in the building's lower level.
Hundreds of revellers were in or near the popular White Corner Club in the old town of Kos when the building partially collapsed.
At least five other people were seriously injured as tourists and local residents scrambled out of buildings, some even leaping from balconies.
Five of the injured were being transported by helicopter to a hospital on the island of Crete, officials said.
Scottish scuba instructor Christopher Hackland described the frightening moment the earthquake hit.
"The instant reaction was to get ourselves out of the room," he said.
Hotels had broken glass and other damage, leaving hundreds of tourists to spend the rest of the night outdoors, resting on beach lounges with blankets provided by staff.
Other buildings damaged included an old mosque where a minaret collapsed and a 14th-century fortress at the entrance to the main port.
Kos Mayor Giorgos Kyritsis said the loss of the island's old buildings was a tragedy on its own.
"There are not many old buildings left on Kos. Nearly all the structures on the island have been built under the new codes to withstand earthquakes," .
The island's 'old town' area, which is full of bars, was littered with fallen bricks and other debris.
Several Greek Government ministers, as well as rescuers with sniffer dogs and structural engineers traveled to Kos overnight to coordinate the rescue effort.
In nearby Turkey, the quake caused cracks on walls of some buildings in the resort of Bodrum, flooded the lower floors of sea-front hotels and restaurants and sent moored boats crashing toward the shore.
Boat captain Metin Kestaneci, 40, told the private Dogan news agency that he was asleep on his vessel when the quake hit.
"There was first a noise and then a roar. Before I could ask 'what's happening?' my boat was dragged toward the shore. We found ourselves on the shore," Kestaneci said. "I've never experienced such a thing."
Turkish authorities said some 70 people were treated in hospitals in the resort of Bodrum for minor injuries, mostly sustained during panicked flight from their homes. But damage was light and they expect life will soon return to normal. With tourists continuing their holidays.
Rescuers were checking for trapped people inside houses after the quake struck in the middle of the night and were heading to outlying villages to check for damage.
Ferry services were cancelled until daylight because of damage to Kos's main port.
Turkish broadcaster NTV reported aftershocks were being felt in the region, with a magnitude-4.6 aftershock hitting at 8:52am.
European quake agency EMSC said a small tsunami in Bodrum was caused by the quake.
"This may hit other coasts in the area, better to leave beaches," it tweeted.
The USGS said the earthquake was very shallow, only 10 kilometres below the seabed.
Turkey's Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency (AFAD) said the temblor had a magnitude of 6.3, while local authorities said the quake was felt across the Aegean coast.
The area between the Arabian plate and Eurasian plate is prone to earthquakes.