Hurricane Harvey Makes Landfall Near Corpus Christi, Tex.
Because the storm was moving slowly, damage was expected to be more severe than if it had hit land at a faster clip. “Due to the slow motion of Harvey and a prolonged period of onshore flow,” the hurricane center said, “water levels will remain elevated for several days.”
Forecasters called it the first “major hurricane” to hit the United States in nearly 12 years. Among the damage that was expected to trail Hurricane Harvey: downed walls and power lines, roofless businesses and unanchored mobile homes. Electricity could be unavailable for weeks.
Up and down the 370-mile Texas coast — from Port Arthur to Brownsville — there were fears of the type of destruction left by hurricanes in Texas about a decade ago. Gov. Greg Abbott asked for federal help, and President Trump obliged late Friday by signing a disaster proclamation for the state.
Residents in the Corpus Christi area had spent much of the day scrambling to evacuate while the millions living in the Houston area were given contradictory guidance from the authorities on whether to leave or stay put.
Texas Medical Center, one of the largest medical complexes in the world, is in Houston, and officials there awaited the worst with a full complement of patients on site. “We are hunkered down,” said William McKeon, the center’s president and chief executive, speaking by phone from his office as the hurricane made landfall about 200 miles southwest of the city.
In nearby coastal Galveston, about 120 patients remained at the University of Texas Medical Branch’s Jennie Sealy Hospital on Friday night, said Chris Smith-Gonzalez, a media relations officer. The hospital opened last year and was “built to withstand a significant hurricane,” he said, after Hurricane Ike caused severe damage to the former medical campus in 2008.
Refineries in the Houston and Beaumont-Port Arthur areas, both nerve centers for the nation’s energy industry, shut down operations in preparation for the storm, sending jitters through global energy markets.
To be called a major storm, a hurricane must be Category 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson scale, which means winds of 111 to 129 m.p.h. Those winds can bring devastating damage, stripping off roof decking and bringing down many trees. Ike was a Category 2, though it pushed a monster storm surge. Sandy, despite the devastation it caused, had become what is known as a post-tropical storm before it made landfall.