Mumbai building collapse leaves 33 dead, nearly a dozen others possibly buried
Rescuers have worked through the night, removing the rubble of a collapsed apartment building in Mumbai, where at least 33 people have died and nearly a dozen others may still be buried.
Fire officer Prabhat Kumar said 15 injured survivors were pulled from the debris.
Nearly a dozen others were missing and feared trapped beneath the huge mound of broken concrete slabs and twisted steel girders after the building collapsed in India's financial capital.
Rescuers used earth-moving machines to lift concrete slabs and cement blocks as they searched for survivors.
The rickety 117-year-old, five-story building in the congested Bhendi Bazaar in south Mumbai was declared unsafe to live in six years ago, but people continued to stay there.
The residents of an adjacent building were advised to leave after it developed cracks.
The building had housed nine families in apartments above a first-floor nursery school, but the collapse on Thursday morning occurred before the toddlers had arrived for the day, police said.
It was the first major building collapse after Mumbai recorded 315 millimetres of rainfall on Tuesday, the city's highest since 2005.
Thousands of buildings in Mumbai are more than a century old, their foundations weakened by years of heavy monsoon rains.
The collapse of a four-story building in the city's suburb of Ghatkopar last month killed 17.
Building collapses are common in India during the monsoon season, which is June to September.
High demand and lax regulations encourage some builders to use substandard materials or add unauthorised extra floors.
Property prices and rents in Mumbai are among the highest in India as the city has expanded in the past five decades.
The city is slowly returning to normal after being paralysed by heavy downpours for two days.
Since the start of the season, devastating floods across South Asia have killed at least 1,000 people and affected close to 40 million across northern India, southern Nepal and northern Bangladesh.