Storm blamed for three deaths in Caribbean
(CNN)Hurricane Irma -- one of the strongest storms ever recorded in the Atlantic -- hammered Puerto Rico on Wednesday night after smashing a string of small northern Caribbean islands where at least three people were killed.
CNN's Leyla Santiago, in the Puerto Rican capital of San Juan, said there were 900,000 customers without power as strong winds lashed the island. Officials told her there were several rescues because of flooding but there were no immediate reports of injuries in the US territory of about 3.4 million people.
Gov. Ricardo Rosselló told CNN he thinks the island was being hit hard even though the eye of the storm stayed off shore.
"From the center of operations that we have over here in San Juan, there is pretty significant damage already done," he said, citing wind gusts of more than 100 mph.
The outer bands of the storm continued to whip heavy rain upon the island late Wednesday.
-- At least two people died and two others were seriously injured in the islands of St. Barts and St. Martin, French Overseas Affairs Minister Annick Girardin said. An infant died in Barbuda, where as many as 95% of structures were damaged, Prime Minister of Antigua and Barbuda Gaston Browne told CNN's "Anderson Cooper 360˚."
-- On Thursday the storm will move very near or over the Turks and Caicos, with catastrophic damage likely. The storm will also pass just north of the Dominican Republic and Haiti, bringing hurricane force winds to northern sections of the island, with flooding and mudslides probable.
On Tortola, the largest of the British Virgin Islands, Kennedy Banda said fierce winds blew out the windows of his home. He and his family were taking shelter in a bathroom; he said he was bracing his body against the door in an attempt to keep it shut.
Stacy-Ann Taylor, whose husband works at a hotel in St. Maarten, stayed there during the storm with their two children. When the storm winds started blowing hard in the middle of the night, they went into the hallway, as did a bunch of other hotel guests.
Mayo was there on a business trip. "It is pouring down rain. It is howling," she told CNN. "Most people are either in their bathroom, or they've been moved downstairs to the third floor where management thinks is a very, very safe spot."
Workers at five gas stations in Miami Beach told CNN by phone Wednesday that all were out of fuel. One said the station expected to receive more Wednesday night; another said a resupply was coming Thursday morning.