Mont Blanc avalanche kills 9: British victim Roger Payne pictured in French Alps
A British mountain guide was among nine climbers killed by the ‘deadliest avalanche in years’ in the French Alps yesterday.
Roger Payne, 55, who wrote a training programme on avoiding avalanches, was one of three Britons swept more than 600ft to their deaths by a huge wall of snow.
The victims were part of a group of 28 experienced climbers who had been attempting one of the most dangerous ascents in Europe to reach the summit of Mont Blanc.
The climbers were hit by a 60ft high and 500ft wide wall of snow as they climbed 14,649ft Mont Maudit – which translates as ‘cursed peak’ – to reach Mont Blanc. Police in the nearby town of Chamonix confirmed that three Germans, two of them women, two Spanish and one Swiss victim were among the dead.
Nine others were airlifted to hospital with broken bones, dislocations and deep cuts.
Last night two other British climbers who had been missing feared dead walked into Chamonix police station. By nightfall all the climbers on the trip had been accounted for.
Dramatic pictures taken minutes after the disaster by mountaineer Klemen Gricar show injured climbers huddled under survival blankets awaiting rescue. Mr Gricar, a guide who works for the British-run company Mountain Tracks, was part of a following group and was one of the first on the scene.
He said: ‘I saw people coming down the mountain from the accident. Some of them were bleeding and there were bad injuries – dislocated shoulders, broken legs. There were dead people as well, it was a horrible accident. We helped the injured climbers and mountain guides but the conditions were difficult. It was clear but there were very strong winds.’
Expert mountaineer Klemen Gricar took these pictures of climbers waiting to be rescued from Mont Maudit just minutes after the avalanche
He said the climbers had been roped together on very short ropes because of the nature of the climb, so ‘wouldn’t have been able to do much’ when the avalanche hit.
Climber Cesar Gonzalez, 35, was 100 yards away when the avalanche fell. The web designer from Madrid said: ‘We heard some crying and when we got up the slope we looked down and saw there had been an avalanche.
‘We could see maybe five or six bodies in the snow, and six or seven people with broken arms or legs. No one who was there had escaped injury, though some only had cuts on their faces and were walking around.’
British mountaineer Kenton Cool, based in Chamonix, said: ‘It would have been a huge wave of snow. The climbers making their way up the slope would have had no chance.’
French rescuers believe the disaster unfolded after one of the lead climbers dislodged a bank of snow.
The 28 climbers, who had split into two groups, had spent Wednesday evening sleeping at Cosmiques Refuge, a climbers’ hut at 11,800ft.
They left the hut at 1.30am and began their ascent in temperatures of minus 5C (23F).
When they left there were no weather reports warning of avalanche risks, officials say. However gusts of wind of up to 43mph may have created huge walls of snow, known as wind slabs, which are extremely dangerous when they collapse.
The group were trying to climb up a steep snow-covered ridge on the north face of Mont Maudit at 13,120ft when the avalanche struck. One of the injured climbers called the emergency services on his mobile phone at 5.25am.
Another local guide said that some of the injured were dug out of the snow ‘very quickly’ by the first rescue teams on the scene.
One of the first to arrive was a British guide Victor Saunders and his doctor client. They had left two hours later than the avalanched party after the guide expressed concerns about the weather. They gave first aid to the survivors and alerted the rescue services.
Rescue: A helicopter from the Securite Civile (emergency services) flies over the Mont Blanc massif as investigators look for those stranded in the avalanche
More than 50 mountain rescuers and police using teams of dogs and heat-seeking devices spent the day searching the snow in an attempt to find any bodies buried. Teams of rescuers from across the border in Italy joined the search.
Last night members of the close-knit climbing community were paying their respects to Mr Payne, 55, and the other climbers.
Dave Turnbull, chief executive of the British Mountaineering Club, said Mr Payne was a former BMC general secretary and president of the British Mountain Guides.
‘Roger was one of the UK’s most enthusiastic and respected climbers with a track record of Alpine and Himalayan mountaineering stretching back to the 1980s,’ he said. ‘Our thoughts are with Roger’s friends and family, in particular his wife Julie-Ann.’ John Cousins, from the British Mountain Guides Association, said: ‘He was such an energetic character. He really was a truly remarkable and amazing individual.’
Mr Payne, originally from Hammersmith in West London, was an expert guide with an intimate knowledge of the Alpine range.
The climber, who lived in Leysin, Switzerland, with his wife, also a mountaineer, had been on 20 expeditions to some of the world’s highest and most challenging peaks.
His avalanche training programme is used to teach hundreds of students each year.
Last night members of the British Foreign Office arrived in Chamonix to offer assistance.
The two British climbers who escaped had taken a different route, said Sir Peter Ricketts, the British Ambassador to France, who last night arrived in Chamonix to offer assistance. A local official added: ‘They were part of the original party but for some reason they changed their minds. They must have had some premonition.’
One of the dead Spanish climbers was Joaquin Aguado, a 51-year-old father of two who was an experienced climber and head of the fire services mountain rescue team at Madrid national park. In a bizarre twist of fate he and another Spanish victim had swapped places with two fellow countrymen to take part in the ill-fated trip.
The avalanche is the worst to hit the Chamonix community since 1999 when 12 were killed in their chalets in Montroc.
VIDEO: Rescue operation to save the climbers from the mountain side