Several areas in MM, Luzon under state of calamity
MANILA, Philippines (UPDATE) – Several cities in Metro Manila and nearby provinces in Luzon are now under a state of calamity following the non-stop rains and floods the past few days.
Officials have declared a state of calamity in the provinces of Pampanga, Zambales, Bataan and Laguna; the cities of Marikina, Manila, Pasay, Pasig, Pateros, San Juan, Malabon, Navotas and Valenzuela, and the municipalities of Cainta, Rodriguez and San Mateo in Rizal province.
In Pampanga, nearly 200 barangays in 18 towns of the province are still flooded and rescue operations continue for affected residents. Three people were reported to have died in Lubao, Candaba and Florida-blanca at the height of the rains on Tuesday.
In Angeles City, residents living near Abacan River were evacuated.
In Cainta, Rizal, the local government sounded the alarm to warn residents of the rising level of flood water while search and rescue operations continue for its affected residents.
Nearly 2,500 residents from five barangays have been evacuated. While some refuse to leave saying the flooding is not as bad as Ondoy, there are many who have sought refuge in schools that turned into evacuation centers.
In Malabon, rescuers called for more help to assist them in rescuing residents still trapped inside their houses.
Local disaster officials said they are continuously receiving distress calls from residents asking to be rescued as a large portion of the city's 17 barangays remain underwater.
At least 2,093 families or 12,870 residents remain inside 29 evacuation centers as of 8 a.m. Wednesday.
In Bataan, a total of 9,935 families or about 52,312 individuals were affected by the flooding in province.
All major roads in Bataan are now passable, but three barangays are still isolated and are being monitored.
Residents are still waiting for relief operations.
In Bulacan, the town of Marilao is now underwater, according to Mayor Epifanio Guillermo.
In Pangasinan, the body of a woman between 70 to 80 years old was found floating in waters off San Jacinto, according to Gov. Amado Espino.
The floods affected around 30,000 families and left the towns of Calasiao, Pilar, Bugallon and Sta. Barbara submerged in water.
Espino said that a storm surge also occurred in Aguilar and Bugallon that caused several fish ponds to overflow.
The governor added that all major roads in the province are now passable.
Meanwhile, five areas in the Cordillera are being closely monitored for possible landslide. These are Ambassador, Tublay and Little Kibunga in La Trinidad; Ampucao in Itogon, Benguet; Barangay Kias in Baguio City; and Bulalacao Mancayan, Benguet.
Some of the residents in the said areas voluntarily left their homes and have sought temporary refuge in the homes of their relatives.
The Department of Public Works and Highways in Cordillera Region closed the Abra-Kalinga road in the Malibcong Section, but all roads leading to Baguio City are open to motorists. Reports from ANC, ABS-CBN and dzMM