Deadly earthquake hits northern Burma
As many as 12 people feared dead as mines and bridge collapse in magnitude 6.8 quake a week before Barack Obama's visit
A strong earthquake struck northern Burma on Sunday, leaving as many as 12 people feared dead.
An official from the meteorological department in the capital, Naypyitaw, said the magnitude 6.8 quake struck at 7.42am local time. The area surrounding the epicentre is a centre for mining of minerals and gemstones, and several mines were reported to have collapsed.
The biggest single death toll was reported by an administrative officer in Sintku township, who said six people had died there and another 11 were injured. He said some of the dead were miners who were killed when a gold mine collapsed.
According to news reports, several people died when a bridge under construction across the Irrawaddy river east of the town of Shwebo collapsed. The bridge linked Sinku on the east bank of the Irrawaddy with Kyaukmyaung to the west.
The website of Weekly Eleven magazine said four people were killed and 25 injured when the bridge fell. The local government announced a toll of two dead and 16 injured. All of the victims appeared to be workers. A police officer in Shwebo said one person was confirmed dead from the bridge's collapse, and five were unaccounted for.
Weekly Eleven also said two monasteries in Kyaukmyaung collapsed, killing two people.
"This is the worst earthquake I felt in my entire life," said Soe Soe, a 52-year-old Shwebo resident. She said the huge concrete gate of a local monastery collapsed and several sculptures from another pagoda in the town were damaged.
A resident of Naypyitaw, 225 miles south of the quake's epicentre, said several window panes of the parliament building had broken. The quake was felt in Bangkok, the capital of neighbouring Thailand.
It comes a week before a scheduled visit to Burma by Barack Obama. He will be the first US president to visit the one-time pariah nation, which is emerging from decades of military rule.