UK snow: Schools and transport hit by disruption
More than 3,000 schools have been closed in England and Wales as a band of heavy snow affects most of the UK.
Transport is disrupted with flights at Heathrow, Bristol and Southampton airports cancelled and hazardous conditions reported on many roads.
Heavy snow is falling in Wales, where a rare Met Office red warning for severe disruption has been issued.
There is an amber warning for Northern Ireland and most of England, with snow also due in parts of Scotland.
There have been widespread school closures in England with over 500 in Hampshire and the Isle of Wight, and 300 in Norfolk, while 300 schools and colleges have been closed in Gloucestershire. In Wales, 1,200 schools have been closed.
The Met Office's red warning for snow, which is unusual and means all non-essential travel should be avoided, applies to the south-eastern side of the Brecon Beacons and Black Mountains until 21:00 GMT on Friday.
Red warning areas could see up to 30cm (12 ins) of snow and blizzards.
Amber severe weather warnings, which mean be prepared for disruption and only travel if necessary, are also in place until at least 21:00 GMT across large parts of central, western and southern England and Wales, as well as Northern Ireland.
BBC Weather said Northern Ireland would experience rain early on Friday, which would turn to snow during the course of the day, with between 10cm and 15cm expected in most areas and about 20cm over hills.
BBC weather forecaster Mike Silverstone said much of England and Wales would experience between 5cm and 15cm of snow on Friday, whereas Northern Ireland could see up to 20cm (8 ins) by Saturday morning.
The snow is expected to ease off later on Friday, although it is set to remain in eastern areas, forecasters said.
He added it was likely to stay very cold over the weekend, with snow likely to be confined to Scotland, north-eastern England and Northern Ireland on Saturday.
The Highways Agency has put road ploughs and snow blowers on stand-by to clear major routes.
Steve Crosthwaite, who heads the agency's National Traffic Operations Centre, urged drivers to allow more time for travel.
He added: "During periods of severe weather we also suggest people consider whether their journey is essential."
RAC spokesman Simon Williams said reaching stranded motorists was now a "real challenge".
"In order to deal with an expected increase in calls for assistance later in the day, we have also put every technically qualified engineer normally based in the office back out on the road again in patrol vehicles," he said.
Passengers travelling to Heathrow and London City airports have been advised to check the status of their flight before travelling to the airport.
For more information on the weather and transport situation in your area, visit the BBC Weather website and BBC Travel News.