Deadly storms roar across Midwest, South – USATODAY.com
LOUISVILLE, Ky. – A series of tornadoes that cut a swath of death and destruction across at least 10 states left stunned residents digging through rubble Saturday, looking for survivors and bodies.
The death toll stood at 32 early Saturday, including 14 each in Kentucky and Indiana, three in Ohio and one in Alabama. Tornadoes also were reported in Mississippi, Tennessee, Illinois, Georgia, North Carolina, and Virginia.
Massive thunderstorms threw off scores of tornadoes, crushing entire blocks of homes, ripping down power lines and tossing cars, buses and trucks on roadways made impassable by debris. The scale of the devastation and the breadth of the storms made it impossible to immediately assess the storm system's damage.
At least four people were killed in and around the town of Chelsea in Jefferson County, Ind. First responders found a 4-year-old boy and his great-grandparents lying on the ground 50 feet from where the elderly couple's home was blown off its foundation and thrown more than 100 feet.
"All of this happened in less than 30 seconds," said volunteer firefigthter Cory Thomas.
In Marysville, Ind., most of the several dozen homes that make up the town were destroyed.
"Marysville is completely gone," Clark County Sheriff's Maj. Chuck Adams said.
Kentucky declared a state of emergency, and Indiana officials said they were discussing that. Authorities in Ohio planned to survey areas Saturday to determine the extent of the damage there.
The storm outbreak has the potential to be the USA's largest ever recorded in March, Weather Channel severe storm expert Greg Forbes said. As of Saturday morning, the Storm Prediction Center had received 95 reports of tornadoes from Friday across the central and southern USA.
Including the tornado reports, there were more than 700 reports of severe weather in all on Friday and Friday night, AccuWeather meteorologist Bill Deger reported.
In Henryville, Ind., the birthplace of Kentucky Fried Chicken, the storm cut a wide swath, destroying homes and businesses in its path. Hail driven by storm winds riddled the sides of several buildings like gunfire, leaving holes in siding and breaking windows.
Schools sustained extensive damage as children were supposed to be dismissed from school. Teachers and staff kept many inside in bathrooms, hoping to protect them from the storm.
Indiana State Police Sgt. Jerry Goodin said no students were reported missing or injured.
Endre Samu, public affairs office for the Kentucky State Police in Morehead, said three people were dead in West Liberty and at least 75 injured.
"All of the downtown area was just devastated," he said. Samu said West Liberty's hospital was damaged in the storm and some patients were being transferred to area hospitals.
In Marysville, Leon Gilbert counted himself one of the more fortunate residents as he arrived home from work to find the back wall of his home missing and the roof partially collapsed.
"It's just a bad deal . . . but the main thing is everybody's alive," Gilbert said.
"We knew this was coming. We were watching the weather like everyone else," Clark County Sheriff Danny Rodden said. "This was the worst-case scenario. There is no way you can prepare for something like this."