Powerful Storms Cut Across Southern and Midwestern States
Rescue workers in southern Indiana were still sifting through mountains of debris from demolished homes and buildings this morning to look for more victims from Friday’s deadly tornadoes, which killed at least 31 people in Indiana, Kentucky and Ohio.
Hardest hit were small, rural towns in southern Indiana, including Henryville and Marysville, about 20 miles north of Louisville, Ky.
Shortly after the storm hit, this amateur video showed the extent of the damage in Marysville, a town of about 1,900 people.
But Alex Campell, a reporter for the Indianapolis Star who is postinglive updates on TwitterSaturday from Marysville, noted that some buildings remained standing, including the post office.
In New Pekin, another small town nearby, where several fatalities were reported, raw amateur video uploaded onto YouTube shows the enormous funnel cloud as it approached.
A motorist, Chad Hinton, driving along Indiana 60 on Friday afternoon also captured video of the large funnel cloud as it touched down in Borden, Ind.
As my colleague, Kim Severson reports, the powerful storms on Friday stretched from northern Alabama into south-central Indiana.
By midafternoon on Friday, the authorities were deeply concerned about the unusually large tornado churning through south-central Indiana.
School officials in Henryville decided to dismiss students early, but some school bus drivers, seeing the huge funnel cloud approach, raced back to the junior-senior high school to seek cover. School officials said about 40 people huddled in the center of the building, sprawled on the floor as the powerful storm ripped the building apart.
Raw aerial videofrom the WLKY-TV news helicopter of Henryville High School showed the roof almost completely torn off the school in the town of about 3,000 people.
The Facebook page of Jacob Wycoff, a meteorologist, included photos of the damage in Marysville.
Photographs from The Courier Journal showed the extent of the damage.
Two days after tornadoes killed 13 people in the Midwest, including six in Harrisburg, Ill., the violent storm activity on Friday began in Alabama in the morning around the Huntsville area.
In late morning, local news organizations in the Huntsville area described a powerful line of storms that sent at least a half-dozen people to the hospital, ripped off the roof of a state prison and leveled homes before moving northeast into Tennessee, where the suburbs of the Chattanooga area were particularly hard hit.
A Twitter user shot this image from her car as tornadoes and storms ripped through northeastern Alabama.
Adam Henry, a journalist who lives in northern Alabama and whose Twitter handle is @viewofadam, shared multiple photos of the damage, including one of a tree that also landed near his home.
The Huntsville Times reported that 300 inmates from the Limestone Correctional Facility were in temporary housing because of damage from the storm.
In Tennessee, storms caused the most damage in the suburbs of Chattanooga, the authorities said. The Chattanooga Times Free Press published a map on its Web site that showed where the tornado had touched down. In the Harrison area, the newspaper reported that six to eight people were seriously injured and about 20 homes were torn from their foundations.