Piedras Negras, Coahuila, Mexico devastated by June 15th flood
The City of Piedras Negras, Coahuila, Mexico was devastated by the June 14-15, 2013 flood affecting between 40,000-50,000 residents, approximately 30-35% of its city residents, with more than 62 residential subdivisions flooded, announced Piedras Negras Mayor Oscar Lopez Elizondo.
A record 17 inches of rainfall during a 36 hour period caused all the creeks, streets, Rio Grande River, San Joaquin River, Escondido River, and the San Antonio River to crest above their banks and flooding every subdivision adjacent to them as well as many business and industrial parks suffering massive flooding.
One subdivision close to the Rio Grande River in northern Piedras Negras, Coahuila known as “Las Malvinas” remains flooded with over three feet of water destroying every home and property inside these homes leaving its residents homeless and despondent as emergency relief is unavailable to service every resident of Piedras Negras and this subdivision. Yesterday, residents of Las Malvinas subdivision protested because emergency relief has not reached this subdivision and bypassed its residents enroute to other nearby subdivisions. A Mexican military emergency relief convoy delivering emergency supplies to other subdivisions was jeered and rocked by residents of Las Malvinas who had grown upset for not receiving any relief from local, state, or federal authorities.
According to Mexican news reports, one open surface coal mine named Tajo Zacatoza/Norte operating near the banks of the Rio Grande River in northern Piedras Negras, Coahuila flooded causing its coal mining company to pump out the water from its open coal mining pits.
The City of Piedras Negras, Coahuila, Mexico is on the United States-Mexico border opposite its sister city of Eagle Pass, Texas, which it too sustained significant flooding damages, has a population between 150,000-175,000.
A total of 62 or more subdivisions in Piedras Negras, Coahuila report suffering heavy flooding and damages from the June 15th flood. Many subdivisions have received little or no emergency relief from local, state, or federal authorities. Authorities are working diligently to bring emergency relief, water, and food to its over 40,000 residents affected by the flood waters.
Many public and private schools had to close down despite the school year coming to an end in a few weeks as a result of the damages sustained from the June 15th flood as well as many teachers and students homes were affected and are busy trying to clean up their own properties. Although federal authorities are seeking to reopen public schools, most of the public schools are inoperable due to the heavy damages caused by the flooding.
The City of Piedras Negras, Coahuila is no stranger to flooding as it sits on the banks of the Rio Grande River on the U.S.-Mexico border but this community was caught unprepared by this sudden downpour of more than 17 inches of rain over a day and a half of severe thunder storms and subsequent extreme flooding. No rain has fallen on this community since Sunday, June 16th, and sunny skies are expected for the remainder of the week.