3 dead, pilgrims stranded as rain lashes Uttarakhand
As incessant rains continued across Uttarakhand in the last 48-hour, hundreds of pilgrims got stranded on the Char Dham route (Badrinath, Kedarnath, Gangotri, Yamunotri) due to landslides and at least three people lost their lives due to collapse of a house in Dehradun.
In an advisory, the state government asked people to refer to information on weather condition before visiting. A 24x7 control room has been set up in the Chief Minister's Office to monitor the situation in districts where rivers are above the danger mark.
"We are in constant touch with officers in Uttarkashi, Rudra Prayag and Chamoli districts. As per our initial reports, two bridges were swept away in Chamoli district. One person was swept away in Pithoragarh district. There is report of seven deaths due to the incessant rains," said Amit Negi, incharge of the control room in the state secretariat. According to him, several rivers are flowing above danger mark at various points in the state. "We have alerted Haridwar district administration regarding possible damage in the wake of the rivers flowing above danger marks," Negi said.
The government has asked the DMs of various districts to set up rescue camps in their areas. "At least 100 persons have taken shelter in camps in Uttarkashi district. The administration is in touch with the local units of ITBP and BSF," Negi added. He said a proper assessment of the damage would be done on Monday. "It is difficult for the local administration to collect report about the situation in remote villages of hill areas," he said.
On being contacted, Anand Sharma, director (weather, Dehradun), said Dehradun city has seen record a rainfall. "We recorded 220mm rainfall at 8.30 am. This was in the last 24 hours. Dehradun recorded 188mm rainfall way back in June 1925," Sharma told The Indian Express over phone. He said the rains would continue till June 17. He added that the state's disaster management cell had been informed about the situation.
Please read our before posting comments
indianexpress.comindianexpress.com TERMS OF USE: The views expressed in comments published on indianexpress.com are those of the comment writer's alone. They do not represent the views or opinions of The Indian Express Group or its staff. Comments are automatically posted live; however, indianexpress.com reserves the right to take it down at any time. We also reserve the right not to publish comments that are abusive, obscene, inflammatory, derogatory or defamatory.