Driver Was ‘Out For Blood’ In Venice Boardwalk Crash That Killed 1, Injured 11 « CBS Los Angeles
VENICE (CBSLA.com) — Witnesses said a driver purposely and methodically plowed into crowds of people on the Venice Boardwalk Saturday evening killing at least one person.
Two people were seriously hurt, 2 more were critically injured.
The accident was reported just after 6 p.m. Saturday.
The crash occurred near 1 Dudley Avenue, according to LA Fire Department spokesman Brian Humphrey.
At least eight other people sustained minor injuries.
Witnesses told police the driver seemed to be in control of the vehicle.
Louisa Hodge, reporting for KCAL9, said witnesses told her the driver seemed to be deliberately trying to hit people.
She reported seeing many “people being brought out on stretchers. I saw people with blood all over their legs.”
She quoted one witness as saying “The driver was out for blood.” She quoted other witnesses who said the driver was going 60 mph and that others told her the man was driving “with intent.”
Unconfirmed reports from the scene said one of the critically injured is believed to be a child as young as 4-years-old.
“It was a solo vehicle versus multiple pedestrians on the Venice Boardwalk,” Humphrey said.
He added that one man was in “grave condition, a man is fighting for his life.” It is believed that the man with grave injuries was the person who died.
Police later confirmed the driver fled the vehicle and was wanted for felony hit-and-run.
At 10 p.m., police told KCAL9’s Rachel Kim that a suspect was in custody and being questioned. In an abundance of caution, the LAPD’s Counter-Terrorism Unit also responded to the scene.
Kim spoke to several people who witnessed the crash.
“This guy had an intent to create mayhem and massacre a lot of people,” said Dave Blackburn.
“It was horrific. People flying everywhere. It looked like something out of a movie,” said Elizabeth Adams.
Meanwhile, KCAL9’s Brittney Hopper spoke to Aaron Mason, a man who was hit by the vehicle causing an injury to his leg. Mason is visiting LA from England.
He told Hopper he refused medical treatment on the scene because there were “so many people” with injuries a lot more severe than his.
Send your pics and videos of the scene to streetteam@cbs.com