Six Dead and Nine Injured in Toll Road Collision; Rock Star's Son Involved
“The police must also hold Dhani, as the parent, accountable and he can also be detained for his part in causing the deaths of other people,” Neta said in a press release on Sunday.
Neta alleged that Dhani had bought a car for his underage son and allowed him to drive.
“In this case, Dhani may face criminal charges for causing the deaths of other people, which carries a sentence of up to five years in jail. As such, the police can immediately detain him,” Neta said.
Ahmad Abdul Qodir Jaelani, known as Dul, was allegedly driving a Mitsubishi Lancer sedan on the Jagorawi toll road between Bogor and Jakarta when he apparently lost control of the vehicle at 1.45 a.m. on Sunday.
The car crashed through the separating fence and collided with a Daihatsu Gran Max with 13 occupants, which in turn collided with a Toyota Avanza. Six people died and nine were injured during the crash.
Neta said Dul could be charged for multiple violations such as driving before reaching the legal age limit, driving without a driver’s license and for negligence that led to the death of the other people.
The IPW called on parents to be responsible for their children and not spoil them.
“Those who are financially well off should be able to watch their children so that they don’t cause the deaths of other people,” Neta said.
“Families of victims and those whose cars were damaged can file criminal and civil charges against Dul and his father,” he said.
Seto Mulyadi, a child psychologist who is also an advisor for the National Commission for Child Protection, explained that there was a reason for the age limit.
“Psychologically, children below 17 years of age are still impulsive, easily provoked and thus not allowed to drive, whether a two-wheel or four-wheel vehicle because they pose a danger to themselves and to others,” Seto was quoted as saying by Detik.com on Sunday.
He said the incident also showed that socialization by both law enforcers and families about traffic regulations were low, allowing people to believe they can violate rules with impunity. Seto called on the police to intensify law enforcement against those violating traffic regulations.
Beyond enforcing legal age limits, police are also responsible for enforcing safe numbers of passengers per vehicle and working safety belts in order limit the fatalities in accidents. The Daihatsu Gran Max was reportedly overloaded.
“Parents can also be blamed for condoning this behavior, which led to the child to commit this act.”
Seto highlighted that the environment plays a pivotal role in forming a child’s behavior.
“We also need to see the child’s environment at school, at home, his family. Such behavior [of children illegally driving] could stem from a model in their environment. It could be the same in certain environments, such as with celebrities, children of officials or police,” he said.
Data from the Jakarta Police showed that the number of traffic accidents caused by children below the age of 16 years soared by 160 percent last year, from 40 cases in 2011.
Such numbers indicate that minors are acting without intervention from their parents.
Data from the Jakarta Police Traffic Corps divided the ages of traffic violators into six groups with the age group below 16 recording the highest increase.
The number of accidents caused by people in the 22-30 year-old age group only rose by 8.53 percent, while other age groups recorded a decline between 2 and 6 percent.
A sharp decline in traffic violations was recorded by the 31-40 age group, which fell by 5.74 percent.
Minors contributed 1.72 percent to accidents out of a total of 6,064 that occurred last year in Jakarta and surrounding areas. The age group between 22 and 30 years was the biggest contributor with 33.13 percent.
On the other hand, the number of children who became accident victims dropped sharply by 27.98 percent, especially those between the ages of 1 and 10. Children who are accident victims make up 4.04 percent of the total accident victims, the lowest among the six age groups.
Last year, the number of accident
victims in the Jakarta area reached 10,003 people, down slightly by 2.06 percent compared to the figure from the previous year.
Adj. Cmr. Agung Budi Laksono, head of the East Jakarta Police traffic accidents unit, said Dul could be charged with traffic law violations and he could face six years in prison.
“He could be charged under article 310 of the 2002 traffic law for negligent driving which prescribes a term of six years in
prison,” Agung said. “Especially because he is still underage. But we are still investigating the accident thoroughly.”
Sr. Cmr. Rikwanto, a Jakarta Police spokesman, said under the Child Protection Act No. 23/2002, Article 13, a minor is afforded certain legal protections.
He said the sanction will likely be imposed on the child’s parent if the parent was guilty of failing to watch their children or for protecting children who committed violations.
“Under the child protection law, the child gets legal protection. He will still be questioned but with a different treatment,” Rikwanto said on Sunday.
Rikwanto also confirmed that the person behind the wheel and who caused the crash was definitely Dul.
“The driver of the Mitsubishi Lancer was Abdul Qodir. There were two people in the car, Abdul and Noval. Both are seriously injured,” Rikwanto said.
He added that the police were still investigating the cause of the accident, including the car’s speed when it slammed into the separating fence and crashed into the two other cars.
“The speed the car’s was traveling at before the accident is still unknown.”
Rikwanto said the Lancer was apparently coming from Bogor and it was on the way to Jakarta when the driver lost control and hit the separating fence.
He added that the accident was likely due to the driver’s lack of concentration.
“Because [the driver] was not concentrating, his car hit the separating fence, crossed into oncoming traffic and hit a Daihatsu Gran Max with 13 people in it, which was pushed into a [Toyota] Avanza,” he said.
Dhani, who was at the hospital, told reporters that his son was traumatized by the accident. He added that Dul also sustained a leg fracture.
“Dul is still traumatized. Dul’s right leg was also broken. He also sustained bruises on his head,” Dhani said.
He explained that the accident occurred after Dul dropped off his girlfriend at her home.
“During the incident, Dul was with his friend N. [Noval]. Prior to that, Dul dropped off his girlfriend at her home. He usually takes a driver with him but at the time of the incident, he drove himself,” the musician said.
According to Dhani, the accident occurred after his son tried to avoid a collision with another vehicle driving in front of his car.
“Dul tried to avoid a car in front and he swerved to the right and hit the separating fence,” Dhani said.