NSW bushfires: properties destroyed, man dies amid worst fires in a decade
Today is a much quieter day than yesterday but this is a fire emergency which could go on for quite some time.
There are hundreds of people who are grieving the loss of property, tragically there has been it seems one life lost further north, someone who was defending his house. We grieve for everyone impacted by these fires, and we thank and congratulate everyone who is working to keep the state of NSW safe right now.
We've had hundreds of police, we've had hundreds of NSW fire brigade workers, and we've had literally thousands of Rural Fire Brigade volunteers and state emergency services volunteers out over the last 24 hours.
These are ordinary people, who on extraordinary days come together to support their community and to protect their fellow australians. We are incredibly lucky to have them. We're also lucky to have supportive employers and supportive families who allow their loved ones to go out and do this kind of work when needed.
I want to say thank you to the employers of NSW for making so many of their staff available to serve in the emergency services, particularly in rural fire brigades at this time.
It could be a long, hot, dry summer, over the last three months most areas of NSW have had above average temperatures and below average rainfalls. It's projected that over the next three months most parts of NSW will similarly have above average temperatures and below average rainfalls.
I trust that the employers of NSW will be patient with those of their staff and workers who need to get out and serve with the emergency services, particularly with the rural fire brigades in coming months. This is an important way in which families and businesses can serve our community by supporting those of their members who are out with the rural fire brigades.
Again, I just want to say how sorry we are, on behalf of the people and parliament of Australia, for the heartache which so many hundreds of people in NSW are currently dealing with, but how proud we are of the thousands of volunteers and full time professionals who are out there keeping the community safe on a difficult day.