NSW bushfires: State of emergency declared ahead of worsening conditions
A state of emergency is in effect across New South Wales as authorities warn of an unparalleled fire emergency and a potential mega-fire across hundreds of kilometres.
Three large fires are burning in the Blue Mountains at Lithgow, Springwood and Mount Victoria, and the Rural Fire Service (RFS) is worried they could merge.
The State Mine fire near Lithgow, which has burned nearly 40,000 hectares, is of most concern today and RFS Commissioner Shane Fitzsimmons says he expects it will connect with the blaze at Mount Victoria.
Firefighters have spent the night building containment lines ahead of predicted hot and windy weather.
Residents in some affected areas have been advised to leave ahead of deteriorating conditions over the coming days, with the worst of the weather due on Wednesday.
As of Monday morning, a total of 56 bushfires were burning across the state and 12 are out of control.
Premier Barry O'Farrell says the emergency declaration gives authorities additional powers for the next 30 days, including the right to order the public to leave areas and cutting gas and power supplies if needed.
"We're planning for the worst but hoping for the best," Mr O'Farrell said.
Mr Fitzsimmons says the worst-possible scenario would see the three large fires burning in the Blue Mountains join up.
He says fire crews are dealing with "unparalleled conditions" and the situation is extremely serious.
"The potential is for the entire Blue Mountains and Hawkesbury, including places like Kurrajong, to be at risk over the coming days," he said.
"We genuinely hope not to see a massive evacuation or removal of people out of all these townships. The reality is I expect to see significant relocation of people out of harm's way.
"The fire burning through to the top end of Bells Line of Road, particularly up around the Darling Causeway, could very easily join with the fire at Mount Victoria and both of those fires will become one, head into an easterly direction and come into the back end, ultimately, of the fire that we're seeing impact in Springwood and Winmalee.
"These are not out of the realms of possibility."
Mr O'Farrell said the last time a state of emergency declaration was issued was in March last year, when floods affected southern parts of NSW.
"We're not sure what's going to happen over the next few days. The only thing I'm convinced about is we will get through it," he said.
"But this is another guarantee we will get through it, because it will give the state's emergency services any additional powers they require under this legislation.
"These powers include the right to order the public to leave or enter areas, shore up or demolish buildings, and prevent people disobeying an order given under these powers."
Conditions are expected to deteriorate over the coming days, with the worst of the weather due on Wednesday.
The Blue Mountains Mayor, Mark Greenhill, says this week will be extremely difficult, especially if the wind picks up.
"Our big concern over the next few days is the fire near Springwood and Winmalee, which is sitting in the valley and every time the wind blows it comes out and is a danger to homes," he said.
"The other concern is the State Mine fire, which at the moment is sitting to the north-west of us.
"If that fire gets into the Grose Valley and it is already spotting in that area, and comes down the Grose Valley and jumps the highway at Falconbridge we have a problem with the whole city.
"We have predictions of wind speeds increasing from 50kph through to Wednesday it may be 100kph. We have a significantly difficult couple of days ahead."
Earlier, Mr O'Farrell said residents may be forcibly evacuated from their properties should they attempt to remain in extreme conditions.
"Undoubtedly that will cause distress to those people and wider controversy, but it's clear that at times like this it's better to be safe than sorry," he said.
"It's better to do the right thing and not have it occur, than not do the right thing and end up with a disaster."
NSW Police Assistant Commissioner Alan Clarke says authorities are hoping for cooperation from the public, but added police will undertake forced evacuations "if the risk is necessary".
"Those that can help themselves, we are going to give them all the information we can so they can make a responsible decision early," he said.
"We will do forced evacuations if necessary, but they should be risk based.
"At the end of the day, we hope we have buildings standing. But if we don't have buildings standing we don't want bodies in them."