At least 13 dead in Europe's worst storm in a decade
At least 13 people were killed and thousands of homes left without power in the worst storm to hit northern Europe in a decade.
Hurricane-force winds and heavy rain brought down trees and powerlines, causing severe travel disruption with trains, flights and ferries being cancelled and major roads closed.
A 17-year-old girl was killed when a tree fell onto a caravan in Kent, while a man was crushed to death when a tree fell onto a car in north London.
A man and a woman died in west London when a tree fell onto a house, causing a suspected gas explosion and three properties to collapse
Six people were killed in Germany - four by trees falling onto cars and a fisherman and a sailor were killed in separate incidents at sea, the BBC reported.
A woman was swept out to sea in northern France, and a tree crushed a woman near a canal in Amsterdam.
The last comparable UK storm was in 2002, a Met Office spokesman said.
Gusts of up to 160 kilometres per hour were recorded as the storm lashed southern England and Wales on Sunday night (local time), and into the rush hour, before hitting the continent.
In the UK, power supplies to up to 600,000 homes were affected, although many were quickly reconnected.
A crane smashed into the Cabinet Office, a ministry in central London, forcing deputy prime minister Nick Clegg to cancel a news conference.
Millions of commuters who would normally travel into London were forced to stay at home as train and Tube lines were closed by toppled trees and power failures.
Heavy winds also swept across the low-lying Netherlands, halting all trains into Amsterdam.
Uprooted trees smashed cars and homes while roofs were blown off buildings and several houseboats were ripped off their moorings, police said.
Amsterdam's Schiphol airport cancelled 50 flights and Rotterdam Port, Europe's busiest, said incoming and outgoing vessels were delayed.
Hurricane-force winds battered Scandinavia from mid-afternoon, closing the bridge between Sweden and Denmark and paralysing road and rail transport.
In France winds topped 100 kph felling trees, whipping up six-metre high waves and cutting power supplies to 75,000 homes, according to the ERDF electricity distribution company.