Philippines typhoon: UK commits extra £30m in aid
The UK government is to give an extra £30m in emergency aid following the devastating Philippines typhoon, Prime Minister David Cameron has announced.
The UK's assistance following Typhoon Haiyan now stands at £50m. Mr Cameron said that the scale of the disaster was "becoming clearer every day".
He said an RAF C-130 Hercules aircraft would also be sent to help aid workers.
It comes as the Disasters Emergency Committee (DEC) said donations from the public had reached £33m.
The prime minister said at the Sri Lanka Commonwealth summit: "Today I can announce we are providing another £30m to support the UN and the Red Cross emergency appeals and we are also supplying an RAF C-130 Hercules aircraft to help ensure aid workers can move between the worst affected areas and get aid to those who need it."
The floor of the first floor room at the Philippines building in London is half covered with bags of food clothing and other supplies. Already they've filled one 40ft shipping container and a steady stream of people are coming to give aid or donate money. The collection here is being organised by Michael Duque of the Philippines Nurses Association, which represents the 25,000 Filipino nurses in the UK "People have been very generous across Britain," he says. "The supplies we've already collected will be shipped soon, and we are hoping to fill another 20ft container." Lorraine Manalo, 27, and her cousin Charlene Kendra, also 27, whose parents are from the Philippines, brought a car loaded with supplies. "We did a Supermarket run for rice, pasta, tinned food, and clothes with money donated by friends and and our employers," explained Lorraine. Charlene is recently married, and says she and her husband are honeymooning in the Philippines early next year. "We're planning to visit Cebu so may see first hand the aftermath of some of the devastation," she says.
He added: "A week after Typhoon Haiyan hit, the scale of the disaster is becoming clearer every day - over 3,600 dead, nearly 12 million affected.
"They are going to need sustained help from the international community as they start to rebuild their lives.
"I'm proud of the fact that the UK has taken the lead in international relief with rapid response of warships, aircraft and equipment."
Mr Cameron also praised the generosity of the British people, who have so far donated £33m to the DEC appeal in the UK.
And members of the public have donated items to the Philippines embassy in London to help the relief effort.
Speaking on behalf of the 14 UK aid agencies that make up the DEC, chief executive Saleh Saeed said: "The generosity of the public is yet again surpassing all expectations.
"The aid agencies represented by the Disasters Emergency Committee never take such kindness for granted but this shows that when people are really suffering, the UK responds."
An RAF C-17 aircraft has already arrived in the Philippines, and the C-130 announced by Mr Cameron will also carry aid to the country.
The plane's cargo included two diggers, two Land Rovers and a forklift truck with stickers reading "UK aid from the British people", as well as medical supplies.
A team of 12 medical experts from the UK, requested by the Philippines Department of Health, has arrived in the country's capital, Manila.
Royal Navy destroyer HMS Daring has been sent to the country from manoeuvres near Singapore.
It is due to be relieved by the aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious, which is expected to arrive by 25 November from the Gulf.
A British man is reported to be among those missing in the wake of Typhoon Haiyan.
The storm, which hit last Friday, has killed at least 3,621 people and displaced more than half a million.
A huge international aid effort is under way but widespread infrastructure damage is hampering efforts to distribute it to some areas.
A US aircraft carrier and other American vessels have arrived in the Philippines where the UN estimates 11 million people have been affected.