Death toll of Yolanda nears 5,800
CASUALTIES in the wake of Yolanda (international name: Haiyan) rose to 5,786 on Friday as the damage estimate remained at P35.24 billion, almost a month after Visayas was hit by what has been described as the world’s strongest typhoon this year. Imee Charlee C. Delavin In its situation report on Friday, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) also said that the number of injured and missing remained at 26,233 and 1,779, respectively. The damage estimate remained P18.21 billion for infrastructure and P17.03 billion for agriculture as the agency awaited other reports from local government units. The affected population increased to 11.24 million individuals from the 11.20 million reported on Thursday, with still more than 4 million of them displaced. Out of the displaced population, 21,788 families or 94,310 persons were still being served in the 385 evacuation centers managed by the Social Welfare department. The cost of assistance to typhoon victims from the Social Welfare and Health departments, local government units and non-government organizations has amounted to P974.21 million. Meanwhile, in a separate statement from the Foreign Affairs department, the government of Poland through the Polish Humanitarian Action (Polska Akcja Humanitarna; PAH) has, to date, raised $366,000 (more or less P15.74 million) for the relief and rehabilitation efforts in the central Philippines in the aftermath of typhoon Yolanda. This was disclosed on Dec. 4 by PAH President Janina "Janka" Ochojska during her meeting with Philippine Ambassador to Poland Patricia Ann V. Paez at the Philippine Embassy. According to the statement, Ms. Ochojska also informed Ms. Paez that PAH’s two staffers are already in Cebu to look into the situation in the typhoon-devastated areas. "They also discussed other possible forms of raising more funds since the scale and magnitude of the devastation was enormous and that it will take years for the communities to be rehabilitated," the statement said. --