Port Hedland and Karratha on red alert as Cyclone Christine tracks towards WA's Pilbara
Residents are in lockdown after a red alert was issued for Port Hedland and Karratha as a category three cyclone tracks towards Western Australia's Pilbara coast.
Cyclone Christine is expected to bring massive storm surges of up to five metres, flooding, rain and winds of up to 200 kilometres an hour when it makes landfall between Karratha and Port Hedland around midnight (WST).
The weather bureau's Neil Bennett warns the winds will be destructive.
He says Cyclone Christine is expected to remain a category three but will intensify as it crosses the coast.
"We could see wind gusts in excess of 130 kilometres an hour being generated, and then right around the core as it crosses the coast we could see winds even stronger than that, perhaps as strong as 200 kilometres an hour or even greater that," he said.
"We're also expecting some widespread heavy rainfall; 150-300 millimetres possibly.
"This is a very powerful system and one that needs to be treated with a great deal of caution."
Australia's biggest iron ore miners have already been forced to shut down their operations and with a red alert now in place, residents must stay indoors and turn off gas, water and electricity.
Port Hedland Mayor Kelly Howlett says a red alert means that people must not go outside until the all clear is given.
"It means remaining indoors, and remaining indoors until the official all clear has been declared," she said.
"That's not the all clear when you think it might be all clear, it's making sure it's the official all clear because we don't want anyone coming into contact with hazards such as fallen powerlines or any hazards that might be on the road that could cause any serious harm."
Ms Howlett is bunkered down in her home and says the wind is starting to pick up.
"It's looking very ominous, certainly it's been very grey, we have been experiencing an increase in winds, we have been getting some strong gusts and we have been getting a little bit of rain," she said.
"We know we are expecting more and I guess that's what we are all bracing for and being prepared for."
A number of cyclone welfare centres have been set up around the Pilbara, including the Karratha Leisureplex, JD Hardie Centre in South Hedland and Marble Bar Civic Centre.
Visitor to the region Barry Collett says the Roebourne caravan park, where he is staying, has been evacuated.
"We got stuck with no money so we ended up at the caravan park for a week till we get some money to get back to Collie," he said.
"Went for a holiday and picked the wrong season, they told us to move on, we can go back there when the storm blows out."
Zimbabwean Joshua Mwale is also staying at the caravan park.
"Little bit nervous but since we've been informed that we'll be safe here, I feel I will be protected," he said.
A number of people left Indigenous communities for Karratha's evacuation centre, including Tootsie Daniel, who says it was becoming unsafe.
"It was very windy and we can feel like the wind was hitting hard," she said.
"We've come here because it's more safer for us, and thank God we have SES people that care about us in our communities.
"We just feel safe because we have the little ones here you know the babies so it's safer for us all."
Authorities are most concerned about the massive storm surge likely along the coast.
"Our biggest concern is the water; we've done a lot of preparation, particularly in the Port Hedland area with regards to that flooding possibility," the Department of Fire and Emergency Services' Les Hayter said.
"It's a waiting game now, we just have to see how this thing pans out."
Journalist Elise Batchelor, who is in Port Hedland, says the main concern is flooding from the surge.
"When you have a storm surge, it's when the combination of a high tide at the same time that the cyclone crosses the coast, can lead to a massive rise in the tides that have already been pushed up due to the winds," she said.
She says the winds have picked up in Port Hedland and it has been raining for about the past 12 hours.
Ms Batchelor says many people are away for the Christmas period but those remaining have already experienced one power outage, and it is too late to move to evacuation centres.
"Now is the time to lay low, stay inside, presuming that you have taken all the precautions to prepare and be ready," she said.
"We've got a lot of cyclone-rated houses though in Port Hedland which means they've been built with steel structures that are intended to withstand this kind of seasonal event so we hope for the safety of everyone in their homes."
Glenn Connell from Pyramid Station, 100 kilometres east of Karratha, is in the path of the cyclone and has spent the past 24 hours preparing.
"I've been flat out yesterday tying down all sorts of stuff. On a station there's plenty of stuff to do - more than the average house," he said.
"I've been flat out tying up everything, cleaning up everything I can and filling tanks with water."
Summer cyclones like Christine are nothing new for Mr Connell and he says he and his family are prepared to be isolated for some time.
"Plenty of food, plenty of water," he said.
"We're just on the other side of the George River so we actually do get cut off quite a fair bit depending on how long it flows and quite often we're stuck in here a lot longer than other people, so that we're pretty used to," he said.
But he says the rain will be welcome.
"She's pretty brown, so we're looking forward to a bit of rain.
Residents in Karratha have been stocking up on supplies at supermarkets - many appear unconcerned about Christine, however there are a number of visitors in town for the Christmas period who have not experienced a cyclone before.
The world's biggest mining company, BHP Billiton, has now suspended its port and rail operations in Port Hedland.
Fortescue Metals has secured its port and rail infrastructure, and Rio Tinto says it has shut down its coastal port and rail operations at Dampier and Port Hedland.
Other ships have been sent out to sea to wait out the storm.
Woodside says its non-essential staff have left its Pluto LNG Plant and the Karratha Gas Plant.
A red alert is in place for people in or near coastal areas between Pardoo and Mardie, inlcuding Port Hedland, South Hedland, Whim Creek, Roebourne, Point Samson, Wickham, Karratha and Dampier.
Those on the coast between Pardoo and Wickham, including Port Hedland, are warned of the potential for a very dangerous storm tide tonight.
The Bureau of Meteorology says tides may rise significantly above the normal high tide mark with damaging waves.
Authorities have issued flood warnings for the Pilbara region as the cyclone moves inland over communities such as Newman and Paraburdoo.
Forecaster Noel Puzey says it is hoped the storm will bring much-needed rain to dry parts of the state.
"North-western Australia, they get their rain through these sort of events really and some of the area is quite dry," he said.
"This is the first decent rainfall event for them and we are hoping it'll provide much-needed rain - but not too much."