Videos capture South Korean ferry's final moments, fuel fresh outrage
The video capturing passengers' panic was recorded by a teenage boy on the vessel, according to South Korean national TV network JTBC. The teen's father gave the network the footage after authorities recovered his son's body and found the cell phone. Its memory card was still intact, JTBC reported.
Speaking out about it for the first time on Monday, the men who rescued him said they had no idea who he was until later.
"During the rescue operation, people were just dropping in the sea," South Korean coast guard Capt. Kim Kyung Il told reporters. "Everyone was wearing a life vest, so we couldn't tell who was passenger, and who was crew."
The ship's captain and 14 others have been arrested. Prosecutors in Mokpo, who are leading the ferry investigation, told CNN that all 15 crew members responsible for sailing as well as the engine room face charges and are being held in Mokpo prison.
Chung Hong-won apologized "on behalf of the government for the many problems that arose during the first response and the subsequent rescue operation" in addition to "problems that existed before the accident."
"My son, it must have been cold and dark where you were," said Park Jong-dae, weeping as he read a statement on JTBC. "How much you must have been cold and afraid?
"I hoped and prayed for your survival, but it didn't turn out that way. My son, now it's time for us to say goodbye. It's time for you and me to say goodbye and for me to let go of the hope that I could not let go so far. Please forgive me. Farewell. ..."
In the audio recording provided by JTBC, a voice on a public address system warns that everyone should stay where they are: "Do not move from your present location and please stay. ..."
While some seem confused, there are people who appear to joke around, clearly not fully comprehending the gravity of what's happening. At one point a voice is heard saying, "This trip is screwed."
Some passengers talk to one another, trying to reassure and inform. Another voice says, "I think it's calming down."
One shouts, "Hey!" then says the name of someone who doesn't have a life jacket. "We need to get one!"