Winners, nominees, opening jokes and more
The parade of gorgeous gowns has begun for the 66th Annual Primetime Emmy Awards, with Hollywood’s elite strutting their stuff for the second time this week.
KEEP us bookmarked through the day for rolling coverage of the winners, losers and best gags from today’s Emmy Awards ...
Approximately 27 hours later, the Emmys are done for another year. Awards-wise, it felt like an exceptionally safe year: Breaking Bad was given a fitting swan song, taking out several major awards in honour of its final season. Modern Family proved it really is an unstoppable force in the Best Comedy category, landing a fifth win in a row.
The biggest upset? For our money, it’s Orange Is The New Black going home empty-handed. With wins at the Creative Arts Emmys in the lead-up to today’s ceremony, we thought all signs pointed to the wonderful inmates at Litchfield Prison going home with at least one award.
Comedian Billy Crystal’s tribute to friend Robin Williams was heartfelt and pitch-perfect - let that be a lesson to you, MTV VMAs.
It was left to the presenters and winners to provide the most unexpected moments of the night — Ricky Gervais’ faux-bitter presentation after losing out on the Best Actor Emmy was a delight, as was Billy Eichner’s pre-taped street interview which taught us one thing: people in New York could care less about the Emmys.
Winner of the Best Writing — Variety award, Sarah Silverman appears to have been stoned during the ceremony. That's certainly one way to make it to the end of the show.
And let’s not forget the moment Julia Louis Dreyfus stopped on the way up to collect her Best Comedy Actress award to gun for another gong: World’s Longest Pash with Bryan Cranston.
Halle Berry’s on stage to present the final award of the night ...
Series creator Vince Gilligan accepts the award, calling it a “wonderful farewell to our show.”
It sure is: acting gongs for Bryan Cranston, Aaron Paul and Anna Gunn, a writing award and now the biggest award of the night, outstanding drama.
Jay Leno’s up to present the award for best comedy. “It's hard to believe we're nearly a tenth of the way through the ceremony,” he says. DON’T JOKE, JAY.
“Orange is the New Black”
That makes it five years in a row for Modern Family. Orange is the New Black woz robbed. ROBBED WE TELLS YA. Head of the Modern Family team starts getting played off before he’s even landed his first joke. One more to go, gang ...
“Please welcome a woman who starred in Mystic Pizza 25 years ago, and was never heard from again — Julia Roberts!” - Uh, hasn’t Seth Meyers already done a variation of this joke about three times tonight? Julia’s here to present a big one:
It could only be Bryan, recognised for the final season of Breaking Bad. Top marks to Julia Roberts for making it All About Her when presenting the award — “Apologies to anyone who doesn’t get to hug me in the next 10 seconds,” she said, before reading out the winner.
“I don't know why I’ve been blessed with an abundance of good fortune,” Cranston says. “I love acting and I will do it until my last breath. I have so much gratitude.” Beautifully humble speech, with a couple of laughs too: he thanks his on-screen wife Anna Gunn for all their great scenes together, “especially the ones in bed.”
The favourite gets it. Good for Julianna, but this has been a very safe Emmys so far, hasn’t it? No big upsets. “What a wonderful time for women on television,” Julianna says during her speech. AMEN.
Moira Walley-Beckett takes it out for her writing work on Breaking Bad. “To my brilliant cast of actors: writing for you was pure joy.” The ‘play her off’ music starts about 15 seconds into her speech. Know what that means — WE’RE RUNNING OVER, PEOPLE!
Anna gets it. Another win for Breaking Bad! She describes the show as “the most extraordinary journey, over the past seven years.”
Next award presented by Debra Messing and Jim Parsons, or, as Seth Meyers calls them: “A couple of Messing Parsons.” *cool guy shades*
Cary Fukunaga accepts the award for True Detective, keeping his speech brief and rocking sweet hair braids.
Comedian Billy Crystal gives an emotional speech in honour of his departed friend Robin Williams. “I used to think if I could put a saddle on him and stay on for eight seconds, I’d be doing OK.”
Telling stories about Williams’ comic genius, he described his energy as akin to a dog that's been kept inside all day that’s finally allowed out to run around.
“As genius as he was on stage, he was the greatest friend you could ever have — present, loving. He was the brightest star in our comedy galaxy.”
Singer Sara Bareilles delivers a beautiful rendition of the classic Smile for the In Memoriam segment, paying tribute to the small screen stars who’ve passed away in the past year- and ending, to huge applause, with an image Robin Williams.
Also, here’s a full report on that brilliant Billy Eichner comedy skit from earlier in the broadcast. Check it out.
Aaron takes it out for the final season of Breaking Bad — it’s his third Emmy win and fifth nomination. In the lead-up to the awards, he sent BB fans on a Twitter scavenger hunt around LA to find memorabilia related to the show — great guy.
Also, how do you keep the audience’s interest while delivering a dry speech about history and activities of the Emmy Academy? Easy — put Modern Family star Sofia Vergara on a revolving platform in a figure-hugging dress.
“Our success is about always giving the viewer something compelling to watch,” the Academy head says.
... Which presenter Gwen Stefani mispronounces as “The Colborrrr Roporrr,” which is a bit awkward. Gwen, you had one job. Perhaps she’s still nursing a post-VMAs hangover?
Before that, Directing — Variety Special goes to Glenn Weiss for the 2014 Tony Awards. He accepts from the control room, where he’s at the helm for the Emmys. How’s that for multi-tasking?
Ricky Gervais is up to present an award, but not before doing a bit about losing the Best Comedy Actor award to Jim Parsons. He reads the speech he would’ve read had he won, thanking the other nominees, including “Joey from Friends.” He points out that he travelled the farthest to be here, so really, shouldn’t he have won it?
He gives the award for Writing — Variety Special to Sarah Silverman. Two risque comedians on stage one after the other — we bet they’ve got their fingers on the ‘censor’ button in the control room right now.
“We’re all just made of molecules and we’re hurling through space right now,” Silverman says during her speech. SMART LADY.
“Please welcome the only person from ER ever to amount to anything, Julianna Margulies! We’re sure George Clooney finds that joke hilarious — we’re also sure that Noah Wyle is at home somewhere crying into his Ben & Jerrys.
The Normal Heart takes it out — phenomenal TV movie about the origins of the AIDS crisis in the early ‘80s. Check it out if you haven’t already, it's heartwrenching stuff with great performances across the board.
Game of Thrones star Lena Headey takes the stage to announce the award for best miniseries — but not before being interrupted by Andy Samberg, in costume as King Joffrey. “Mother! Oh mother, I’ve been poisoned!” “Not now, dear.” Great moment.
Meyers and Andy Samberg introduce Weird Al Yankovic, who’s here to perform a musical sequence in which he puts words to this year’s TV theme songs. Yankovic’s as popular as ever — he just hit number one on the US album charts with his latest musical comedy offering.
Can Kristin Wiig take this one out? If only for the epic speech she’d give?
It’s a good year for American Horror Story: Coven, what with Kathy Bates’ earlier win. Looking stunning at 65, the multi-Emmy winner gives a brief speech.
Amy Poehler’s back! She and Seth work through a few possible introductions to True Detective stars Matthew McConaughey and Woody Harrelson. “One is named after a disciple of Jesus, the other is named after a boner!” “Please welcome the only actors in Hollywood not rumoured to be starring in season two of True Detective!”
The True Detective stars, real-life pals and ultra-chill guys are here to present the Best Actor in a miniseries award:
Benedict isn’t there to accept the award.
Kate Walsh and Scott Bakula have the night’s first minor flub as they take the stage to present an award: “OK, where’s that teleprompter?” Walsh asks nervously. After a shaky start, they’re off:
Fargo director Colin Bucksey wins, and uses his speech to thank his lucky stars he made it back from the bathroom in time to accept the award.
Stephen Colbert is on stage to present the award for Best Supporting Actor in a Miniseries, and delivers a typically histrionic monologue about his imaginary friend, Rosco. Give the man an Emmy for that scenery-chewing performance alone.
“Martin couldn't be here tonight, so I accept this award on MY behalf,” Colbert tells us.
Kathy takes it out, saying she was sure she wouldn’t win because she was seated far from the stage. Kathy, they tricked you!
Allison Janney and Octavia Spencer are here — not to announce a sequel to The Help — but to present an award:
Seth Meyers takes some questions from the audience: Jon Hamm asks if the Emmys will be televised, and Melissa McCarthy offers up a parking question: “Will I get towed?” Andre Braugher asks if he can go to the bathroom. The Portlandia duo Fred Armisen and Carrie Brownstein start a chant to get the Emmys happening annually: “EVERY YEAR! EVERY YEAR!” Wouldn’t that be nice?
“So You Think You Can Dance”
The show’s 10th win in the category.
Taylor Schilling, “Orange is the New Black”
Is this our best Emmys moment? Julia gives the world’s biggest pash to Bryan Cranston on her way to the stage. Like, HUGE snog. From there, she somehow pulled herself together enough to deliver quite a heartfelt, sincere speech about the joys of working for Veep on HBO.
The favourite takes it out — Jim Parsons grabs his fourth Emmy award. Keeps his speech brief — after four years up there, he’s no doubt run out of people to thank by now.
Seth Meyers introduces COMIC GENIUS Billy Eichner for an epic session of his Billy on the Street quiz show, in which he barks at the pedestrians of New York about Emmys trivia. We’ll bring you a breakout story on that hilarious segment soon.
“Orange is the New Black”
Each nominee tape featured a cute moment from an actor on the show. explaining the best advice their director gave them. Natasha Lyonne, on occasional OITNB director Jodie Foster: “She taught me I could relax because I knew I’d never be as good as Jodie Foster.”
Modern Family takes it out, with director Gail Mancuso directing her speech directly to Matthew McConaughey, because she can’t look at her cast or crew or else she’ll cry.
Jimmy Kimmel presents the award for Best Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series, but not before questioning why bona fide move star Matthew McConaughey is here tonight, muscling in on TV star territory. “Look at that face: that’s a movie star face,” he says, before the camera cuts to “TV star face”, Ricky Gervais:
Kate Mulgrew, “Orange is the New Black”
Surprise win for Janney, who looks stunning and points out that, at 54, she’s currently playing a great grandmother. “Hopefully by next season I’ll be incontinent.”
Zooey Deschanel and Allison Williams present the award for best Comedy Writing to Louis CK for his work on Louie. Haven’t seen it? Hunt it down, folks — it’s one of the best comedies in years.
Seth introduces Amy Poehler who announces the award for “Best on-screen orgasm in a civil war re-enactment” — oops, she means: Best Supporting Actor in a Comedy.
Ty wins it, and reads out a great speech apparently penned by the kids of the Modern Family cast.
Here are the best pearlers from host Seth Meyers’ opening monologue:
Pointing out the diversity of the Best Drama nominees tonight, he said that at the 1976 Emmys, the four Best Drama nominees were all police shows. “Basically you voted for the cop whose hat you liked the most.
“We had comedies that made you laugh, and comedies that made you cry, because they were dramas submitted as comedies,” he said, referencing Orange is the New Black’s contentious inclusion in the Comedy category.
“I would like to congratulate the writers in the room tonight, but their seats are too far away for them to hear me.”
When he asked last year’s hosts Tina Fey and Amy Poehler for help writing his monologue tonight, “they both jumped at the chance to text back, ‘New phone. Who dis?’”
His advice to shows experiencing critical and commercial success: kill off all the characters, or else “before you know it, you’re paying Sheldon a million dollars an episode.”
HBO has 99 nominations tonight: “Not to be outdone, NBC is also a network.”
Former Saturday Night Live cast member Seth Meyers is hosting today’s ceremony, and he already promised E! ’s Giuliana Rancic in a red carpet interview that he wouldn’t be going hard on any of the attendees during his opening monologue. Is he telling the truth, or should some of TV’s finest prepare for a roasting?
As for winners today, there are few sure bets, but our predictions: Bryan Cranston seems a cert for Best Actor in a Drama Series, given his sterling work in the acclaimed final season of Breaking Bad.
Modern Family has won Best Comedy series four times in a row, but can new gal on the block Orange is The New Black snatch the award this year?
Check out the video at the top of the page for all the news.com.au entertainment team’s Emmy predictions.