It's a boy AND a girl for Princess Charlene! Monaco royal gives birth to twins
Princess Charlene of Monaco today gave to give birth to twins – a boy called Jacques and a girl called Gabriella.
Gabriella was born first at 5.04pm, and Jacques at 5.06pm, but it is Jacques who will be the future Prince of Monaco, because of the Mediterranean principality's male inheritance laws.
They are the first children for the 36-year-old former South African Olympic swimmer, who married Prince Albert II, 56, three years ago. 
He was by her side today, as the children were delivered at the Princess Grace Hospital, which is named after Albert's mother, the late Hollywood star, Grace Kelly.
Soon after 7.30pm, 42 cannon shots rung around Monaco, confirming that the babies had been born.
Albert had arranged the 42 shots, in place of the 21 that would boom for a single baby.
It was the first time Charlene has become a mother, while Albert is the father of at least two children considered 'illegitimate' by the House of Grimaldi.
They are Jazmin Grace Grimaldi, his 22-year-old daughter with a Californian woman, and Alexandre Coste, his 10-year-old son with a former flight attendant from Togo, in West African.
DNA tests were used to confirm Albert's status as father in both cases, following protracted legal battles involving the billionaire royal.
A palace source confirmed Jacques will be the Principality's future ruler, and inheritor of the tax-free fortune which goes with it.
The babies are the first twins in the royal household, which dates back to the 13th Century.
Prince Albert made it clear that if a boy and girl were born, the boy would become the royal heir, in line with the male priority of Monaco's succession law.
Albert has admitted that he did not know the sex of the children before birth: 'It is one of the beautiful surprises that life offers us,' he said.
Only one woman has ever reigned over Monaco, Princess Louise-Hippolyte, but she died months after assuming the throne in 1731.
It was in 2002 that Monaco's Parliament was directed by the royal family to change its constitution to allow royal power to pass from a reigning prince with no descendants to his siblings - potentially Albert's two sisters.
This would have ensured the continuation of the Grimaldi dynasty if Albert never produced a legitimate heir.
It would also ensure that his other children did not stake a claim to the throne in future years.  
Now, not one but two royal heirs have arrived at once - much to the delight of locals. 'This is going to create an immense joy. Immense!' said Monaco resident Isabelle Roux, ahead of the birth. 
'They are awaited like the messiah ... Everyone is talking only about that.'
'Two babies for the price of one. I think it's very good for the image,' added Adelaide de Clermont-Tonnerre, editor-in-chief of the celebrity weekly Point de Vue. 'With twins, there's always an extra interest.'
The babies will be the first twins in the royal household, which was established in the 13th century, but they will not share the throne.
In the UK, only one set of royal twins has ever been born - to King James I of Scotland and his wife Joan Beaufort in 1430. 
It is thought that the twins were welcomed via caesarean section, but the doctor delivering them had no more than a symbolic hand in deciding the destiny of the Grimaldi dynasty. 
In principle, there's no medical reason a doctor would have an active role in deciding which newborn is delivered first, even in the case of a caesarean section, an expert said.
'The obstetrician will always deliver first the twin that presents itself first when the uterus is opened at the time of caesarean section,' said Dr. Patrick O'Brien, spokesman for Britain's Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 'We don't decide in advance which twin to deliver first.'
Had they both been of the same sex, the first one out would have taken the throne but because the Monégasque twins are a boy and a girl, the boy will automatically inherit. 
Elsewhere in Europe, twins are more common with Georg Friedrich, Prince of Prussia, and his wife Princess Sophie of Isenberg producing a pair of twin boys last year. 
Also parents to twins are Crown Prince Frederik of Denmark and his wife Mary, who welcomed Prince Vincent and Princess Josephine into their family in 2011.
Prince Louis Alphonse, Duke of Anjou is yet another royal father of twins, and was with his wife Maria Margarita Vargas Santaella when she gave birth to Prince Louis, Duke of Burgundy and Prince Alphonse, Duke of Berry in 2010.  