Madonna falls off stage during Living For Love performance
When you're singing a song that includes the lyric "watch me stumble", the last thing you want is for life to imitate art.
But life did indeed imitate art when the 56-year-old music icon Madonna tumbled down a staircase due to a wardrobe malfunction during her live performance at the Brit Awards in London.
Performing her new single Living For Love and surrounded by dancers, Madonna was shrouded in a cape which, once unfastened, was to be removed by one of the dancers.
But as Madonna fumbled with the lacing around her neck, one of the dancers yanked on it while it was still attached.
Instead of the planned revelation of Madonna's costume, the malfunction resulted in Madge being yanked backwards and her tumbling down a staircase on the stage.
The cape, she later revealed, was tied too tightly.
According to media reports, there were gasps of shock from the audience at the O2 auditorium.
At first, some onlookers presumed the fall to be part of the show, but it then became clear that the pop superstar had dropped her microphone and was not singing.
Astonishingly, and in a reflection of both her professionalism and physical fitness, Madonna barely lost a beat, recovered, re-took the stage and continued singing.
She did miss several lines of the song because of the dropped microphone, but she finished the performance without incident.
The guest list for the Brit Awards included Russell Crowe, Kanye West and Kim Kardashian.
In the aftermath, Madonna noted via her social media account on Instagram that "my beautiful cape was tied too tight".
"But nothing can stop me and love really lifted me up," she said. "Thanks for your good wishes. I'm fine." 
Fans took to Twitter to show their support for Madonna.
User Louise Houghton wrote: "Big respect to @Madonna @BRITAwards for carrying on so professionally & giving an awesome performance. Please don't slate her."
Melanie Redmond tweeted: "Oh my god. Madonna. That fall. I feel so bad for you but you did sing about stumbling. And you really did more than that, you crash landed."
Another wrote: "I'm sweating with anxiety for the cape puller who will perish in the flames tonight."