Ma Jian protest paints the London Book Fair red
In a dramatic act of protest at this week's London Book Fair, Chinese author Ma Jian smeared red paint across his face to demonstrate his anger at the choice of China as the event's "market focus".
It was the latest development in the row over the British Council's collaboration with China's General Administration of Press and Publications (Gapp). Critics have attacked China's record on censorship and selection of authors invited to London.
Ma, whose novel Beijing Coma is banned in his native country, said he had been "manhandled" when he tried to give a copy of the book to Liu Binjie, the head of Gapp, at the fair. Daubing a red cross over a copy of the book and on his own face, he declared that no Chinese writer has freedom of speech.
The incarcerated Nobel laureate Liu Xiaobo should have been among the authors invited, he said, calling the 180 Chinese publishers present at the fair "the mouthpiece of the Chinese communist party".
"In this book fair that looks so modern, so impressive, so beautiful, you will not see the ugly reality that lies behind, you will not see the Tibetan lamas who have set fire to themselves, you will not hear the voices of the writers who are persecuted in China," said Ma. The situation was "a dishonour to the values that make western civilisation so strong," he added.
Away from the drama of the protest, the tussle over strong debuts continued, with Orion snapping up Helen Giltrow's thriller The Distance for its "brilliant plot" and HarperCollins winning an auction to secure a dark futuristic tale, The Hatchery, by Tom Isbell.
US publisher Crown paid a rumoured seven-figure sum (in dollars) for Dataclysm, a study of how "big data" is transforming our understanding of ourselves, written by Christian Rudder, founder of US dating website OkCupid.com. Meanwhile, HarperCollins made a bid to corner the cute-book-for-Christmas market by signing the "autobiography" of Uggie, the canine actor who charmed in the Oscar-winning film The Artist. Uggie's life story will be told with the help of comic novelist Wendy Holden.
Vintage Classics announced the acquisition of a new translation of the last novel by German writer Erich Maria Remarque, author of the first world war novel All Quiet on the Western Front.
The Promised Land opens on the Ellis Island detention centre towards the end of the second world war, with the narrator a concentration camp survivor hoping that life in New York will offer both him and his fellow immigrants a new beginning.
The changing shape of the book industry was evident at the fair, with publishers boasting of exciting new digital offerings including a "spectacular" app for Shakespeare's sonnets set to come from Faber. Digital self-publishing was also a hot topic, with Amazon's self-publishing programme Kindle Direct Publishing exhibited for the first time.
But the row that erupted between Bloomsbury's Richard Charkin and Audible's Donald Katz over the digital audiobook retailer's scheme to pay $1 per audio sale direct to the authors revealed the strains such changes are putting on the industry. Charkin told Katz the strategy was "damaging" to the publishing houses who invested so much editorially in their books, while an unabashed Katz declared that it was the relationship between author and reader that mattered.