2015 Pulitzer Winners: South Carolina Paper Wins Public Service Prize; New York Times Wins 3
The Post and Courier of Charleston, S.C., with a staff of about 80 and a daily circulation of 85,000, won the most prestigious of the Pulitzer Prizes for journalism awarded on Monday, for a series on the high number of deaths resulting from domestic abuse in the state.
The series, titled “Till Death Do Us Part,” was awarded the gold medal for public service, the first Pulitzer the paper has won since 1925. It is the first time in five years that the prize has gone to such a small newspaper.
The New York Times won in the international reporting category for “courageous front-line reporting and vivid human stories” on the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. The newspaper’s coverage was the result of an expansive and dangerous effort. It included foreign correspondents, science writers and a video journalist (the paper’s winning entry included two online videos). The photographer Daniel Berehulak won the award for feature photography for a series of poignant portraits, shot across months, documenting Ebola’s deadly spread in West Africa.
The Times also won the prize for investigative reporting, for a series by Eric Lipton on aggressive efforts by lobbyists and lawyers to push state attorneys general to drop investigations, change policies, negotiate favorable settlements or pressure federal regulators to benefit their clients. It shared the prize with The Wall Street Journal, which won for a project that revealed to Americans previously confidential data “on the motivations and practices of their health care providers.”
The Los Angeles Times won two Pulitzers. Diana Marcum won the feature writing prize for her stories from the Central Valley of California on how the state’s drought affected the lives of residents. The newspaper also won the criticism prize, for Mary McNamara’s writings on television and culture.
Bloomberg News won its first Pulitzer, for explanatory journalism. It went to Zachary R. Mider, for his reporting on how American corporations dodge taxes and get away with it. Speaking in the newsroom on Monday, Matthew Winkler, the emeritus editor in chief, said that when he told the company’s founder, Michael R. Bloomberg, that Bloomberg News had won its first Pulitzer, Mr. Bloomberg replied, partly in jest, “It’s about time.”