Princess Charlotte Elizabeth Diana
All you need to know about the British Royal Family.
IN A fitting tribute to the “people’s princess”, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge have named their daughter Charlotte Elizabeth Diana.
The announcement came via the couple’s Twitter feed at approximately midnight AEST on Monday.
“The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge are delighted to announce that they have named their daughter Charlotte Elizabeth Diana,” an initial tweet read.
“The baby will be known as Her Royal Highness Princess Charlotte of Cambridge.”
The Princess of Cambridge was born at8:34am on Saturday 2 May weighing 3.7kg (8lb 3oz) and is fourth in line to the throne.
The name stems from a long line in the royal family, including grandparents Prince
Charles and the late Princess Diana, great-grandmother Queen Elizabeth and the late Queen Mother.
Elizabeth is also Princess Kate’s middle name, along with grandmother Carol Middleton.
The Duke and Duchess stood on the steps of the Lindo wing and introduced her to the world, but unlike with the birth of Prince George, did not comment to waiting media.
Earlier, Prince William emerged from the hospital to pick up Prince George and bring him back to meet his little sister, carrying him into the hospital in a moment reminiscent of when he was taken there as a child to meet Prince Harry.
An official notice of the birth was posted on an easel outside Buckingham Palace in front of a large crowd after news of the birth was delivered via a series of tweets from the palace.
The Duke of Cambridge was present for the birth and “Her Royal Highness and her child are both doing well”, Kensington Palace confirmed.
Earlier the world’s media and royal watchers gathered outside the Lindo wing of St Mary’s hospital in London’s Paddington after the Duchess was admitted to hospital around 6am UK time. The birth took less than three hours, although the announcement came just after 11am, UK time, as the Cambridges waited to inform their family.
The Lindo wing is the same place Prince George was born in mid-2013 and is also where the Duke of Cambridge and Prince Harry entered the world.
The princess is fourth in line to the throne behind Prince Charles, Prince William and Prince George and the fifth great-grandchild of Queen Elizabeth II. She is the first royal female who can’t be overtaken by younger brothers when it comes to succession, after a change to the law in 2012 which ensured daughters can’t be pushed down the list.
The name of the newborn wasn’t expected to be announced immediately. When George was born, officials waited two days before announcing his name.
A crowd of royal watchers erupted into cheers following the announcement the Duchess “was safely delivered of a daughter”. A town crier in elaborate costume read the news from the steps of the hospital.
For weeks betting odds had heavily favoured the Duchess having a daughter with Alice and Charlotte the clear favourite names, followed by Elizabeth, Victoria and Diana.
UK Prime Minister David Cameron and other leaders expressed their delight on Twitter. Prime Minister Tony Abbott said he wishes the young Princess a “long and happy life”.
“I am sure that the Princess and her older brother, Prince George, will in time develop a deep familiarity and love of Australia, feelings the rest of their family already share,” he said in a statement. Australia’s Governor-General and Lady Cosgrove also sent “heartfelt congratulations’.
Kensington Palace welcomed other people adding to their family to post a photo for their blog using the hashtag #WelcomeToTheFamily.
The birth of their daughter marks the start of a new period for the Duke and Duchess who will move to their country home while Prince William takes up his new job as a helicopter ambulance pilot.
The family will live in 10-bedroom property Anmer Hall, which is nearly 200 kilometres north of London.
For more details on how the royal birth unfolded, click here.