A Humble Pope, Challenging the World
Through gestures and words, Francis has repeatedly challenged elites, inside the church and out. He has attacked an insular Catholic hierarchy for focusing too much on dogma and “spiritual worldliness,” and too little on ordinary people. He has attacked prevailing global economic orthodoxy — the belief that markets and the pursuit of wealth will lift all boats — as a false ideology, inadequate for fully addressing the needs of the poor.
In the United States, Francis’ biting critiques of the excesses of capitalism — if ringing true to many people — have caused discomfort even among some sympathizers and outright disdain from critics, who have called him a Marxist or a Communist. Those who have known Francis for years laugh at those labels, yet they agree that he can be elusive, having refused to be placed neatly inside an ideological box since his early days as a young Jesuit leader in Argentina.
“He delights in confounding categorizations,” said Austen Ivereigh, author of the biography “The Great Reformer: Francis and the Making of a Radical Pope.” “There is a sense in which the elites always want to own him, and he’s always eluding them.”
From the moment he stepped onto the central balcony of St. Peter’s Basilica and greeted the masses after his unexpected election in March 2013, Francis made history as the first Latin American pope. He even told a joke that night about how “his fellow cardinals” had gone to the “end of the world” to find a pope.
It was a lighthearted reminder of the great distance to his native Argentina from the Vatican. But what now seems clear is that Francis was not only telling a joke. The “end of the world” was a metaphor for the slums, and the worldview of the Latin American church that he was bringing to the Vatican.
So to better understand the pope of gardeners and janitors and the poor, it is best to start in Argentina, where the man who would become Francis was named Jorge Mario Bergoglio.
The Archbishop of the Slums
For many Argentines, Jorge Mario Bergoglio (pronounced Ber-GOAL-io) was a mystery. When he became archbishop of Buenos Aires in 1998, he converted the official residence into a hostel for priests and moved into the downtown diocesan office building. He took a small bedroom with a portable heater that he switched on when the building’s heating system automatically shut down on weekends. He often cooked himself meals in a small kitchen.
He avoided the limelight, rarely speaking to the media, and spent little time in the affluent parts of the capital. His predecessor as archbishop had courted Argentina’s political elites (which led to a later corruption scandal), but Archbishop Bergoglio erected a divide. His focus was Argentina’s poor. He created a cadre of priests who worked and lived in the slums of Buenos Aires, and he made regular visits, leading religious processions or saying Mass. Before every Easter, he visited prison inmates or AIDS patients or the elderly.
“His papacy is a clear continuity, above all, in his focus on the poor,” said Father Augusto Zampini Davies, who once worked in the Buenos Aires slum of Bajo Boulogne. “The church — those that appointed him — wanted a change. And they wanted a change from the periphery. But perhaps what some did not predict is that when somebody starts to see the world from the viewpoint of the poorest, he undergoes a profound transformation.”
Francis’ grandparents and his father were immigrants from the Piedmont region of Italy who left for opportunity in Argentina, and also to flee Mussolini’s fascist regime. They were supposed to travel in October 1927 aboard The Principessa Mafalda,an Italian ocean liner, but fortuitously missed the departure: The ship sank. The family took another vessel and arrived in Buenos Aires, where other Italians and Europeans had immigrated. Less than a decade later, Jorge Mario Bergoglio was born.
Jorge’s grandmother Rosa was a dominant influence in his life, teaching him Piedmontese-inflected Italian and imbuing him with a love of literature. Among his favorite novels was Alessandro Manzoni’s Italian classic “I Promessi Sposi,”or “The Betrothed,” which he has read at least three times. Mr. Ivereigh, the biographer, argues that Francis’ vision of the church as a “field hospital” is influenced by the book’s depiction of courageous wartime priests working in a field hospital outside Milan.
As a 16-year-old, Jorge was going to meet friends when he was overcome by an urge to detour into a local basilica in Buenos Aires. “I don’t quite know what happened next,” Cardinal Bergoglio said during a 2012 radio interview with a community station in a Buenos Aires slum. “I felt like someone grabbed me from inside and took me to the confessional.”
The teenager stepped out of the confessional convinced that he would become a priest. And even though his family was deeply Catholic, his mother, Regina, opposed her oldest child entering the priesthood, relenting years later after his Jesuit ordination, when she knelt and asked for his blessing.
Among Catholics, Jesuits are famous as missionaries, intellectuals and educators — and for often being stubbornly independent, skeptical and politically adept. They helped create modern Argentina but were temporarily dissolved in 1773 by Pope Clement XIV in a pivotal moment in Latin American history: Clement sided with European monarchs trying divvy up South America, while the Jesuits sided with the indigenous populations living in independent communities known as reductions.
For Francis, the transformative event of his early priesthood was the Second Vatican Council, the meetings from 1962 to 1965, which stirred sharp internal debates and ended with the church adopting a new openness. Mass could now be celebrated in native languages, not just Latin, and the church resolved to open unprecedented dialogue with members other faiths, including Jews.
But for many Catholics, the council proved deeply unsettling and politically divisive. By the 1970s, the Jesuits were divided, partly over different interpretations on how to achieve social justice, and the number of new priests dropped sharply. In Argentina, several Jesuits had embraced a Marxist-influenced strain of liberation theology, a Latin American movement calling for structural change to help the poor.
At only 36, Father Bergoglio was placed in charge of Argentina’s Jesuits. He would later acknowledge his immaturity for such a position — and his lack of preparation. But he won a loyal following and was praised for replenishing the numbers of new priests.
However, his hard-nosed style also brought him enemies. He would be dogged for decades by accusations that he failed to protect two priests who were kidnapped and tortured by the brutal military government ruling Argentina during the 1970s — allegations that have been challenged by biographers and were later refuted by one of the two priests. Among some Jesuits, he was considered an archconservative.
It would not be the last time someone tried to put him into an ideological box.
On a Tuesday morning this June, Pope Francis stood inside the chapel of the Santa Marta guesthouse and spoke about poverty and the Gospel. There was a four-month waiting list to attend one of his morning services. And Francis still reserves the service mostly for ordinary people, or missionaries, priests and nuns, but Vatican Radio is allowed to transmit excerpts from his message globally.
His message, not surprisingly, often comes back to poverty. Poverty, Francis noted on June 16, is “a word that always embarrasses.” He said it was common to hear complaints that “this priest talks too much about poverty, this bishop speaks of poverty, this Christian, this nun talks about poverty,” adding, “Aren’t they a little Communist, right?”
Francis’ first months as pope were a veritable love-fest: Here was the ordinary-guy pope, paying the bill at the hotel where he stayed before his unexpected election; keeping his plain black shoes instead of red papal slippers; eschewing the papal apartment for rooms in the Vatican guesthouse. He washed the feet of inmates, women and a Muslim. He kissed the head of a grossly disfigured man. He signaled a more welcoming public attitude toward homosexuals by saying, “Who am I to judge?”
Traditionalists grumbled, but Francis had managed, seemingly overnight, to rebrand the church, at least in style. But then the substance started coming, too. He released what amounted to his papal mission statement in November 2013, with the publication of “Evangelii Gaudium,” a sweeping 224-page document that many Catholics received as an optimistic call for a tolerant, joyous Catholicism open to the world, and the world’s poor. But many capitalists were jolted by Francis’ blunt attack on the global economic system as “unjust at its root.”
He expanded the theme last June in his landmark environmental encyclical, “Laudato Si’,” in which he held rich countries most responsible for climate change and obligated them to help poor ones deal with the crisis. Then in a July visit to Bolivia, Francis compared the excesses of capitalism to the “dung of the devil” and apologized for the church’s role in Spanish colonialism in Latin America, warning of the “new colonialism” of materialism, inequality and exploitation.
“Once capital becomes an idol and guides people’s decisions, once greed for money presides over the entire socioeconomic system, it ruins society, it condemns and enslaves men and women, it destroys human fraternity, it sets people against one another and, as we clearly see, it even puts at risk our common home,” one of Francis’ speeches in Bolivia asserted.
To some conservatives in the United States, the Argentine pope seems to be making a frontal assault on the American way. Rush Limbaugh blasted him as a Marxist. Others labeled him a communist or socialist. Some affluent Catholic donors withdrew pledges or expressed discomfort.
“I hope I’m not going to get castigated for saying this by my priest back home, but I don’t get economic policy from my bishops or my cardinals or my pope,” Jeb Bush, a Republican presidential candidate and a Catholic, said in response to the environmental encyclical.