Archibald Prize 2016: Portrait of Barry Humphries by Louise Hearman wins
This year's Archibald Prize has been awarded to Louise Hearman for her portrait of Barry Humphries.
Hearman won $100,000 for her oil on masonite painting of the 82-year-old comedian, satirist and actor.
As she accepted the prize for the work titled 'Barry', Hearman said the portrait had taken several years to make.
"Every feature on this painting has been in a different place at some point and it took me several years to make it," she said.
"I had to keep waiting for Barry to come back from overseas to Australia, and I had to go up to his face, look into his eyes and try to work out what colour they were."
Hearman said Humphries, known for his alter ego characters Dame Edna Everage and Les Patterson, was a very difficult person to paint.
"I hope I kept him open, like he wasn't one thing or another," she said. "He's all things at once."
Hearman, 53, studied at the Victorian College of the Arts and is known for her dark, dream-like paintings.
She said the local industry had been difficult for artists in recent years.
"Life in Australia has been pretty ragged for visual artists in the last few years, so now I'm back in the black," Hearman said.
"It's sad that so much great talent in Australia has to leave this country to make a living from what they do.
"I love Australia, I want to stay here, I want to work here, and this prize will really help me do that."
Curator Natalie Wilson said women had featured prominently among this year's 51 finalists.
"Women have won all of the prizes this year, the Archibald, the Wynne and the Sulman prizes.
"It just shows that there is no difference in women and men when it comes to the arts."
The Wynne Prize was awarded to the Ken Family Collaborative for their work 'Seven Sisters' and Ester Stewart won the Sulman Prize for 'Flatland Dreaming'.
Sydney artist Tim Storrier won the 2014 Archibald Packing Room Prize for his portrait of Humphries as alter ego Sir Leslie Patterson.
And in 1969, Humphries depicted as Dame Edna Everage by John Brack was also an Archibald finalist.
Among the 51 finalists this year, subjects included Wendy Whitely, Ken Done, and designer duo Pamela Easton and Lydia Pearson.
Indigenous Australian model Sam Harris was a subject, as was criminal lawyer and former child solider Deng Adut, who came to Australia in 1998 as a refugee after fleeing South Sudan.
The Packing Room Prize was awarded last week to Betina Fauvel-Ogden for her oil on linen portrait of MasterChef judge George Calombaris.
In its 95th year, the annual Archibald Prize will be on exhibition at the Art Gallery of New South Wales from Saturday.