Sorry for Having Insulted China? Here’s Your Chance to Apologize
“If you have any thing want to apologize to China, Welcome to attend the first annual ‘Apologise to China’ contest,” the page reads in English. The contest began Saturday and expires July 30 and the winner will be crowned ‘The first king of apologize to China!’” the page said.
In one video on the page that is proving a popular contender for the title, several men prance around a room in what look like rubber wet suits, slapping themselves on the face and bottom, apologizing.
Most of the video is in Cantonese, the language spoken in Hong Kong and southern China, but one set of apologies is sung in Japanese. Japan is another target for Chinese online patriotic ire because of a territorial dispute over the islands known as the Diaoyu in China and the Senkaku in Japan. Here are some of the lyrics:
Recently, the trolling reached saturation point for Kiko Mizuhara, 25, a Japanese-American model and actress who, separately and in earnest, apologized to those who said she had expressed anti-China sentiments. She stood accused of “liking” an image by the artist Ai Weiwei of a lifted middle finger on Tiananmen Square, among other things.
Online, some sprang to Ms. Mizuhara’s defense: “China really is a damnable pile of mentally ill people and crazy dogs,” wrote Chuang Viki underneath the video broadcast on YouTube, which is blocked by Chinese censors.
Another recent high-profile target who has been obliged to issue an apology is the Taiwanese actor Leon Dai. Tens of thousands of Weibo posts have accused him of supporting independence for Taiwan and Falun Gong, a spiritual group that is banned on the Chinese mainland.
“You are not good enough to be Chinese,” wrote one person, in a typical comment. “You Taiwan independence separatist won’t have a good death.”
Last week, Zhao Wei, a mainland Chinese actress and director also known as Vicki Zhao, said she was dropping Mr. Dai from her movie “No Other Love” over the uproar.
In January, the Taiwan pop singer Chou Tzu-yu, a member of a South Korean band, apologized after being excoriated by Chinese commenters online for holding a Taiwanese flag during presidential elections on the island.
For many Asian artists, the Chinese market has become a core part of their sales, exposing them to threats of boycott.
“Apologized yet today?” a person wrote on the Facebook page, summing up the mood.
Online wrath for those who cross China surged after a ruling last week by an international tribunal rejecting the country’s claims to most of the South China Sea.
On its official Weibo site, the Communist Youth League praised the waxing patriotic fervor.
“The Leon Dai scandal and the South China Sea tribunal ruling have flooded China’s social media,” it wrote. “The young people rushing onto center stage are changing the rules of the game of social media.”
“They have built a path of national territorial integrity and sovereignty that are core interests of the country, and that constitute a red line that cannot be crossed,” it added. “And that’s the own choice of a new generation.”
Over the weekend, a popular Beijing-based Taiwan journalist, Gong Ling, committed suicide, leaving a note saying, “There is nothing in China that is not political.”
Ms. Gong had reportedly had depression, but she said she had also been the target of criticism by mainland Chinese who applied “trumped-up labels” to attack her pro-Taiwan politics.
But even that was an occasion for nationalistic criticism online, with some on the mainland Chinese site Zhihu saying that Ms. Gong lacked resilience, and that the tragedy reflected that China was becoming powerful and Taiwan weaker.