Lady Gaga Gets A Concussion, Keeps On Singing
Maybe Lady Gaga's fans should call her Mother Terminator instead of Mother Monster. The unstoppable pop machine proved her mettle on Sunday night during the last of three shows in New Zealand when she was struck in the head with a pole and just kept on rocking.
Videos of the incident posted online show a male backup dancer accidentally hitting Gaga in the head with a metal set piece while trying to take move it off the stage. Gaga, who bent down to pick up a prop machine gun during the performance of "Judas," staggered a bit and rubbed her head before briefly walking off the stage. But, a short time later, she was right back at it, performing 16 more songs before calling it a night.
Later in the gig, she told the audience, "I want to apologize. I did hit my head and I think I may have a concussion. But don't you worry, I will finish this show." The singer's make-up artist, Tara Savelo, tweeted about the incident on Sunday, writing, "Gaga has a concussion but she is going to be okay. She wants u to know she loves u. I'm taking care of her. Can't believe she finished the show."
Maybe at the next big awards show she can trade notes with Justin Bieber, who recently suffered a concussion  when he walked into a glass wall backstage during an appearance in Paris.
There was other news out of her New Zealand swing as well. After Madonna called Gaga out  during her tour kick-off in Tel Aviv recently by playing a mash-up of her "Express Yourself" with Gaga's similar-sounding 'Born This Way' and then ending the song by chanting, "She's not me," Gaga appeared to respond to the dis.
While playing her follicular pride tune "Hair" during a NZ show on Thursday, Gaga sat down at her motorcycle-shaped keyboard and appeared to respond to the incident. "It sometimes makes people feel better about themselves to put other people down or make fun of them or maybe make mockery of their work," she said in a video of the speech posted on YouTube in which she speaks in general terms about knocking down others to make yourself feel better. (Speech starts at 2:30 mark.)
"And that doesn't make me feel good at all. That just makes me feel like I'm not being a good human being ... I don't even want to fight back because it's more important to me to keep writing music. Because that's really all I care about, is the music ... things are really different than they were 25 years ago, and that's what makes 'Born this Way' so relevant for me. We're socially in a different place and it's OK, we don't have to all slice and hate each other anymore."