Warner Brothers accuses its own websites of copyright violation
Several Warner Brothers websites are violating the film company’s copyright ... according to Warner Brothers.
The studio flagged some of its own sites as piracy portals, and asked Google to erase them from search results, in a bizarre takedown request.
Vobile, a digital copyright company, sent the request to Google on behalf of Warner Brothers in mid-August.
The message obsentibly asked Google to nix hundreds of little-known sites that, according to Warner Brothers, allow people to pirate the company’s hit films.
Daily News winners visit the movie New York at Universal Studios
But as the copyright site Torrent Freak first noted, Warner Brothers blamed itself for its own privacy problems.
The takedown request included the official Warner Brothers websites for the blockbusters “The Dark Knight” and “The Matrix.”
The notice also demanded Google remove a search result for Amazon, and for the IMDB page for “Batman Begins.”
The message did not specify how those websites allegedly allowed users to torrent the films.
Vobile CEO Yangbin Wang told the Daily News the company "never intended" to make it look like Warner Brothers was implicating itself. He blamed "a bug" in their search process for why the company's sites ended up on the list of web addresses, also known as URL's.
"In total there are less than a handful of URLs out of millions of proven piracy URLs reported for taking down by error," Wang said in an email. "None of the four URLs on legitimate sites were ever removed because it's an obvious error."  
The pages remained among the first search results for those movies Monday afternoon.
Warner Brothers and Google did not immediately return messages from the Daily News.
Vobile represents several other entertainment companies, including Paramount, Netflix and Viacom Media Networks. It has sent more than 32,000 takedown requests to Google since 2012, which included nearly 14 million webpages, according to Google’s data.
Vobile sent its most recent requests on Monday, targeting tens of thousands of pages on behalf of Warner Brothers, Viacom, Netflix and several other companies. One Warner Brothers request included a link to an inactive Facebook page.