2017 Golden Globes TV Nominations reactions
The Hollywood Foreign Press unveiled the nominees for the 2017 Golden Globes early Monday morning, and as always, the list of TV shows and stars featured both expected veterans like Veep’s Julia Louis-Dreyfus and first-timers like FX’s Atlanta and Insecure‘s Issa Rae. 
From Crazy Ex-Girlfriend‘s Rachel Bloom to the This Is Us cast, see their reactions below, and click here for reactions to the movie nominations:
Sterling K. Brown, nominated for Best Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role in a Series, Limited Series, or Motion Picture Made for Television, for People v. O.J. Simpson: American Crime Story: “HFPA! Y’all crazy for this one… and I couldn’t be more grateful! Thank you for such a tremendous honor! What a wonderful way to finish off the year…wow! In recognition that no one gets to this place in their career by themselves, I have to first thank my wife and two children for giving me such a clear purpose for being. Ryan, Andrew, Amaré… you make this all worthwhile! Jennifer Wiley Stockton… thank you for doing so much, so that I can stay focused on the task at hand. Let us never part. Michael Geiser, you are unsung, sir! (And if you erase this from my statement, we’ll have words)! Love you, buddy. To my agents at Innovative Artists, especially my man David Rose, thank you for giving your boy all the support he could ask for. St. Louis, I rep you ’til the day I die! To all my family and friends there, thank you for making your boy feel special. #ChocolateCardinal y’all know I luvs you! To my artistic family from NYC, including (but not limited to) my friends and faculty at the grad acting program at NYU, thank you for keeping your boy nourished and fed. Literally and spiritually. Namaste.”
Dan Fogelman, creator of This Is Us, which is nominated for Best Television Series, Drama:
Chrissy Metz, nominated for Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series, Limited Series, or Motion Picture Made for Television
Ryan Murphy, executive producer of The People v OJ: American Crime Story, which was nominated for Best Television Limited Series or Motion Picture Made for Television: “What a great morning for everyone who worked so hard on The People v. OJ: American Crime Story! Thank you Hollywood Foreign Press for the recognition, and congratulations to my incredible producing partners and amazing actors. This project  is easily one of the most satisfying of my professional life. I am feeling very blessed and appreciative today.”
Julia Louis-Dreyfus, star of Veep, who was nominated for Best Performance By an Actress in a Television Series, Musical, or Comedy: “Huge thanks to the Hollywood Foreign Press Association and the Russian hackers that made our nominations possible.”
Rachel Bloom, nominated for Best Performance By an Actress in a Television Series, Musical, or Comedy, for Crazy Ex-Girlfriend  
Hugh Laurie, star of The Night Manager, nominated for Best Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role in a Series, Limited Series, or Motion Picture Made for Television: “It’s an incredible honor to be nominated in the last ever Golden Globes.”
Kerry Washington, nominated for Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Series, Limited Series or Motion Picture Made for Television, for Confirmation
Brian Tyree Henry, star of Atlanta, nominated for Best Television Series, Comedy: “Atlanta!!!!! We were nominated for a Golden Globes Award. Thank you HFPA! I am beyond honored and can’t thank everyone enough!!!! This is so dope! Seriously. The love we’ve been shown this year is unlike any other.”  
Issa Rae, star of Insecure, nominated for Best Performance By an Actress in a Television Series, Musical, or Comedy:
Rami Malek, star of Mr. Robot, who was nominated for Best Performance by an Actor in a Television Series, Drama: “I’m incredibly grateful to the Hollywood Foreign Press Association for recognizing me in this group of distinguished and accomplished actors. I’m thrilled to be sharing this moment with my co-star and fellow nominee Christian Slater. I am so thankful for the brilliant mind of Sam Esmail, USA Network, Universal Cable Productions, and the exceptionally gifted cast, crew, and writers of Mr. Robot.” 
Thandie Newton, nominated for Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series, Limited Series, or Motion Picture Made for Television, for Westworld: 
Evan Rachel Wood, nominated for Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series, for Westworld: “Being a part of Westworld is such an honor. Dolores is the greatest character I’ve ever played. I’m so thankful to everyone on the show and that these groundbreaking complex roles are being written for women and even more grateful that the Hollywood Foreign Press is recognizing me and the show for it. Thank you.” 
Riz Ahmed, star of The Night Of, nominated for Best Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Series, Limited Series, or Motion Picture Made for Television: “Thank you HFPA! I’m absolutely thrilled to be counted amongst this year’s nominees. I’m deeply indebted to Steve Zaillian, Richard Price, HBO, to all the cast and crew of The Night Of for their dedication in bringing this timely story to life, and all those who shared their stories of prison and prejudice with me in researching this role. It was an honour to portray Nas, and through him the untold stories of so many.”
Jeffrey Tambor, star of Transparent, nominated for Best Performance By an Actor in a Television Series, Musical, or Comedy: “Maura Pfefferman continues to be the role of a lifetime, and I’m honored to be recognized by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association. I’m very excited to celebrate our series nomination with the amazing Jill Soloway and my extraordinary co-stars.”
John Turturro, star of The Night Of, nominated for Best Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Series, Limited Series, or Motion Picture Made for Television: “It’s nice to be invited to the party, thank you HFPA.  I am especially pleased to share it with my acting partner Riz Ahmed.  And of course, our indomitable leader Steve Zaillian and Richard Price.”
Anthony Anderson, star of black-ish, nominated for Best Performance by an Actor in a Television Series, Musical, or Comedy: 
The Duffer Brothers and executive producers Shawn Levy and Dan Cohen on Stranger Things nomination for Best Television Series, Drama: “Thank you to the Hollywood Foreign Press Association for this recognition. We are so humbled and honored that our show has struck a chord with audiences around the world. We are constantly inspired by the tireless, phenomenal work of our cast and crew, and we are particularly excited for Winona, who created an indelible performance that viewers won’t soon forget.”
Tracee Ellis Ross, star of black-ish, nominated for Best Performance By an Actress in a Television Series, Musical, or Comedy: 
Gael Garcia Bernal, star of Mozart in the Jungle, nominated for Best Performance By an Actor in a Television Series, Musical, or Comedy: “I’m so thrilled I was nominated for Mozart in the Jungle and that the show was nominated. I’m equally as thrilled Neruda was nominated for Best Foreign Film. I’m so lucky to be a part of both projects. Thank you to the Hollywood Foreign Press.”
Liev Schreiber, star of Ray Donovan, nominated for Best Performance By an Actor in a Television Series, Drama: What a great wake up call…Thank you to all the writers on Ray Donovan, Ann Biderman, David Hollander, David Nevins, and the extraordinary cast of actors who carry me through every season of this show. Huge thanks to the Hollywood Foreign Press Association for continuing to support our show and for giving me another great excuse to play dress up with the boys. We are thrilled! 
Christian Slater, star of Mr. Robot, nominated for Best Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role in a Series, Limited Series, or Motion Picture Made for Television: “I am so grateful for this incredible recognition and privileged to be included in this category beside these wildly talented actors. Thank you so much to the HFPA, and a huge congratulations to my dear friend and co-star, Rami Malek. I’m so thrilled to be celebrating this nomination with him. I also share this with the entire Mr. Robot family – Sam Esmail is a true creative genius and I am blown away by the talent on this show: Portia, Carly, Grace, Stephanie and the entire cast and crew.”
Gina Rodriguez, star of Jane the Virgin, nominated for Best Performance By an Actress in a Television Series, Musical, or Comedy: “Thank you to the HFPA for always recognizing new and unbelievable talent regardless of color or culture. The HFPA changed my life three years ago and they continue to do so for so many talented artists and projects out there. How wonderful it is to see an awards show so full of diversity, and not just for diversity sake, but because of the phenomenal performances. I feel beyond blessed and humbled to have been one of their discoveries. It’s 10pm in Thailand and I think we are going out for a celebratory beer and tacos. Yup. I said tacos in Thailand, wish me luck!”
Bob Odenkirk, star of Better Call Saul, who was nominated for Best Performance By an Actor in a Television Series, Drama: “Blown away again to be recognized in the sea of excellence that is TV drama right now. I’m going to take it as a compliment for every aspect of Better Call Saul. The writing, the entire cast around me and everyone involved in the production of it. I really love getting to know the empathetic character Jimmy McGill, the man behind the not so empathetic, rapscallion Saul Goodman. Thank you to the Hollywood Foreign Press!”
Sarah Jessica Parker, star of Divorce, nominated for Best Performance By an Actress in a Television Series, Musical, or Comedy: “This is such delightful news. I’m deeply honored to be included among women whose work I admire so much. Especially thrilled given all the impressive and affecting performances by women in television this past season. I’ve been granted a wonderful opportunity to return to television in a fantastically challenging, exquisitely written role I love and the privilege of working alongside people who inspire daily, most especially Thomas Hayden Church. I thank the HFPA for their kind consideration and for the great early morning surprise.” 
Claire Foy, star of The Crown, nominated for Best Performance by an Actress in a TV Series, Drama: “I am so delighted by the nominations The Crown has received today! The whole experience has been wonderful. I feel very lucky to have had the opportunity to bring Peter Morgan’s Princess Elizabeth to life; she is a gift of a role and a challenge I am so grateful for—a young woman trying to navigate a path through an extraordinary situation. I must thank the HFPA for this nomination, it’s such an honour. More than anything I am so happy that people have enjoyed the show the way they have and recognised the hard work of the truly brilliant ensemble cast and crew. I would also like to congratulate John and everyone on The Crown for their nominations today.
Millie Bobby Brown, star of Stranger Things, which was nominated for Best Television Series, Drama: 
Noah Schnapp, star of Stranger Things, which was nominated for Best Television Series, Drama: “I am so excited! Stranger Things received a Golden Globe nomination!! Thank you HFPA for this honor. I am especially thankful to the Duffer Brothers, Shawn Levy, Dan Cohen and the entire Netflix team for having given me this amazing opportunity to be a part of something so special.” 
Peter Morgan, creator of The Crown, which was nominated for Best Television Series, Drama: “I am thrilled with the nominations for The Crown. Delighted of course for Claire and John, but this was a massive team effort, and the Best Drama – Television nomination really reflects that. I am proud of everyone involved. Thank you so much to the HFPA.”
Susanne Bier, executive producer of The Night Manager, which was nominated for Best Television Limited Series or Motion Picture Made for Television: “I am so excited and proud that the Hollywood Foreign Press Association has recognized our show, The Night Manager, as well as the outstanding actors Tom Hiddleston, Olivia Colman and Hugh Laurie, and the genius behind it all, John LeCarre. I am incredibly happy by this tremendous honor.”
Riley Keough, star of The Girlfriend Experience, nominated for Best Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Series, Limited Series or Motion Picture Made for Television: “I am so honored and honestly shocked to be recognized for my role in The Girlfriend Experience. I have been very luck to work with Steven Soderbergh throughout my career. I’m thankful for Amy Seimetz for creating this complicated female character, and even more grateful to the HFPA for recognizing such an unusual character.”
Colin Callender and Sonia Friedman, executive producers of The Dresser which was nominated for Best Limited Series: “The single drama which celebrates great writing and great performances is an endangered species. The Dresser’s nomination is a tribute to the HFPA’s support for this important and beloved form. This nomination is a testament to Ronald Harwood’s brilliant writing, Richard Eyre’s glorious direction and a masterclass in acting by Anthony Hopkins and Ian McKellen, along with all the support we received from Starz and the BBC.”
Mark S. Greenberg, President of EPIX on Graves star Nick Nolte’s nomination for Best Performance By an Actor in a Television Series, Musical, or Comedy: “We are incredibly honored for the support and recognition of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association of Nick Nolte’s masterful portrayal of a former President who endeavors to make good on a less than auspicious political career in one of our first original series. Graves’ was undeniably prescient in its reflection of issues that surfaced on the debate floors of this year’s election, many of which were once thought too outrageous in the writers’ room only to see them come to life during the Presidential campaign.”