'The Help' wins best ensemble – USATODAY.com
9:57:Brad Pitt presents the last award of the night: film ensemble. It goes to The Help. This win and Davis' are sure to have Oscar prognosticators re-crunching their numbers tomorrow. Davis speaks for her castmates, saying "An ensemble is a group brought together to achieve a single effect."
9:50:Ben Kingsley presents the lead film actress category. Guess that means Colin Firth is indisposed. He hands it off to Viola Davis from The Help. "I was eight years old when I decided to be an actress. I'm so inspired to be here with the woman who inspired me … Cicely Tyson." She then commands a group of kids in Rhode Island to "dream big and dream fierce."
9:40: Last year's winner for lead actress in a film, Natalie Portman, returns to name this year's lead actor winner. And it's …Jean Dujardin from The Artist, who's getting lots of chances to practice his English this awards season.
9:34:TNT trots out Dallas stars Patrick Duffy, Linda Gray and Larry Hagman (complete with white cowboy hat) to present the TV drama ensemble prize. Boardwalk Empire wins for the second consecutive year. Buscemi hoists each of the kids in the cast and says, "I've got nothing. Martin Scorsese."
9:22: "I believe it was director Sidney Lumet who gave this advice to actors: Know thyself," begins presenter John Krasinski. Co-presenter Tina Fey: "I believe it was Today show fourth-hour host Kathie Lee Gifford who said, 'If drag queens love you, you'll have the longest career in the world.'"
They hand over the TV drama actor award to Boardwalk Empire's Steve Buscemi, who wins for a second consecutive time. He begins, "I have to thank our talented director, Martin Scorsese. You can drink." He finishes up by apologizing to fans of Michael Pitt, whose character, Jimmy, was killed in the Season 2 finale. "I know, I'm sorry. Please stop yelling at me on the street."
9:18:American Horror Story's Jessica Lange follows up her Golden Globe with the SAG award for TV actress in a drama.
9:03:Dick Van Dyke gets his own standing ovation while introducing life achievement honoree Mary Tyler Moore. "MTM. Everyone in the civilized world knows what that stands for," he says. (We suggest you test that theory out on the the 20-somethings in your office tomorrow.)
After running down her accomplishments, Van Dyke adds, "That's my Mary. She really did make it after all," and brings out MTM herself. She explains how she got the Tyler in Mary Tyler Moore —there were already multiple Mary Moores in the SAG rolls and she was encouraged to change her name. She opted to use her middle name, which she shares with her father.
8:58:Kristen Wiig, Maya Rudolph and Melissa McCarthy share the drinking game they made up on the set of Bridesmaids: "Drink every time you hear 'Scorsese.' You'd be surprised how often that comes up in casual conversation."
8:51: SAG President Ken Howard announces that his board and that of AFTRA (American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, which represents on-air talent, writers and producers) have voted to merge the two unions. The vote now rests in the hands of the rank-and-file members.
8:46: The TV miniseries/movie actor win belongs to Paul Giamatti, who played Fed chair Ben Bernanke in HBO's Too Big to Fail… and he's not in the room, either.
8:42:Kate Winslet is not on hand to pick up the TV miniseries/movie actress she's won for HBO's Mildred Pierce. Moving on …
8:32: TV comedy ensemble honors go to Modern Family, though sadly Eric Stonestreet (Cameron) does not light firecrackers to the sounds of Let's Hear it for the Boy from the Footloose soundtrack, as he did in the clip shown. "I think it was the great W.C. Fields who said, 'Never work with kids or animals,'" says Nolan Gould (Luke). "Well, he can kiss my …"
8:24: Betty White (Hot in Cleveland) looks pretty floored when her name is called to come collect the TV comedy actress trophy. "I don't think they can read," she says of the presenters. "I think they made a terrible mistake." She goes on to say that though the nomination goes to all four members of the cast, "I'm not going to let them keep it. I'll let them look at it."
8:20: The TV comedy actor trophy will go home with 30 Rock's Alec Baldwin. It's his sixth consecutive award in the category. "Omigod!" he exclaims. "No offense to anyone else here, but we have the best writers."
8:13:Octavia Spencer builds momentum for Oscar night by taking the SAG supporting actress win. "I'd like to thank an unsung hero of The Help, Medgar Evers and his family." (Evers' assassination plays a role in the plot.) She goes on to say, "I dedicate this to the underserved, underprivileged and overtaxed."
8:04:My Week With Marilyn star Michelle Williams presents the film supporting actor trophy to Christopher Plummer. It's the first win for Captain Von Trapp. "I can't tell you what it's like being a member of the world's second-oldest profession," Plummer cracks. "When they honor you, it's like being licked by the Holy Grail."
8:02: The night's first "I'm (Name Here) and I'm an actor" speech goes to Two and a Half Men's Jon Cryer, who said his back-up vocation was being an astronaut, so he weighed his options: "Actors get to meet famous people and astronauts spend long periods of time in pressure suits filled with their own urine. I'm Jon Cryer and I'm an actor."
7:55: Guess Brad Pitt is over his injury -- he's cane-free tonight. And he and Angelina Jolie, decked in a low-backed dress that showed off her tattoos, got the night's biggest applause.
7:41:Aaron Paul notes that this is the first time the Breaking Bad cast has been nominated as an ensemble. He's also a bit bittersweet about what's to come on the show: "We have one more season and it's going to blow our past seasons away."
7:40:The Help's Cicely Tyson went the fashion-over-function route tonight. She's wearing a gray dress by B. Michael, who is with her on the red carpet, and a chinchilla stole: "I'm not cold. This is all about fashion!"
7:31:Glee's Kevin McHale (Artie) on kissing scenes: "Nobody's really good at them. It's like table hockey."
7:29: Asked if he'd ever drop trou like Michael Fassbender did in Shame, George Clooney just had this to say on the matter: "I'm 50. I'm just trying to keep the trou up."
7:19: "I always wear panties!" exclaimed Modern Family's Sofia Vergara to E!. Vergara, a nominee for TV comedy actress, probably disappointed a few fans with this declaration. "They are very tiny but I am wearing them." Asked what body parts she didn't like, she was at least honest: "There are not that many parts I want to improve."
7:16: Supporting actor nominee Nick Nolte (Warrior) is all over your TV tonight. In addition to appearing at the SAGs, his new HBO series Luck debuts further on down the cable dial at 9 p.m. ET/PT.
Nolte admits the SAGs aren't quite his scene. "I'd like to be at home, quiet, sitting in the pool, but this is a good time to hang out with my peers," he tells USA TODAY's Andrea Mandell. "Actors don't tend to hang out with each other, just like painters don't hang out with painters. You work on a movie, you get along with the actors, and you say you'll meet up but you never do. And then you work with them five years later." One way he's coping with red carpet duty: "I've got candy," he said as he noshed on a Twix bar.
7:17: "Who inspired you to become an actor?" E!'s Guiliana Rancic asked Dexter's Colin Hanks. "Let's go with Chewbacca," he answered. When she gave him a "what the …" face, he explained, "When you look into those Wookiee eyes, you just get lost."
7:10 p.m. ET/PT: Good evening, everyone, and welcome to USA TODAY's coverage of the Screen Actors Guild Awards. To some, the SAG Awards might be one of the minor trophy handouts in Hollywood, but not to Julianna Margulies, who's up for TV dramatic actress for The Good Wife. "This is the heart of the awards shows, because you're being respected by your fellow actors."
Her co-star, Matt Czuchry, admits he may need a refresher course in red-carpet preparation. He had his Bernardo Rojo bowtie pre-tied before he left New York. "I was smart. I had a real problem last year. I used to know how to tie it in college but somehow I forgot."