Prince Philip retires: Queen Elizabeth's husband bows out of public life
For more than 65 years, he has been the unwavering presence alongside the world's longest-reigning living monarch, the consummate consort and royal representative.
Now Prince Philip, 96, has completed his 22,219th and final solo public engagement, braving pouring rain to meet Royal Marines at Buckingham Palace.
The Duke of Edinburgh appeared in good spirits, waving to cheering crowds holding Union Jack umbrellas.
Inside the palace gates he joked with the soldiers, who had completed 2,678 kilometre trek to raise money for charity.
"You all should be locked up," quipped the Prince, who is known for his sense of humour and off-colour gaffes.
Philip, the husband of Queen Elizabeth, watched as a unit of marines marched past him in formation in a ceremonial procedure known as taking the salute.
Afterwards, the soldiers let out three cheers for the Prince, with one more coming from a watching crowd behind.
As the band played For He's a Jolly Good Fellow, Philip lifted his hat and gave a rare wave — perhaps a sign that he too accepted the significance of the moment.
Philip has been Captain General of the marines since 1953, and has a personal connection with the Royal Navy after serving with the force in World War II.
He announced he was stepping down from public duties in May.
The Royal recently joked about his big retirement day, telling celebrity chef Prue Leith: "I'm discovering what it's like to be on your last legs."
Philip has given 5,496 speeches, written 14 books and gone on 637 solo visits overseas.
He has championed environmental and conservation issues, and has interests in science, engineering and industry.
He is a patron, president or a member of over 780 organisations. He will continue to be associated with them, but will not play an active role by attending engagements.
While he has enjoyed overall good health, Philip has been admitted to the hospital on a number of occasions in the past few years for abdominal surgery, bladder infections and a blocked coronary artery.
Philip has poked fun at himself and his advancing years. In a letter to The Oldie magazine in 2011, he said he appreciated being named "Consort of the Year".
"There is nothing like it for morale to be reminded that the years are passing ever more quickly, and that bits are beginning to drop off the ancient frame," he wrote.
"But it is nice to be remembered at all."
The palace has said his health was not behind the retirement decision.
The Queen, the world's longest-reigning living monarch who celebrated her 91st birthday in April, will continue to carry out a full program of official engagements.
Philip, described by Elizabeth as "my strength and stay", will still appear at her side from time to time.