Tongan crown prince marries second cousin
The Pacific nation held a national holiday today for the lavish wedding of the 27-year-old prince, Tupouto’a ’Ukukalala, who is first in line to the throne, to 25-year-old Sinaitakala Fakafanua, who is 26th in line.
The celebrations, which included traditional offerings by commoners of roast pork, marked the end of a 100-day mourning period following the sudden death in March of the flamboyant monarch, King George V.
But the marriage — the first of a crown prince in 65 years – has been mired in controversy over the decision to continue the practice of marriage between cousins.
In 1969, a 21-year-old princess studying in Auckland married a commoner policeman but was forced by her family to return home and have the marriage annulled.
According to Tongan royal protocol, members of the royal family must marry into a noble family to keep the bloodline strong.
One royal family member, Princess Frederica Tuita, publicly said earlier this year that the bloodline was too narrow, while others raised the prospect of health problems.
Princess Tuita, ninth in line to the throne, attacked the wedding, saying the royal system of arranged marriages ”was extremely arrogant and only perpetuated the motive behind social climbers”.
A veteran pro-democracy politician, ’Akilisi Pohiva, criticised the wedding, saying the family wanted to keep “the royal blood to their own family”.
“They are too close,” he told TVNZ earlier this year. “I do not know about biological effects of two close bloods mixed together, but I think they need new blood from outside.”
A leader of the influential Tongan community in New Zealand, Will Ilolahia, said many in Tonga opposed this week’s marriage but were reluctant to speak out.
“In the Tongan society we don’t have a word for cousins, cousins are actually brothers and sisters,” he tod ABC Radio.
Mr Ilolahia said he was concerned about the genetic risk of close relatives marrying, though geneticists have said the dangers are minimal.