Comedian Phyllis Diller dies in Los Angeles; celebs react
One of the true legends of the comedy world, Phyllis Diller, has died in Los Angeles.
"She died peacefully in her sleep with a smile on her face," her longtime manager, Milton Suchin, tells the Associated Press.
Diller, known for her loud cackle laugh, died at her L.A. home, surrounded by family members. She was 95. She had recently fallen, hurting her wrist and hip, and her health had been on the decline ever since, according to TMZ. She had been living in hospice care at her home.
Diller suffered a heart attack in 1999 and was later fitted with a pacemaker.
Phyllis began her career in 1952 and rose to fame with her TV specials alongside Bob Hope in the 1960s.
Comedians, and other entertainers, are paying tribute to the funny lady via Twitter. Among the celebs:
Ellen DeGeneres: "We lost a comedy legend today. Phyllis Diller was the queen of the one-liners. She was a pioneer."
Whoopi Goldberg: "A true original has died. Phyllis Diller There was NOOne like her, no 1looked like her sounded like her. A FUNNY FUNNY. Classy& Smart RIP"
Joan Rivers: "I'm beyond saddened by the death of Phyllis Diller. We were friends - Melissa and I had a wonderful time with her at lunch just a month ago."
Ruth Buzzi: "Phyllis Diller, thank you for what you did for all women in comedy who followed your path. My dear friend, rest in peace; I'll miss you."
Marie Osmond: "What a voice. What a presence. She was an all-out comedian. We will miss Phyllis Diller."
Dane Cook: "Phyllis Diller passed away - age 95. Legend. Inspiration. A funny human being that brought tons of laughs to this world. #RIP"
Henry Winkler: "PHYLLIS DILLER : a painter on canvas and in humor of the human condition MAY REST IN PEACE making GOD laugh"
Reba McEntire: "Gonna miss Phyllis Diller. Rest in peace my friend. The world is a better place because of you. Happy Trails."
And Barbra Streisand released this: "I adored her. She was a wondrous spirit who was great to me."