Kim Ki-duk's 'Pieta' wins Venice top prize
Korean director Kim Ki-duk's drama ``Pieta,'' the brutal story of a debt collector who cripples those who can't pay until he meets a woman who claims to be his mother, won the Golden Lion for best film at the 69th Venice Film Festival on Saturday. In a departure from the usual acceptance speeches, Kim thanked the jury and festival audience with a short song in Korean, leaving the theater in rapt silence. The Silver Lion for best director went to Paul Thomas Anderson for `'The Master,'' a film inspired by Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard. The movie's stars, Joaquin Phoenix and Philip Seymour Hoffman, shared the prize for best actor. In the film, Hoffman plays a charismatic sect leader who both befriends and enthralls a World War II veteran, played by Phoenix, who is drowning in homemade swill and unable to find a job or a life purpose. Hoffman accepted both awards on behalf of both Anderson and Phoenix, who had continued from Venice on to Toronto to promote the film. Hoffman apologized for being ruffled, saying he had just landed at the airport and had changed into his suit in a restroom. ``So don't judge,'' he jested. Hoffman praised Phoenix as a `'life force'' and called Anderson ``one of my closest friends.'' ``Friend first, collaborator second. And he happens to be one of the great filmmakers in the world. How lucky am I?'' said Hoffman, who has appeared in five of Anderson's films. The best actress award went to Israeli actress Hadas Yaron for her role in Rama Burshtein's ``Fill the Void.'' The movie, set in Tel Aviv's Hasidic community, tells the story of 18-year-old Shira, played by Yaron, who faces the choice of whether or not to marry the widower of her beloved sister after her death in childbirth. ``Paradise: Faith,'' by Austrian filmmaker Ulrich Seidl, took the special jury prize. The film, the second part in Seidl's trilogy about three women from the same family on different quests, stars Maria Hofstaetter as a single woman who dedicates her vacation to missionary work. The movie caused a stir in the Italian media for a scene in which Hofstaetter's character simulates sex with a crucifix _ a point that the director addressed briefly while accepting the award. ``I am not blasphemous,'' Seidl told the audience. ``Pieta'' follows a young debt collector he goes about his business maiming debtors until his ruthless course is interrupted by a stranger who claims to be his mother. His acceptance of his mother weakens his resolve to brutally collect the debts, leaving him vulnerable to revenge. Korea's Yonhap news agency called ``Pieta'' ``a bruising but wisely woven drama (that) plainly shows how money can destroy humanity and create hellish interpersonal relationships.'' ``Pieta'' is the Italian word for pity, but also applies to the artistic image in sculpture or painting of the Virgin Mary cradling the dead body of Jesus, evoking a mother's love for her son. Yonhap said the title ``gives the false impression that the film is about trying to find meaning in life through religion.'' Other prizes were: Best emerging actor or actress: Italian actor Fabrizio Falco for roles in two competition films, Daniele Cipri's ``It was the Son,'' and Marco Bellocchio's ``Dormant Beauty.'' Best screenplay: French director Olivier Assayas for ``Something in the Air.'' Best technical contribution: Cipri for ``It was the Son.'' (AP) 김기덕 감독의 영화 '피에타'가 8일 오후(현지시간) 이탈리아 베니스에서 열린 제69회 베니스국제영화제 시상식에서 황금사자상(최우수작품상)을 수상했다. 한국영화가 베니스국제영화제, 프랑스의 칸국제영화제, 독일의 베를린국제영화제 등 세계 3대 영화제에서 최고상을 수상한 것은 이번이 처음이다. 특히 베니스 영화제는 세계에서 가장 오랜 역사를 자랑하는 영화제다. 한국영화로는 2005년 박찬욱 감독의 '친절한 금자씨'가 베니스영화제에 초청된 이후 7년 만에 '피에타'가 경쟁부문에 진출해 최고상을 받는 영예를 안게 됐다. '피에타'는 경쟁부문에 초청된 테렌스 맬릭 감독의 '투 더 원더(To The Wonder)', 폴 토머스 앤더슨의 '더 마스터(The Master)', 브라이언 드 팔마의 '패션(Passion)' 등 18개 작품 가운데 최우수작품에 선정됐다. 은사자상(감독상)은 '더 마스터'의 폴 토머스 앤더슨 감독이 수상했다. 남우주연상은 '더 마스터'의 주연인 호아킨 피닉스와 필립 세이모어 호프먼이 공동수상했고, 여우주연상은 '필 더 보이드(Fill The Void)'에 출연한 이스라엘 여배우 하다스 야론에게 돌아갔다. 심사위원 특별상(Special Jury Prize)은 '파라다이스:믿음(Paradies:Glaube)'을 연출한 오스트리아의 울리히 사이들 감독이 수상했으며, 각본상은 '섬씽 인 디 에어(Apres Mai)'의 각본을 쓴 프랑스의 올리비에 아사야스 감독에게 돌아갔다. 황금사자상을 받은 김기덕 감독은 시상대에 올라 "이 영화에 참여한 모든 배우와 스태프에게 무한한 감사를 드린다. 그리고 베니스영화제에서 영화 '피에타'를 선택해준 모든 이에게 이 영광을 돌리고 싶다"고 소감을 밝혔다. 이어 그는 한국민요 '아리랑'을 부르고 내려왔다. 김 감독은 지난해 자신의 삶을 담은 다큐 영화 '아리랑'으로 칸 영화제에서 '주목할 만한 시선상'을 받았을 때에도 영화 속에 삽입된 아리랑을 부른 바 있다. 김 감독과 함께 시상대에 오른 주연배우 조민수는 "황금사자상이 대한민국 최초라 더욱 행복하다"고 소감을 밝힌 뒤 감격의 눈물을 흘렸다. '피에타'는 채무자의 돈을 뜯으며 살아가는 악마 같은 남자(이정진 분) 앞에 어느 날 엄마라고 주장하는 여자(조민수)가 찾아오면서 두 남녀가 겪게 되는 혼란과 점차 드러나는 잔인한 비밀을 그린 작품이다. 아울러 본상은 아니지만 한국영화 두 편이 함께 상을 받았다. 새로운 경향을 소개하는 '오리종티' 부문에서 유민영 감독의 '초대'가 최우수 단편영화에 주는 오리종티 유튜브상을, 비경쟁부문에 초청된 전규환 감독의 '무게'가 '퀴어 라이온(queer lion)'상을 받았다. (연합뉴스)