Today: Tuesday 9th October
Today presenter James Naughtie speaks to Prime Minister David Cameron from the Conservative Party conference in Birmingham. The International Monetary Fund has lowered its expectations for growth in the British economy. And also on the programme, the pit falls of sky-diving from the edge of space. We are no longer providing clips of every part of the programme but you will be able to listen via the BBC iPlayer . Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play. Business news with Simon Jack on news that the International Monetary Fund is predicting that the UK economy will shrink this year. 0709 New International Monetary Fund (IMF) figures have been released and they project less growth in the UK and elsewhere than it had done earlier this year. The BBC's economics editor, Stephanie Flanders, explains why the IMF's analysis of the world's economy is perhaps more interesting. Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play. In a meeting at the Conservative Party Conference organised by the Conservative Home website, Boris Johnson was referred to as "Boris - The Rally". Today presenter James Naughtie reports from the conference in Birmingham on the mayor's position within the party. Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play. Miranda Hart has become one of Britain's best known comedians and has won numerous awards and millions of fans. The BBC's arts correspondent, Rebecca Jones, has been talking to her. 0732 The GMB union has criticised a new owner-employee contract that is likely to come into force from April 2013; the contract gives the employer the chance to offer reduced employment rights in return for employee share ownership. Simon Walker, Director-General of the Institute of Directors, and Brian Strutton, GMB national officer, examine the proposal. 0747 Thought for the day with The Reverend Lucy Winkett, Rector of St James Piccadilly. 0751 The Chinese telecoms company, Huawei, has been declared a national security risk by US House Intelligence Committee. Gordon Corera, BBC security correspondent, Nigel Inkster, director for transnational threats and political risk at International Institute for Strategic Studies discuss how concerned the UK should be. Please turn on JavaScript. Media requires JavaScript to play. Prime Minister, David Cameron, joins Today presenter James Naughtie from the Conservative Party Conference in Birmingham and the BBC's political editor, Nick Robinson gives his analysis. 0833 This afternoon the Austrian adventurer Felix Baumgartner will attempt to break a skydiving record that has been held for 52 years. The BBC's science correspondent Pallab Ghosh is in the United States for the jump. 0837 Ken Livingstone and former Goldman Sachs managing director, Jennifer Moses, are appearing at an Intelligence Squared to debate on the proposition that "London should love its bankers". Mr Livingstone and Mrs Moses explain their views. 0845 The leader of the Scottish Conservatives Ruth Davidson has claimed that only 12 per cent of Scotland's population are net contributors to the economy. John Kay, a Scottish economist who used to be on the Scottish government's Council of Economic Advisers, analyses how true the claim is. 0849 The autobiography of Pete Townshend, guitarist and songwriter with The Who, is published this week. The BBC's John Wilson has been speaking to him about his music and the art of writing classic songs. 0854 Matthew d'Ancona, columnist on the Evening Standard and the Sunday Telegraph, and Times columist Mary Ann Sieghart, reflect on our interview with Prime Minister David Cameron earlier in the programme. Get in touch with Today via email , Twitter or Facebook or text us on 84844.