Whitney Houston's death: Medics performed CPR for about 20 minutes
Beverly Hills paramedics found singer Whitney Houston unresponsive at a room at the Beverly Hilton hotel and declared her dead after performing CPR on her for about 20 minutes, officials said.
The Beverly Hills Fire Department said they were called to the hotel around 3:30 p.m. and she was pronounced dead around 4 p.m.
Her cause of death was unknown.
Houston, 48, was in the Los Angeles area for a musical tribute for music executive Clive Davis and had performed earlier this week.
Houston was planning to attend Davis’ annual pre-Grammy party Saturday at the Beverly Hilton hotel. Earlier this week, the 79-year-old Davis perused page after page of guest lists in a bungalow at the Beverly Hills Hotel, where he conducts business when he’s in the Los Angeles area. Among those Houston was expected to rub elbows with: Quincy Jones, Tony Bennett, Akon, Cee Lo Green, Miley Cyrus, Sean "Puffy" Combs, Jennifer Hudson, Jackson Browne, Elvis Costello and Diana Krall. “It’s a great time where everybody can set down their swords, so to speak,” Davis said, seated on an overstuffed divan next to a coffee table cluttered with papers, CDs and videos. “I was grateful that, inviting them to my home, that they would feel comfortable and just keep coming back, and they've kept coming back every year to where it's expanded to be this incredible haven for musicians.”
Houston had drug and alcohol problems for years, and in May her spokeswoman said she was going back to rehab.
Publicist Kristen Foster told the Associated Press on Saturday that Houston had died but did not provide further details.
Houston was kown for such hits as “How Will I Know,” “Saving All My Love for You” and “I Will Always Love You.” She also starred in movies such as “The Bodyguard.”
Determining cause to take time
Appreciation: A voice for the ages tarnished by addictions
Photo: A Los Angeles police crime lab truck sits in the driveway of the Beverly Hilton Hotel a few hours before the scheduled Clive Davis And The Recording Academy's 2012 Pre-Grammy Gala And Salute To Industry Icons in Beverly Hills Saturday. Credit: Mladen Antonov/AFP/Getty Images