Chan movie will be 'last action role'
Martial arts star Jackie Chan has confirmed his next film will be his last as an action star.
Speaking at a news conference in Cannes to launch Chinese Zodiac, Chan told reporters: "This will be my last big action movie."
The Hong Kong-born actor, 58, added: "The world is too violent now. I love fighting but I hate violence."
The film, due for release in December, is the third in Chan's Armour of God series.
The first film was released in 1987, with Chan playing the Indiana Jones-style character Asian Hawk.
"I want the audience to know I'm not just about fighting, also I can act. And so, day by day, year by year, I said, 'Right, I'm going to show you the real Jackie Chan.'"
Last year, he starred opposite Will Smith's son Jaden Smith in the remake of The Karate Kid, in the role of Smith's mentor Mr Miyagi.
"I don't just want to be an action star, I want to be a true actor. So for the last 10 years I've done other films like The Karate Kid, where I'd rather play an old man."
Chan began his career as a stuntman working alongside his idol Bruce Lee in the films Fists of Fury, in 1972, and Enter The Dragon, in 1973.
Since then he has appeared in more than 100 movies, famously doing all of his own stunts. He claims to have broken almost every bone in his body.
His most serious injury occurred when he fell from a tree, fracturing his skull.
"I will ask my body how long I can go. I'm not young anymore," he said, but added: "In the future I'll still do Karate Kid 2, Rush Hour 4."
The new film sees Chan's character searching for the 12 bronze heads of the Chinese zodiac.
The figures were designed during the 18th Century Qing dynasty for an imperial retreat outside Beijing. In 1860 they were looted and five are still missing.
The heads were recreated by dissident artist Ai Weiwei for an outdoor show in the courtyard of Somerset House in London last year.
Chan's producer, US director Brett Ratner - who also worked with him on the Rush Hour series - said the film addressed the controversy of the ownership of the busts.
"What's great about this film is that it also has an incredible message. It's about something which is socially conscious."