the greatest of the history boys
When asked by an interviewer about his choice of gravestone epitaph, the most gifted British character actor of his generation needed barely a moment to rattle off a response so delicious it can’t be read too often. “Richard Griffiths. Actor,” he said, “Born 1947. Died 2947.”
It was not to be. A man of such munificent girth was hardly a banker to reach his biblical three score and 10, let alone smash Methuselah’s longevity record of 969 to become the species’ first millenarian. One imagines he was perennially among the favourites in those tasteful New Year betting markets about the next celebrity demise. But if it came as small surprise, his death at 65 also came as news to millions sighing, “Oh no, not him. I absolutely loved him.”
Was there ever a more adorable stage and screen presence than Griffiths? Many of yesterday’s online headlines styled him as “the Harry Potter actor”, but as with a tabloid’s “Arthur’s butler dies” for Sir John Gielgud, that seems marginally to miss the point of his career.
However excellent he was as the sadistic Uncle Vernon, countless actors could have played the part. Few, if any, could have done what Griffiths did with the earlier avuncular role in Withnail And I, or as the grammar school teacher Hector in The History Boys, who lunged at his Oxbridge candidates’ crotches while giving them a lift on his motorbike. Griffiths became apoplectic when anyone called Hector a paedophile, furiously pointing out that all the boys were of age. Even so, in an era of screeching hysteria about men preying on youths, he made Hector so sympathetic that there was no whisper of a campaign to discredit Alan Bennett’s play. As with Withnail’s Uncle Monty, who so memorably told Paul McGann’s “I” that “There is a certain je ne sais quoi – oh, so very special – about a firm, young carrot”, he made a predatory homosexual a figure of such appeal that even the sternest of media moralists steered clear of the sermonising.
What was so unusual about Griffiths, if not unique, is that he was a determinedly private man (who used his verbosity as a defence mechanism and would not say a word about his wife) whom you somehow felt you knew, and wanted to know better. I certainly did. Whenever a semi-drunken conversation turned to that hoary parlour game “Who would you want at your perfect dinner party?”, he was on my list. For years, I staked out betting rings in the hope of meeting this lover of the turf and committed punter, though with no more luck than he apparently had on the horses. When a friend and I discussed writing a comedy drama for television, the paramount consideration was making it a vehicle for him. We were not especially bothered about finishing a script, or even starting one. Our motivation was creating an excuse to meet Richard Griffiths.
Where the wry melancholy and air of humanity that informed his best work stemmed from is hard to be sure, though the pop psychologist will hone in on the wretched start in life, as the only child of deaf and mute parents in North Yorkshire, that obliged him to master sign language before he learnt to speak. “I remember being six and walking out of school one day, and watching all these kids chattering to their mums and dads,” he once recalled, “and thinking, 'Isn’t that funny? They talk to their mums and dads’.”
Much as with David Blunkett, born blind in south Yorkshire a month before him, it required strength of will almost beyond imagining to slip the shackles of a weird, lonely and unremittingly miserable childhood. Factor in the corpulence that had audiences holding their breaths in terror whenever he had to cross a stage – the result, he said, of radiation on his pituitary gland when he was a “beanpole” small boy – and his success seems all the more remarkable.
For all the cuddly appearance, he was no teddy bear. The public loved him all the more for the cantankerous dressing downs he delivered to theatregoers who failed to silence their phones. By no means the conventional bien pensant theatrical liberal, he said that had he been made lifetime dictator, he would have introduced the catch-all imprisonable offence of “disrespect” for mobile miscreants and others. As for genuine paedophiles, “I would hurt them so much it would upset and shock everybody in the country. I wouldn’t care if it didn’t change their behaviour. It would just put them on notice that if you do this, you will have skin removed… before you’re allowed to die.” He would not, he conceded, vote for “anybody who talked like I did. But you have to know that I would do it”.
By all accounts, Richard Griffiths more than made up for the silence in which he grew up. A man of legendary loquacity with his friends, professionally he pulled off the fiendishly difficult trick of mingling the fat-man jollity and unforced warmth with a beguilingly understated sense of pathos and vulnerability. Whether he was pre-empting the trend for moonlighting coppers by playing a detective/restaurant chef in the TV series Pie in the Sky, or mock-berating his precocious students and resenting his meretricious, Niall Ferguson-style successor in The History Boys, you could not but feel that this was somebody worth knowing.
Having missed out on his epitaph by a tantalising 935 years, the eulogies might strike him as scant posthumous consolation for that. As Woody Allen famously said, “I don’t want to achieve immortality through my work. I want to achieve it by not dying.” Even so, albeit by the less preferred method, the great and massively endearing Richard Griffiths will deservedly live on.