Actor Jiah Khan commits suicide at Mumbai residence
She also got a Filmfare Best Debutant Nomination.
Bollywood actor Jiah Khan has allegedly committed suicide by hanging herself at her residence here, police said.
The 25-year old actor reportedly hanged herself at her Juhu residence late last night.
According to the police her maid, watchman and neighbours are being interrogated to find out her last visitors.
Jiah made her acting debut in the controversial Ram Gopal Varma's 'Nishabd' where she acted opposite Amitabh Bachchan.
Who was Jiah Khan?| Also Read: Bollywood in shock by Jiah Khan's sudden death | Jiah Khan now Nafisa Khan | Jiah is 'prim and propah' | Jiah sulks over Yahoo | A 15-kilo top for Jiah | Jiah sets her eyes on Shahid
Upon its release in March 2007, the film received mixed reviews, but Jiah was noted for her confidence, attitude, and sex appeal.
She also got a Filmfare Best Debutant Nomination.
She then appeared alongside Aamir Khan in A.R. Murugadoss's 'Ghajini', the Hindi remake of the director's own Tamil film of the same name.
Later she appeared as a supporting actress in Sajid Khan's multi starrer comedy film 'Housefull' (2010). This was her last film.
She was born Nafisa and changed her name to Jiah before going back to her birth name. Her mother is Rabiya Amin, an actress in the 1980s who was seen in the Tahir Hussain movie 'Dulha Bikta Hai'.
Jiah's mother and sister had gone out and she was alone at the house when the incident happened, police said.
"Jiah's mother and sister found her hanging when they returned at around 11 pm," police said, adding that Jiah used her own dupatta to hang herself.
Police said postmortem of the body will be conducted on Tuesday and they have registered a case of accidental death.
Police are yet to record the statement of the actress' mother as she is in shock.
On Twitter, colleagues reacted with shock and grief.
One of the first reactions was from her first co-star Amitabh Bachchan who tweeted: "T 1128 -WHAT ...!!! Jiah Khan ??? what has happened ? is this correct ? unbelievable !!!"
Shahid Kapoor, with who Jiah had been cast in Chance Pe Dance before being replaced by Genelia D'Souza, tweeted: "Shocked n saddened to hear about jiah khan... Very disturbing... RIP... may her soul rest in peace."