Stephen Fry: I attempted to kill myself in 2012
The actor and author, who suffers from bipolar disorder, broke four ribs when the overdose made his body convulse. He was overseas filming at the time and had to be “taken back to England and looked after”.
Fry, who is president of the mental health charity Mind, takes medication to regulate his drastic mood swings, and has attempted suicide in the past.
He disclosed his latest attempt to a shocked audience at the Leicester Square Theatre, where he was being interviewed for a podcast by the comedian Richard Herring.
Fry, 55, said: “I am the victim of my own moods, more than most people are perhaps, in as much as I have a condition which requires me to take medication so that I don't get either too hyper or too depressed to the point of suicide.
“I would go as far as to tell you that I attempted it last year, so I'm not always happy - this is the first time I've said this in public, but I might as well.
“I'm president of Mind, and the whole point in my role, as I see it, is not to be shy and forthcoming about the morbidity and genuine nature of the likelihood of death amongst people with certain mood disorders.”
He went on: “It was a close run thing. I took a huge number of pills and a huge [amount] of vodka and the mixture of them made my body convulse so much that I broke four ribs, but I was still unconscious.
“And, fortunately, the producer I was filming with at the time came into the hotel room and I was found in a sort of unconscious state and taken back to England and looked after.”
Fry said there was no particular reason behind his suicide attempt, adding: “There is no 'why', it's not the right question. There's no reason. If there were a reason for it, you could reason someone out of it, and you could tell them why they shouldn't take their own life.”
He said his friends and family all asked him why he had not called them if he was feeling suicidal, but he said: “Think of your very best friend. Very, very best friend. Suppose you suddenly noticed you had a massive and really disturbing genital wart... would you show it to your very best friend? No, no... you might show it to a stranger, a doctor, a genital urinary specialist, or to Doctor Christian I suppose on Embarrassing Bodies - or in the street in his case. But, the weird thing is, although friendship is what Ralph Waldo Emerson called the 'masterpiece of nature', it is a thing we all celebrate, oddly enough it doesn't solve things like that.”
He said of his condition: “If unmedicated, there are times when I am so exuberant, so hyper, that I can go three or four nights without sleeping and I'm writing and I'm doing stuff and I'm so grandiose and so full of self-belief that it's almost impossible to deal with me. I can't stop speaking, I'm incredible, I go on shopping sprees...
“Fortunately one of the common signs of mania, or hyper-mania as it is known, is sexual exhibitionism. I don't have that as one of my brands, but others do.”
He also disclosed that when he is presenting the BBC quiz show QI, “there are times when I’m going ‘ha ha, yeah yeah’ and inside I’m going ‘I want to f***ing die. I…want…to…f***ing…die.”
Fry suffered a nervous breakdown in 1995 while he was appearing in the West End play Cell Mates and disappeared for several days, coming close to suicide.
In 2006 he made a two-part television documentary called Stephen Fry: The Secret Life of the Manic Depressive, in which he spoke to other celebrities including Carrie Fisher and Tony Slattery about their own problems with the illness. In the programme he also disclosed that he had first attempted suicide aged 17 by taking an overdose.
In 2011 he said of his illness: “The fact that I am lucky enough not to have it so seriously doesn’t mean that I won’t one day kill myself, I may well.”
Those seeking help or advice can contact Samaritans at any time by calling 08457 90 90 90 or emailing jo@samaritans.org