Prince Harry joins Sydney Harbour onlookers at International Fleet Review
Prince Harry has arrived in Sydney to help celebrate 100 years since the Royal Australian Navy fleet first entered the waterway.
The International Fleet Review visit marks the prince's first official trip to Australia representing the royal family.
This morning he and Governor-General Quentin Bryce boarded the HMAS Leeuwin on Sydney Harbour, where thousands of people packed into prime viewing points.
They will take part in a ceremonial fleet review before the prince heads to Kirribilli House to meet a number of young Australians who have been recognised for helping others.
Jordan O'Reilly from disability support group Fighting Chance says he is not sure what he will say to the prince.
"I haven't planned anything yet - I've been given lots of suggestions from friends but I think it'll just be great to meet him and say hello," he said.
"I think, regardless of what you think of the royals today, the opportunity to meet with a member of the royal family is an incredible honour."
Ben Duggan will also meet the prince.
"At first surprised - I thought it must have been a joke. When it sunk in I was quite honoured," he said.
"Quite a few female friends have been asking for my ticket or if I can pass on a mobile number or two."
It is a fleeting visit for Prince Harry, who will fly out tomorrow morning.
Keen Sydneysiders set up deck chairs and cameras from the early hours of the morning, snaring the best spots around the Botanic Gardens, the Opera House, and Mrs Macquarie's Chair.
At 10.00am AEST, there will be a 100 gun salute from the north end of Garden Island, during which the minor war vessels will begin to enter the harbour.
From 10.30am the major war vessels from 17 nations will join them circling the harbour and being officially inspected by Ms Bryce and Prince Harry.
A series of 'Salute to Navy' air displays will take place from 2:15pm to 5:30pm.
A massive light show and fireworks spectacular, which will be broadcast on ABC News 24, will start at 7:40pm.
Yesterday, more than 20 warships from 17 nations glided into the harbour to the Navy centenary.
Leading Australia's ships in the ceremonial spectacle yesterday was HMAS Sydney, which emerged from behind Bradley's Head, followed by six others - Darwin, Bundaberg, Perth, Parramatta, Diamantina and Huon.
HMAS Sydney Commander Karl Brinckman says the first fleet review in 1913 signalled Australia coming of age as a nation.
"One-hundred years ago was the first Australianised fleet, if you like, our own ships that we could call our own," he said.
"Before that we very much relied upon ships, particularly from the UK.
"So the Australian fleet was very important in nation-building for the country. The nation was really only around 12 years old at that time."