JFK assassination 50th anniversary: Dallas moves on from 'City of Hate' reputation
On the night of November 22, 1963 Lyndon Johnson was due to speak at a dinner in Austin, in his home state of Texas.
The speech was to welcome Johnson’s boss, president John F Kennedy, to the state's capital city.
His remarks had been written and typed up ahead of time, and that's how we know it included this quip:
"And thank God, Mr President, you came out of Dallas alive."
It would most likely have played well with a Texas audience, because this was no throwaway line.
Dallas had earned its reputation as the 'City of Hate' long before John F Kennedy’s assassination – and LBJ knew that only too well.
Three years earlier, Lyndon Johnson had been campaigning in Dallas during the 1960 presidential election - when he and his wife, Lady Bird Johnson - were confronted by protesters as they crossed a street.
"They were pretty rough on LBJ and his wife," recalls Bob Huffaker, a former reporter with the local CBS affiliate in Dallas.
"They were heckled and spat upon by the followers of the only Republican congressman in Texas."
That congressman, Bruce Alger, was there too - holding a sign that said: "LBJ Sold Out to Yankee Socialists".
It all sounds pretty benign with half a century of hindsight, but in 1960 it was a display of aggression and disrespect to a vice-presidential candidate that shocked the nation.
And it highlighted the paranoid, anti-communist, and racist elements in Dallas society at the time.
Bruce Alger had also been behind another ugly demonstration a month before Kennedy’s visit.
America's UN ambassador Adlai Stevenson was not only heckled, but was also struck on the head with a placard that read "Who Elected You?"
So it came as no surprise to some in the city when, days before Kennedy’s arrival, pamphlets were distributed in Dallas showing the president's picture above the words "Wanted For Treason".
"There was a lot of talk about how Dallas was not a hospitable place for the president," says Quin Mathews, a Dallas filmmaker who was a teenager at the time of the assassination, and remembers watching the Kennedys arrive on Air Force One.
"My impression as a youngster then, but even today, is that part of the very warm and large turnout for President Kennedy that day in Dallas was sort of a reaction by many people in the city to the reputation that it not only opposed him, but demonised him."
Mr Mathews vividly recalls the feeling in Dallas immediately after the assassination.
They knew that the rest of the country thought of Dallas as the city that killed the president – the 'City of Hate' - and that its citizens should feel guilty and ashamed.
"It was very apparent to me. I think it was to really anyone in the city," he said.
"I told my parents when I came home that day from school: 'We have to move, we can't live here anymore'. It was a devastating time."
That reputation as the 'City of Hate' was cemented just two days after JFK's assassination, when accused shooter Lee Harvey Oswald was himself shot dead by Jack Ruby.
Back then Pierce Allman was a young radio reporter in Dallas.
Weeks after the assassination, as the story wound down, he remembers talking with the BBC team as they were packing up to leave town.
"One of the them said, 'You know Pierce, we were absolutely shocked at the death of Mr Kennedy, but we were not at all surprised that you did away with Oswald'," Mr Allman said.
"I said, 'I'm sorry, what do you mean?'"
"He said, 'Oh, we never expected him to come to trial. Not in Dallas, Texas. Frontier justice. You Texans are a violent lot, you carry guns, you don't discuss things, you just shoot people'."
Mr Allman was horrified when he realised how his city was regarded not just in the US, but around the world.
As the son of a former mayor told the Dallas News: "You learned not to say Dallas when the New York cabbie asked you where you were from".
Even a decade later, when Dallas mayor Wes Wise was at a convention of fellow mayors, a colleague from the Midwest asked him: "How does it feel to be the mayor of the city that killed the president?"
Mr Matthews – whose latest documentary, City of Hate, relives those years – says Dallas's reputation lasted much longer than a decade, as he discovered while travelling through Europe in the 1990s.
"I remember a man asking me where I was from, and he held his finger as if to indicate a gun, and went, 'Oh, Dallas - pish pish', meaning gunshots," he said.
"It happened for a long time. You had to be apologetic for being from Dallas."
Today, Dallas is more recognisable as the gleaming glass metropolis seen in the opening credits of the 1980s soap opera that bore its name – and which helped (along with the success of the Dallas Cowboys football team) to transform the image of the city.
That is, until you walk onto Dealey Plaza – when suddenly it's 1963 again.
There I found - as many others have - that even though you’ve never been there before, you know exactly where you are in your surroundings.
You instantly know where to look for the sniper's window on the Book Depository, where to find the grassy knoll, and where to look for the crosses painted on the road that mark the spots where the two bullets hit the president.
Tourists dodge the three lanes of traffic to stand in the road and have their photo taken next to them.
The drivers whizzing past the Depository probably barely give it a thought anymore. But this week, Dallas will, once again, confront its most painful memory.
It hasn't always been as prepared to do so. Even years after the assassination, the Book Depository itself came close to being demolished. It was saved in the 1970s, and is now a museum.
And it now has very different population to the Dallas of 1963 – far younger, far larger, and far more diverse.
Still, there are many in the city who remember the assassination, and the pain of the years that followed.
"Even today, the leaders who are older are very apprehensive about this anniversary because they deeply don't want anything bad to happen," he said.
"They don’t want anything that would mar the occasion, they don't want anything that would embarrass the city or embarrass anyone outside the city or anything disrespectful to President Kennedy.
"And I think in that sense, it's very much like the Dallas of years past."