Paul Walker dead: Fast and Furious actor killed in California car crash
Actor Paul Walker, best known for his hit roles in the Fast and the Furious movie franchise, has been killed in a fiery car crash in California.
The 40-year-old actor was a passenger in a Porsche that lost control and crashed in Santa Clarita, north of Los Angeles, killing both occupants.
A post by the actor's team on Facebook says he had been attending an event for his charity to raise money for people affected by Typhoon Haiyan, which hit the Philippines last month.
"We appreciate your patience as we too are stunned and saddened beyond belief by this news," the post said.
"Thank you for keeping his family and friends in your prayers during this very difficult time."
Universal Pictures, the studio behind The Fast and the Furious movies, has released a statement saying it is "heartbroken".
"Paul was truly one of the most beloved and respected members of our studio family for 14 years, and this loss is devastating to us, to everyone involved with the Fast and Furious films, and to countless fans," it said.
Celebrity news website TMZ, which first reported news of the death, says the car hit a post or tree and was quickly engulfed in flames.
The identity of the driver of the car is not known.
Walker's career began on the small screen, with roles in shows including The Young and the Restless and Touched by an Angel.
He rose to fame after starring in the 1999 hit film Varsity Blues, but is best known for starring as undercover agent Brian O'Conner in a string of the Fast and Furious movies.
He appeared in all but one of the six movies in the series as one of the leading protagonists, along with Vin Diesel and Michelle Rodriguez.
Filming was still ongoing for the latest film in the series, Fast & Furious 7, which was expected to hit cinemas late in 2014.
Media site Gulf News last month reported Walker and other actors were due to film scenes of the movie in Abu Dhabi in January.
His other film credits include Pleasantville, Into the Blue, She's All That and Takers.
He is survived by his teenage daughter Meadow.