PNoy: 'Yolanda' responders just as heroic as Bonifacio

MANILA -- President Benigno Aquino III paid tribute to the life and legacy of Andres Bonifacio and highlighted the importance of everyday heroes in the country, especially during trying times.
In his speech during the celebration of Bonifacio's 150th birth anniversary in Caloocan City, Aquino noted the similarities between the past and present generations.
He claimed that those who eagerly responded in the wake of super typhoon "Yolanda" are the modern-day "Bonifacios" and heroes of today.
"Nariyan ang mga kawal, pulis, at bumberong nagtaya ng kanilang sariling buhay sa pagsalba sa mga nasalanta, at araw-gabing nagtipon sa mga labi ng nasawi; mga nurse at doktor, na nagtayo ng mga sariling tolda upang makapaghatid ng agarang-lunas at makapagbigay-kalinga; mga volunteer sa loob at labas ng bansa, mula sa pribado at pampublikong sektor—naka-barong man, unipormado, estudyante, may titulo o wala—na nag-alay ng donasyon at kapit-kamay na nag-impake ng relief goods para sa mga pamilyang nabiktima," said Aquino.
According to the President, the sense of heroism is alive among Filipinos today just as much as it was in the past years, as evidenced by the outpouring of help to the typhoon victims.
Aquino lauded his countrymen for being brave, resilient and determined in the face of adversities.
"Ito nga po ang diwa ng bayanihan: Mga bayani mula saan mang antas ng pamumuhay na nagkakaisa upang magpamalas ng malasakit, paninindigan, at pagkamakabayan. Ipinakita nating hindi lamang ito salita o konseptong nakaukit sa bato, kundi tunay na nakatatak sa pagkakakilanlan ng Pilipino," he said.
At the end of the speech, Aquino urged Filipinos to emulate Bonifacio, be an everyday hero and contribute to the progress of the nation.
Aquino on Saturday led the flag raising and wreath laying activities at the Bonifacio Shrine in Caloocan to mark the hero's 150th birth anniversary.
The event also marked the 80th anniversary of the unveiling of the Bonifacio National Monument in Caloocan.
As part of the celebrations, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas Governor Amado Tetangco presented the commemorative coin to the President, while Gary Bonifacio also turned over a commemorative stamp. -- Report by Jeo Angelo Chico Elamparo, ABS-CBNnews.com