At 9/11 Museum Dedication, Remembrance and Resilience
Although the president in his remarks referred obliquely to how “our SEALs made sure that justice was done” three years ago, he did not refer to Bin Laden by name. Instead, the president joined the other speakers in focusing his remarks on the victims who perished in flames and smoke and those who tried to save them.
He singled out the heroism of Welles Crowther, 24, a young man with a red bandanna who helped save people in the south tower before it collapsed, killing him. His identity was long unknown until months later, when his mother read an article about the mysterious savior with the bandanna.
Alison Crowther mounted the stage to say that she and her husband “could not be more proud” of their son. “Welles believed that we are all connected as one human family,” she said. “This is the true legacy of September 11.”
Mr. Bloomberg hosted the event, as chairman of the National September 11 Memorial and Museum, and described the museum as “a testament to the resilience, the courage and the compassion of the human spirit.”
He showed the president around some of the exhibits beforehand, accompanied by Michelle Obama, former President Bill Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton. At the ceremony they were joined by other political figures, including Govs. Chris Christie of New Jersey and Andrew M. Cuomo of New York, Mayor Bill de Blasio, Mr. Giuliani, former Gov. George E. Pataki and former Gov. Donald T. DiFrancesco of New Jersey.
A spokesman for former President George W. Bush said he was invited but could not make it because of a scheduling conflict.
“Amazing Grace,” was sung by Rhonda LaChanze Sapp, an actress and Broadway singer who was pregnant when her husband, Calvin Gooding, was killed at the World Trade Center.
Foundation Hall is dominated by a giant slurry wall — the underground construction that survived the initial attacks and held back the waters of the Hudson River after the towers collapsed. In the hall’s center is the Last Column, the final steel beam to be removed from ground zero.
The museum has been at the center of many controversies. A video exhibit about the roots of the attack, which includes the terms “Islamist” and “jihadist,” was criticized by an advisory group made up of clergy members from different faiths, who claimed that it presented a prejudiced view of Islam. The criticism was rejected by Joseph C. Daniels, the chief executive of the memorial and museum foundation, who insisted that the video was objective.
Some families are also unhappy that unidentified remains of the victims are stored in the same building as the museum, in a specially built repository. Last weekend 7,930 unidentified remains were moved to the repository in a ceremonial transfer, alongside some remains that have been identified but that families chose to have stored there.
Museum and city officials say that the repository is under the jurisdiction of the New York City medical examiner’s office, and is separated from the museum by a wall. It will not be open to the general public, but only to victims’ relatives, who will be able to visit a “reflection room” there.
Some families, angered by the arrangements, held a small protest at Zuccotti Park on Thursday, carrying banners reading, “9/11 Museum Respect the Dead.”
Eileen Fagan, whose sister, Patricia, died in the south tower, also attended the ceremony. Some of her sister’s remains are in the repository.
“Everyone here can feel the presence of their loved one, in a very real way,” she said. “I walked with Pat through the World Trade Center so many times and I feel like I am walking with Pat again. It’s a good feeling, a little bit sad, but a good feeling.”