 Portugal Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Portuguese-speaking countries and territories Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe Western Europe Southwestern Europe Lisbon Capitals in Europe Cities in Portugal Marinas in Portugal Municipalities of Portugal Phoenician colonies Populated coastal places in Portugal Populated places in Lisbon District Port cities and towns in Portugal Roman towns and cities in Portugal Municipalities of Lisbon District Reuters Companies established in 1851 Media companies based in London Multilingual news services News agencies based in the United Kingdom Financial news agencies 1851 establishments in the United Kingdom Webby Award winners Companies established in 1931 Franchises Cooperatives in the United States Companies based in Cook County, Illinois Populated places established in 1534 Populated places in Jamaica Former national capitals Populated places in Saint Catherine Parish Badajoz Municipalities in the Province of Badajoz Populated places established in the 9th century 870s establishments Populated places in the Province of Badajoz 1967 births Living people Sportspeople from Lisbon Portuguese footballers Association football midfielders Primeira Liga players Segunda Liga players S.C.U. Torreense players S.C. Olhanense players Louletano D.C. players S.C. Farense players Vitória F.C. players S.L. Benfica footballers C.F. Os Belenenses players Birmingham City F.C. players K League Classic players Busan IPark players Beijing Guoan players Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in South Korea Expatriate footballers in China Portuguese expatriates in South Korea Portuguese expatriates in China Portuguese football managers F.C. Maia managers S.C. Farense managers Latin words and phrases Cities in Henan Kaifeng Rooms Child welfare Total institutions Henan Central China Provinces of China History of China Street vendors Food services occupations Informal occupations Sales occupations Street culture Street cries Primary education County-level divisions of Henan Xinyang