More violence, protests in Syria as U.S., Turkish leaders discuss aiding opposition
Sunday was marked by a slew of anti-regime protests and yet more violence targeting dissenters in Syria, while outside the embattled country the leaders of the United States and Turkey discussed ways to aid the opposition.
The bloodshed includes what the Local Coordination Committee of Syria, a network of opposition groups, is calling the "Morek Massacre." The group claimed that 11 civilians calling for the regime's ouster were murdered, among them five "executed by firing squad."
In total, the LCC reported that at least 70 died across the Middle Eastern nation Sunday, including 17 in the province of Homs, 17 in Hama (where the town of Morek is located), 11 in Idlib, 10 in the suburbs of Damascus, nine in Daraa, five in Aleppo and one in Hasakeh.
The same group also stated that such violence did not prevent demonstrations in upwards of 18 locales around Syria -- many of which it described as "massive," and documented with YouTube videos.
The meeting, which took place in Seoul, South Korea, where the leaders will attend a nuclear summit this week, was aimed at "syncing up" with Turkey -- a former Syrian ally -- before Istanbul hosts the next "Friends of Syria" meeting on April 1, a senior Obama administration official said.
Obama and Erdogan expect the upcoming conference to enhance ways to provide "non-lethal" aid to the opponents of the Syrian regime, such as medical supplies and communications equipment, said Ben Rhodes, a U.S. deputy national security adviser.
Obama said he and Erdogan "are very much in agreement that there should be a process" to transition to a "legitimate government," in contrast to al-Assad's current government. He also pledged to keep pursuing humanitarian aid as reports of carnage at the hands of the the Syrian regime mount daily.
In its announcement Sunday, the group said it is committed to "democracy, pluralism, equality and human rights," as well as rejecting and fighting terrorism. The group also said every citizen should have equal rights to run for office.
"In these critical and difficult times that our beloved country is going through, all the honorable men and women in this nation are required to work on uniting all efforts to overthrow this corrupt regime," Sheikh said. "The soldiers and officers of the Free Syrian Army pledged their allegiance to protect the people and the nation."
The Syrian government routinely blames the vaguely defined "armed terrorist groups" for violence in the country, while most reports from inside Syria indicate the government is slaughtering civilians in an attempt to wipe out dissidents.
The state-run Syrian Arab News Agency said "six of the most dangerous wanted terrorists" were killed in clashes as authorities "stormed a den of terrorists." Two "competent authorities" were also killed, the government news agency said.
Russia and China have blocked U.N. Security Council attempts to pass resolutions condemning the al-Assad regime. The two countries say they want the violence to stop, but would not blame the bloodshed squarely on the regime.