Afghanistan hit by two deadly suicide attacks
Taliban claim responsibility for attacks in Helmand and Herat provinces that killed a total of 15 people
Suicide bombers struck two government offices in southern and western Afghanistan on Tuesday, killing 15 people as militants stepped up attacks across the country with the arrival of warmer weather, authorities said.
Four policemen were killed at the local police office in the Musa Qala district of Helmand province in the south. Another three policemen and eight civilians died in a large blast in Herat province in western Afghanistan.
The Taliban claimed responsibility for both attacks in telephone messages to the media.
Militants have been targeting Afghan and Nato security forces as they fight to undermine US efforts to build up Afghan forces. Most foreign combat troops are due to leave by the end of 2014.
In Helmand, three suicide attackers wearing vests laden with explosives parked their car outside the police office and walked toward the entrance, said Daud Ahmadi, a provincial spokesman.
Police fired at the attackers, killing one. The others blew themselves up inside the compound, Ahmadi said. He initially reported that eight policemen died but later revised the toll, saying that four were killed and five, including the district commander, were wounded.
Earlier in the day, a group of suicide bombers blew up their truck outside the Guzara district office in Herat province.
Two men and a woman wearing a burqa were found dead inside the vehicle, which exploded at the gate of the building where people were waiting to go in to see officials about various business matters.
Raouf Ahmedi, a spokesman for the regional police commander, said officers had received a tipoff that the black four-wheel-drive was loaded with explosives.
"They were chasing the car and tried to stop it," Ahmedi said. "The vehicle then turned toward the district headquarters building and tried to pass the checkpoint, but police stopped them to be searched and asked where they were going."
Moments later the vehicle exploded, causing a loud boom that could be heard a few miles away.
"The explosion was so strong, there are casualties among police and civilians," said Nasar Ahmad Popul, the chief of the Guzara district, who was inside the headquarters.
Ahmedi said 11 people were killed – three policemen who were guarding the building and eight civilians.
Twenty-two others were wounded, including children, he said.
Herat province, like most of western Afghanistan, is relatively calm as insurgents have concentrated their attacks in the south and east. The responsibility for nearly all of Herat province has been transferred, or is in the process of being transferred, from Nato troops to Afghan forces.
Tuesday's attack occurred between Herat city, the provincial capital, and the main airport in the area, which is in Guzara district.