Fresh surge in violence in Syria despite international efforts, 'fragile' cease-fire
The Local Coordination Committees of Syria, an opposition network, reported 55 deaths across the embattled Middle Eastern nation on Monday, a notable uptick from the at least 13, 30 and 28 deaths it counted on Friday, Saturday and Sunday respectively.
Until Monday, the recent numbers were below the norm that had been reported earlier this month, when opposition groups regularly claimed regime forces were killing 50 or more people a day. On four days, more than 100 people were purported to have died.
Fighters with the rebel Free Syrian Army told activists in neighboring Binnish that Idlib residents were trapped in their homes as the sound of sniper fire and explosions rang out in the streets. The activists said helicopter gunfire and mortar shells were pounding the city
Opposition fighters said bodies littered the streets, though it was difficult to confirm the number of dead amid the ongoing violence, the activists said. While the LCC reported at least 26 deaths Monday in that northern Syrian city, one activist estimated at least 100 people had been killed.
That agreement was brokered by Kofi Annan, a former U.N. secretary-general who is serving as an envoy from the United Nations and the Arab League trying to curb the bloodshed.
They will be "liaising with the Syrian government, security forces and the opposition members to establish the monitoring process across the country," said Kieran Dwyer, a spokesman for peacekeeping missions at the United Nations.
As many as 250 more observers, who will be unarmed, could join them later. Such a larger deployment, though, is contingent on how the cease-fire holds and if discussions between Syria and Annan make progress.
"It is the Syrian government's responsibility to guarantee freedom of access, freedom of movement within the country," U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said Monday. "They should be allowed to freely move to any places where they will be able to observe this cessation of violence."
The Commission of Inquiry on Syria also said it had received "reports of human rights abuses committed by anti-government armed groups engaged in fighting against the Syrian army during and after the cease-fire, including extra-judicial killings of soldiers captured during armed confrontations."
Armed opposition fighters said Monday that they aren't waiting to see how the cease-fire holds. They are gathering more weapons to fight the regime just in case the agreement falls apart.
"We are preparing ourselves for the next stage if the Annan mission fails," Capt. Amar Wawi, leader of the Ababil Battalion of opposition fighters based in Aleppo, said from the Syria-Turkey border. "We will then use this equipment against the Assad thugs."
"They got this equipment from rebel supporters in the Iraqi-Syrian border," Oda said. "Now the Free Syrian Army are going to get more weapons, more new things which we need strategically on the ground against tanks and against armor. We accept the cease-fire, but that doesn't mean we are not preparing ourselves. Because we don't trust the regime. The regime is going to kill people."
The United Nations estimates at least 9,000 people have died since the protests began, while others put the death toll at more than 11,000.