Bahrain Grand Prix brings happiness to nation, says Jean Todt
FIA president Jean Todt is adamant his conscience is clear and the reputation of Formula One remains intact despite damaging headlines this week.
It is rare for F1 to attract front and back page headlines, but that is the scenario that has unfolded over the past few days.
Todt's decision to press ahead with the Bahrain Grand Prix has drawn stinging criticism that has increased in intensity as the anti-government and anti-F1 protests have been ramped up.
Those demonstrations on Saturday took a new twist with confirmation of the first death in race week of 37-year-old Salah Habib Abbas.
It has been claimed he was killed by shotgun pellets fired by riot police after a raid on Saturday night on the village of Shakhura.
His death was expected to have an adverse effect on two planned marches, one on the main highway that leads into the capital Manama, the other in villages close to the Bahrain International Circuit.
The Coalition of the Youth of the Feb 14 Revolution, one of the main opposition protest groups, have called for tyre burning and road blocks across the Gulf kingdom.
Despite that, and the inextricable link between the sport and politics in which F1 is meant to have no place, speaking for the first time on the matter, Todt dismissed concerns.
'I am sorry about what has been reported - I am not sure all that has been reported corresponds to the reality of what is happening in this country,' said Todt.
'But I feel F1 is very strong. It is a very strong brand, and all the people among the teams to whom I have been speaking are very happy.
'I was even told it would have been a mistake not to come. Again, you speak to those people. That is what I have been told by most of the team principals here.'
Todt's position has been undermined by the fact Force India and Sauber personnel have both been caught in incidents this week.
Force India even took the decision yesterday not to run in the second practice session due to safety concerns after four members of their team witnessed clashes between police and protesters.
Todt, however, insists he is comfortable with the decision to be in Bahrain after asserting all possible pre-race investigations into safety and security were conducted beforehand.
'To say there has not been some controversy around what has happened in Bahrain would be wrong from my side,' added the Frenchman. 'Yes, there are certain problems, yes there are some protests - because it is a democratic country and protests are allowed.
'If there is a protest, can there be some consequences? We know, if you go to any soccer game anywhere in the world, including Europe, there are some consequences when there is a protest.
'When I was in Kazakhstan on Wednesday night I spoke with (Force India deputy team principal) Bob Fernley and he said everything was fine, but there was some emotion.
'I sympathise with people who have some emotions, but we have to deal with facts. I also spoke with Peter Sauber this morning and he said he felt as comfortable here as he would at any other place in Europe.
'Do you think the promoters, if they would have felt it was very bad for their country, they would have encouraged F1 to come here?
'They would not have asked the commercial rights holder, Bernie Ecclestone, in the first place to put Bahrain on the calendar.'
Former Ferrari team principal Todt also dismissed the anti-F1 element amongst the protesters who maintain the race is the sport of repressive dictators.
'I would be very annoyed if it was the majority of people (who did not want F1),' said Todt. 'But at the most it is 10% of the people who are anti. So do we have to penalise 90 per cent of the population because 10 per cent are against?
'My answer is no. My answer is that there is a strong majority of people who want the race. Unfortunately there is a lot of media attention, again rightly or wrongly it is not for me to judge, emphasising this minority.
'But most of the people are in favour of having their life move on and the sport move on.'