Report: 33 Syrian army members defect to Turkey
Bashar al-Assad Syrian President Bashar al-Assad 's military may have more cracks in its armor as dozens more soldiers, including a general and two colonels, have defected across the border, Turkish media reported Monday.
Malik el Kurdi, the deputy commander of the rebel Free Syrian Army, speaking to CNN by telephone from the Apaydin refugee camp, said that within the past week a general and three colonels had arrived, but he had not seen a group of more than 30 new deserters.
The defections included a Syrian general and at least four other officers, according to a Turkish Foreign Ministry official and a commander in the Free Syrian Army camp in Turkey.
Speaking in Washington, U.S. State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland praised the reported defections, which is something the United States has called for, for some time, she said.
"This appears to be an increasing pace of these kinds of military folks voting with feet, voting with their airplanes, voting with their cars, voting with their families against the Assad regime," Nuland told reporters.
The defections took place amid heightened tensions between Syria and Turkey, and the rest of the international community, over how to stop the bloodshed spurred by the Syrian government's crackdown on dissidents.
Syria was in a war of words Monday with Turkey over the shooting down of a Turkish fighter jet by Syria, an incident that threatens to draw in NATO.
Meanwhile, at least 80 people were killed Monday in violence across Syria, according to the Local Coordination Committees of Syria, an opposition group. Twenty of those 80 were killed in Daraa, while 17 were killed in Deir Ezzor, the group said.
Since Syria's anti-government uprising started in March last year, more than 15,000 people, mostly civilians, have been killed, the observatory said. The United Nations has said that at least 10,000 people have been killed in the conflict.
"Both government and opposition forces have been involved in actions which have harmed civilians," Pillay said. "Those responsible must be held accountable, including for attacks against United Nations observers. I reiterate my call for the Security Council to refer the case of Syria to the International Criminal Court. A prompt referral would serve to remind the actors in Syria that they will be held to account for their failure to abide by international human rights and humanitarian law and protect civilians."