UK police descend on Assange's embassy refuge
Assange's supporters say the Swedish charges are trumped up and believe the US has secretly indicted him and would extradite him from Sweden. In Australia, Assange's mother Christine said she feared a decision by Ecuador not to protect her son could lead to him eventually being deported to the United States to face trial over the publication of the secret documents. "What the US wants, the US gets from its allies, regardless of if it's legal or if it's ethical or in breach of human or legal rights," Ms Assange told AAP. The Ecuadorian government will announce its decision on Assange's future at 10pm today (AEST). Police stationed outside the Ecuadorian embassy where Julian Assange remains.
The New York Times is reporting that Ecuador is prepared to allow Assange to remain in its embassy in London indefinitely under a type of humanitarian protection. A government official in Ecuador's capital, Quito, said that the British government had made it clear it would not allow Assange to leave the country to travel to Ecuador, so even with a grant of asylum or similar protection, he would probably remain stuck in the embassy. Scuffle breaks out between police and a protester outside the embassy. Despite a growing police presence at the building that houses the embassy, and social media speculation, police have not entered the embassy. However, the Metropolitan Police may be preparing to deal with angry supporters if Assange emerges and is arrested. Shortly before 1pm Australian time, WikiLeaks released a statement saying that, in a message to the Ecuadorian government, Britain had "threatened to forcefully enter the Ecuadorian embassy in London and arrest Julian Assange".
Police outside the Ecuadorian Embassy in London where Julian Assange is seeking political asylum. Photo: Paul Stewart The statement claimed that Britain had said such action would be permissible under the Diplomatic and Consular Premises Act 1987. It said British authorities had given the warning because it had become aware Ecuador was planning to grant Assange asylum. Embassy of the Republic of Ecuador in London. Condemning the threat, the WikiLeaks statement said: "Any transgression against the sanctity of the embassy is a unilateral and shameful act, and a violation of the Vienna Convention, which protects embassies worldwide."
Several police vans were outside the embassy, police were seen entering through a side door and uniformed officers were standing guard at the front entrance. A crowd of Assange supporters was ordered behind police tape 20 metres from the door. Police forcefully moved a young man who tried to obstruct a police van, as protesters shouted that police were invading the embassy of a sovereign nation. A police inspector, after asking protesters blocking an alleyway to move, told them "as far as I know [Assange] is not in police custody". Asked if police were there to arrest the Australian, he said: "I can't say at the moment."
Late last night, local time, the British Foreign Office issued a statement that said "we are still committed to reaching a mutually acceptable solution" with Ecuador. A crowd began building in the street outside the embassy within minutes of police arriving. Assange supporters used social media to urge people to gather at the location. "Ecuadorian embassy" is trending worldwide on Twitter. Occupy Wall Street tweeted shortly after the raid: "ANNOUNCEMENT: #Assange supporters are calling for an occupation at #Ecuador's Embassy in #London RIGHT NOW. Ecuadorian Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino told a news conference that Ecuador had received a written threat on Wednesday from Britain that "it could assault our embassy" if Assange was not handed over. He said the threat was delivered to Ecuador's Foreign Ministry and ambassador in London.
Despite calls for government intervention into Assange's predicament, Ms Roxon insisted the matter was an issue between Assange and Ecuador, "and increasingly it seems it is a matter between Ecuador and the United Kingdom". "Our role in this is only a diplomatic one, a consular one to make sure Mr Assange has support that he needs for consular issues. It's not something where we have any legal role where we can play."