2.5 million people need urgent aid in Syria, says UN chief Amos
United Nations humanitarian chief Valerie Amos said today that as many as 2.5 million people were in need of aid in Syria.
Baroness Amos, speaking in Damascus where she met prime minister Wael al-Halki and officials this week, urged government forces and rebels to do more to protect civilians caught up in the 17-month conflict.
She said: “Over a million people have been uprooted and face destitution. Perhaps a million more have urgent humanitarian needs due to the widening impact of the crisis on the economy and people’s livelihoods. Back in March, we estimated that a million people were in need of help. Now as many as 2.5 million are in need of assistance and we are working to update our plans and funding requirements.”
Amos said she met displaced families in Damascus and in Nabk north-east of the capital who were housed in public buildings and schools that are due to reopen next month. “Their needs for healthcare, shelter, food, water and sanitation are growing,” she said. 
International watchdog Human Rights Watch today said that 40 people were killed and at least 100 injured by a government air strike on a poor neighbourhood in Azaz in northern Syria yesterday.
So many people were wounded that the town’s hospital locked its doors and residents were told to drive to the Turkish border so that the injured could be treated on the other side.
Meanwhile, four Arab states have told their citizens to leave Lebanon amid signs that the conflict in Syria is spilling over into its western neighbour.
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Kuwait urged action after a string of kidnappings of Sunni Muslims by a powerful Shia clan.
The Meqdad clan said it was holding more than 20 people in Beirut, including a Saudi, a Turk and several Syrians, in response to a member of the family being detained by the Free Syrian Army.
Syrian government envoy Bouthaina Shaaban, who is visiting Beijing, has reportedly praised China and Russia for not trying to be “colonisers” in their response to the conflict.