Rebels say Syrian vice president defects, regime denies claim
"If confirmed, (this) represents yet another high-level official who sees that the al-Assad regime is a sinking ship," she said. "I expect to see additional defections in both the military and civilian sectors in the coming days."
Observers view al-Sharaa's power and influence as more significant than the prime minister, who only served in the post for weeks. He has more clout having long been a prominent, loyal member of the regime's old guard having served as foreign minister under al-Assad and his late father, Hafez, for more than 20 years and vice president since 2006.
Louai Miqdad, the spokesman for the rebel army, said al-Sharaa left Damascus more than a week ago and fled to Daraa to try to make sure his relatives, close proteges and other officials would be secure. Al-Sharaa is from Daraa province, the area bordering Jordan where the regime's violent crackdown against protesters began in March 2011.
He said rebel army leaders "lost communications with our commanders in Daraa who were trying to get him to cross the borders to Jordan," expressing concerns government forces may have detained some of al-Sharaa's relatives to compel him to surrender.
By Saturday morning, the state-run Syrian Arab News Agency had removed al-Sharaa's profile from its website. SANA said a press release from al-Sharaa's office said that, since the crisis began, he has been working "with different parties to end the bloodshed" through "comprehensive dialogue" aimed at "a national reconciliation."
Andrew Tabler, a Syria expert at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, said there had been talk that al-Sharaa's defection was in the works and noting "a lot of similar Sunnis" like Tlas and Hijab "are doing this."
"These may be factors in his favor in the post-Assad phase," she said, as to his possibility of becoming a transition figure. "But he would have to be accepted by the Syrian people. He has thus far represented a brutal dictatorship and his defection at this late stage in the revolution may be too little too late. "
Ramadan ended Saturday with at least 172 people killed nationwide, according to the LCC. The toll includes 70 killed in Damascus and its suburbs, including 40 people discovered in the Tal area. Another 30 were killed in Deir Ezzor, 27 in Daraa (mostly in Hirak) and 26 in Aleppo.
Some 4,685 people have been killed since the Muslim holy month began 30 days ago, the opposition network said. More than one-third of those -- 1,540 people -- died in and around Damascus, while 943 were killed in Aleppo. There were more than 500 fatalities in the provinces of Idlib, Homs and Daraa during Ramadan as well, the LCC reported.
"At the end of the day we have paved the way for a united agreement by the Security Council for the United Nations to stay in this country for the search of peace and ending violence," he said.