Morsi supporters attack demonstrators in Cairo
TONY EASTLEY: The political crisis in Egypt is deepening, with supporters and opponents of President Mohammed Morsi pelting each other with rocks outside the Presidential place in Cairo.
President Morsi has returned to work at the compound despite the protests outside.
His opponents are demonstrating against his powers and a draft constitution which they say is biased.
KIM LANDERS: The latest clashes began when thousands of president Mohammed Morsi's supporters descended on the palace, where hundreds of his opponents were staging a sit-in.
Stones and petrol bombs flew as the president's supporters chased the protestors away from the main gate and tore down their tents.
This protestor says Mohammed Morsi hasn't kept any of the promises made in his first 100 days and is now going from a president to a dictator.
The protests began after President Morsi issued a decree that expanded his powers.
And he's fuelled opposition anger by racing through approval of a draft constitution drawn up by an Islamist-led assembly.
Amr Mussa is one of the opposition leaders.
AMR MOUSSA: The country is now divided and we've landed into violence. We hold the sitting regime responsible. We are here standing before you one hand, one voice defending Egypt and its revolution. We are all for democracy and not for imposing a status quo, dividing the people or dictating a disputed constitution. The draft constitution articles are flawed and unacceptable.
KIM LANDERS: The opposition says it's ready to talk if the president scraps the decree giving himself enormous powers.
Speaking at the NATO headquarters in Brussels, the US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton says the unrest shows the need for dialogue.
HILLARY CLINTON: So we call on all stakeholders in Egypt to settle their differences through democratic dialogue and we call on Egypt's leaders to ensure that the outcome protects the democratic promise of the revolution for all of Egypt's citizens.
And Mohamed Youssef, one of the protestors outside the palace in Cairo, says the country needs stability and that rational, civilized people should sit down together to do what's good for the country.
Meanwhile three more members of President Morsi's staff have resigned over the crisis.
This is Kim Landers in Washington for AM.