Myanmar signs cease-fire with rebel group; Suu Kyi joins elections
The Karen will now be permitted to travel throughout the country, but without weapons, a government official said.
"We have to begin with a cease-fire and then proceed to negotiations, with political dialogue taking place later," KNU Vice President Saw David Thakabaw told the United Nations news service earlier.
KNU leaders said a key problem remains security for civilians living in camps for the internally displaced. They said the government was still sending supplies and troops into Karen areas.
One of eight prominent ethnic groups in Myanmar, the largely Christian Karen have been fighting in the country's eastern jungles for greater rights since Burmese independence from Britain in 1948.
Myra Dahgaypaw, a Washington-based Karen activist with the U.S. Campaign for Burma, said there are no precise numbers on how many people have suffered in the long-running conflict. Just since 1996, she said, government troops have burned down 4,000 Karen villages.
Dahgaypaw, 35, who spent 17 years in a Thailand camp for the displaced, said Myanmar's leadership in Napidaw had not yet put its stamp of approval on the agreement. She was not ready to celebrate peace just yet.
But if it really does take hold, she said, it will mean that many people will be able to finally go back home.
"Since independence, we have never experienced basic freedom," she said, adding that the Karen have had to fight to preserve their culture. "If we don't fight for it, we will get killed."
Ruled by a military junta since 1962, Myanmar is now under President Thein Sein, a former general elected in March, 2011. The new government has instituted rapid reforms but the verdict is still out on whether they are genuine, or merely moves to appease critics.
"The government is striving for emerging good governance and clean government, flourishing of democratic practices, ensuring rule of law, making economic reform and motivating environmental conservation in building a new peaceful, modern, and developed discipline-flourishing democratic nation," the president said then.
The Obama administration cautiously says it finds the changes encouraging as well as promising. Hillary Clinton visited Myanmar last month, the first visit by a secretary of state in more than a half-century.
And last week, Suu Kyi met with William Hague, the first British foreign secretary to visit Myanmar in more than 50 years. He called the peace deal "good news" after 63 years of fighting.
"It has been a longstanding goal of the international community to see a ceasefire, and indeed it was one of the key issues on which I urged the Burmese government to make progress during my visit last week when I also met with Karen representatives," he said. "There is still a long way to go fully to rebuild trust between the parties after so many years of conflict, but this is an important step in the right direction."
Suu Kyi has lived most of the past two decades under house detention.She was released in 2010.