Second blast injures 28 in Bangkok protest
At least one journalist was among those injured. The escalating violence has renewed speculation that Thailand’s powerful military will intervene to end the crisis that has left nine people dead and hundreds injured during two months of protests that are dragging down South-east Asia’s second largest economy. Since another explosion in the middle of a protest parade on Friday the numbers of protesters occupying key intersections across the capital have dropped significantly. A 46-year-old protester died of his wounds and 35 others were injured in that blast that prompted authorities and demonstrators to blame each other. Bomb suspect: Police believe this is the man who threw a grenade into the crowd of protesters.
Police said they are seeking two men, one believed to be the aide of a former opposition Democrat party MP who were seen in a video clip of the explosion that is believed to have been from a grenade. The Democrats support the protest movement trying to topple government of prime minister Yingluck Shinawatra, raising suspicion it was a staged attack designed to blame her supporters. But protest leaders and Democrat officials angrily denied any role. A protest movement backed by Bangkok’s middle class and elite is trying to topple Ms Yingluck’s government and set up an unelected body to run the country for up to two years. They claim Ms Yingluck is a puppet of her elder brother Thaksin Shinawatra, a divisive figure in Thailand, who lives abroad to avoid a jail sentence for corruption.
Thailand’s supreme military commander Thanasak Patimaprakorn said the situation had become serious, with the country like a patient suffering from cancer who needs immediate attention. General Thanasak urged all sides to negotiate but conceded there was no mediator to broker an end to the crisis. “I have only one wish now which is that everyone sit down and talk and that they are all safe,” he said. “This is the military’s stance at this time." The military has staged 18 coups or attempted coups since the 1930s.
Meanwhile the strain on Ms Yingluck, Thailand’s first female prime minister, is becoming evident amid increasingly fierce misogynist attacks. During fiery anti-government rants, Ms Yingluck has been called stupid, ugly, a bitch, a slut and a whore, among even worse things. She has been seen occasionally tearing up in public, asking the other day: “Do you not want me to set foot on Thai soil anymore?” Last Friday she told journalists: “Whoever could be in my position for one day would know how it feels.” When 46-year-old Ms Yingluck won power in a landslide election victory in 2011 she said one of the first world leaders she wanted to meet was Australia’s then prime minister Julia Gillard because she saw a lot in common with her. But she could never have foreseen Ms Gillard’s famous vow a year later to “call out misogyny and sexism wherever I see it” and the crude attacks that were later to come her own way.
A university professor recommended sending a large group of men to “sexually snare” Ms Yingluck, according to reports by the Thomson Reuters Foundation. A well-known doctor offered to give her vaginal repair surgery and to change her sanitary pads and said she could become a nude model because she has hasn’t yet reached menopause. At major intersections in Bangkok which protesters are blockading, huge photoshopped posters have been put up calling Ms Yingluck crude names or showing her with phalluses. Late last year British-educated opposition leader and former prime minister Abhisit Vejjajiva referred to Ms Yingluck as a “stupid bitch”. The crude attacks have come from women and men as Thailand’s political crisis has become increasingly bitter.