Ukraine protests live
Presidency claims deal has been reached after all night talks brokered by EU foreign ministers France, Germany and Poland caution deal not yet definitive and talks to resume at lunchtime Yanukovych leaves Kiev for support base in Kharkiv Opposition has not yet commented amid questions over whether it can sell deal to street Gunfire reported near Independence Square but events unclear Dozens of police defectors from western city of Lviv arrive in central Kiev Thursday was Ukraine's deadliest day, with 70 killed amid sniper attacks on protesters
23.30 We are going to wrap up our live blog now. For the latest news from Ukraine, please visit the Telegraph's world page.
23.00 A US official has told AFP that Mr Yanukovych has gone to Kharkiv for a meeting.
22.51 Reuters has more on the Obama-Putin call. A senior state department official said Mr Putin told Mr Obama that Russia wants to be part of the implementation of the deal struck on Friday.
22.31 Where was Britain while Kiev burned?On the margins, says the Telegraph's Colin Freeman.
22.27 More on Mr Yanukovych's movements, backing up the earlier claims that he has left Kiev:
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Jon Williams - US officials confirm President Yanukovich has left Kiev for Kharkov in Eastern &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23Ukraine" target="_blank"&gt;#Ukraine&lt;/a&gt;. where base of his support is centered &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23Ukraine" target="_blank"&gt;#Ukraine&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
22.20 AFP reports President Barack Obama has spoken to Russian President Vladimir Putin as Washington pressed for swift implementation of a deal designed to end a Ukraine's deadly crackdown on anti-government protesters.
Early details of the call say the men had a "constructive" conversation and both agreed the peace deal needed to be implemented quickly.
22.01 There is an unconfirmed report on Twitter that Mr Yanukovych has fled Kiev and is on a plane to Kharkiv, Ukraine's second largest city.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: James Miller - UKRAINIAN NEWS OUTLET AND PROMINENT JOURNALIST BOTH REPORT UKRAINE PRESIDENT YANUKOVYCH HAS FLED KIEV &lt;a href="http://t.co/35NkfIFL6f" target="_blank"&gt;http://t.co/35NkfIFL6f&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
22.00 Despite the deal, many protesters in Independence Square were in no mood to call off their demonstration.
After an open coffin was held aloft by the crowd, a protester wearing battle-fatigues leapt up to the microphone and triggered roars of approval as he declared: "By tomorrow we want him (Yanukovich) out!"
Referring to the three opposition leaders, including boxer-turned-politician Vitaly Klitschko, who were standing behind him, the man said: "My comrade was shot and our leaders shake the hand of a murderer. It's a disgrace."
21.40 Poland's foreign minister Radoslaw Sikorski has spoken more about negotiations over the peace deal.
Speaking in Warsaw he said he had received signals in Kiev that the Ukrainian president was prepared to use force should the opposition have rejected an EU brokered roadmap to end a bloody crisis.
"We were getting signals that in case the agreement fails, President (Viktor) Yanukovych was preparing to use Interior Ministry forces," he said.
"If the agreement would fail, due to the opposition rejecting it ... politically, it would have been easier for him (Yanukovych) to use force. That's why the situation was so dramatic."
20.10 Great piece by Max Fisher in the Washington Poston the competing narratives of the Ukraine crisis, both of which could simultaneously be true.
The first "human" story is most well known in the West. It's about democracy: corrupt and autocratic Yanukovych was ousted in the so-called "Orange Revolution" a decade ago and now he is back and so is his autocracy and corruption. The protests are fighting back against this.
The second story is structural and more wonkish. It's about demographics and an identity crisis. The Ukraine has been divided by a national identity crisis since its 1991 independence and is split, broadly along East and West, on the basis of competing world views.
19.29 There are reports of the Ukraine hotel in Kiev being evacuated. The hotel has served as a makeshift clinic and mortuary during the clashes.
19.11 The White House says it is in Russia's interest that Ukraine not be engulfed in violence, and that Ukrainian situation is not a US-Russian "tug of war".
18.45 Our correspondent on the ground in Kiev, David Blair, has a dispatch due to go online in an hour or so. Miss Zhukovska, a nurse from Kremenets, 150 miles west of Kiev, was shot clean though the neck yesterday by a sniper but survived has mercifully survived her injuries in a “thousand-to-one chance”. Here is the intro to the article.
Only when jets of blood poured onto her hands and a friend screamed with horror did the volunteer nurse realise what had happened. “And then I thought, ‘now I will die’,” remembered the 21-year-old. “My friends took me to an ambulance very quickly. When I was in the ambulance, I was sure I will die.”
Like dozens of other Ukrainians on Thursday, she had fallen prey to one of the snipers prowling Independence Square in Kiev. With infinite care and precision, this unknown marksman had taken aim beneath Miss Zhukovska’s protective helmet and fired one round clean through her neck.
The distant killer had not been deterred by the white cape with red crosses worn by his chosen target. If anything, those vivid markers might have made Miss Zhukovska more conspicuous and so more vulnerable.
And here is a photograph of Miss Zhukovska:
18.33 Although Ukraine's embattled president, Viktor Yanukovych, signed a deal today with the opposition for early elections and form a new unity government, many in central Kiev's main square are still frustrated he has not stepped down immediately.
"Elections in December are not enough - he has to leave now," one demonstrator, 34-year-old Oleh Bukoyenko, has told Reuters. "He has to leave now. Otherwise he could end up like Gaddafi or Ceausescu."
18.04 Dispatch from Kiev by Aliaksandr Kudrytski for Bloomberg, which contrasts the relative political freedoms in Kiev to his hometown of Minsk, Belarus: "Occupying a main square for months of peaceful protest is unthinkable in Belarus."
Also includes an encounter with Mykhailo Gavrylyuk, who rose became a star of the opposition a month ago, when a video of him refusing to submit to police after being stripped naked and beaten in temperatures well below freezing went viral, attracting more than a million viewers. Here is it re-uploaded onto YouTube.
“We Cossacks are kind of tired of standing around, but we may have some fun soon,” said Gavrylyuk.
1743 Fascinating report by Howard Amos for the Guardian in the EU-facing Ukrainain city of Lviv. Security services and local government openly support the protestors in many areas of western Ukrainian; "few want to see any permanent division between the country's mainly Russian-speaking east and the more pro-European west, but many admit there is a risk it could happen."
17.15 The Ukrainian parliament votes to allow release of jailed opposition figure Yulia Tymoshenko.
Tymoshenko has been serving a seven year sentence since 2011 for abuse of power and embezzlement - charges concerning a 2009 contract with Russian gas company Gazprom to supply natural gas to Ukraine. Her supporters say the charges are politically motivated.
16.44 Unconfirmed reports are saying that police have peacefully surrendered to protesters in Dnepropetrovsk, Ukraine’s fourth largest city. Here is a tweet from Forbes journalist Oleksandr Akymenko on the incident.
16.40 Reuters is reporting that Ukraine's parliament has voted to dismiss acting Interior Minister Vitaly Zakharchenko for using "violence" against protesters during the wave of street unrest.
Zakharchenko is hated by the protesters because of the police crackdowns he has ordered. His dismissal will be seen as a victory for the protest movement.
16.37 China has condemnd the violence in Ukraine. The full text from the official Chinese news agency Xinhua report is as follows:
China on Friday 21 February urged the two opposing sides in Ukraine to exercise maximum restraint and seek a resolution within the legal framework.
Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying made the remarks at a regular press briefing when asked to comment on the current situation in Ukraine as well as the sanctions against Ukraine from the United States and the European Union (EU).
Escalating violence in central Kiev, the capital, has left 77 people dead and more than 500 injured over the past four days.
Hua said China expressed great concern over the situation in Ukraine and worried about casualties during clashes.
"China condemns the extreme violence in Ukraine and holds that all parties should express their appeals through legal means," she said.
The spokeswoman called on the rival sides to restore social order as soon as possible for the benefit of Ukraine's people and regional stability.
The United States refused visas on Wednesday on some 20 Ukraine government officials and individuals, while the EU agreed on Thursday to impose a travel ban and freeze assets of Ukrainians they deemed responsible for human rights violations and violence.
Russia, which wields heavy influence on Ukraine, urged the Ukrainian government to act more resolutely amid the current unrest and demanded the radical opposition stop violence.
Russia on Thursday also criticized Western threats to impose sanctions on Ukraine as blackmail and double standards.
China hopes that the international community will make positive efforts and play a constructive role in stabilizing the situation in Ukraine, said Hua.
Protests in Ukraine, which began last November to back the country's European integration, turned violent in mid-January.
15.35 Following the Polish foreign minister's startling warning to protest leaders that if they did not accept the deal "you will all be dead", James Mates, Europe Editor of ITV News - which filmed the comment - has asked him for confirmation.
Mates tweeted that he had spoken to Radoslaw Sikorski, who confirmed that the threat of martial law was real. "To my knowledge interior ministry troops were being readied," he said.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: James Mates - Polish FM &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/sikorskiradek" target="_blank"&gt;@sikorskiradek&lt;/a&gt; confirms to me threat of martial law was real "To my knowledge interior ministry troops were being readied"&lt;/noframe&gt;
15.26 Radoslaw Sikorski, the Polish foreign minister has been filmed by ITV telling a protest leader: "If you don't support this [deal] you'll have martial law, you'll have the army. You will all be dead."
The minister was leaving talks when he was asked by James Mates, ITV News Europe Editor, if he had managed to convince the opposition. "I don't know," he replied.
European foreign ministers then came back for more talks, after which they announced that the opposition had agreed to sign the deal.
14.00 Our correspondent Roland Oliphant in Kiev reports on the response of protesters in Independence Square to today's agreement:
Foreign ministers left this morning's signing ceremony tight lipped, with Germany's Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Poland's Radek Sikorski jumping into a shared car without offering any comment to reporters outside the presidential administration.
But among protesters on Maidan, the attitude to Mr Yanukovych's offer of snap elections and return to the 2004 constitution is best summarised as one of indifference. "There is no possible deal that would mean anything to us. There was a chance for compromise, and Yanukovych missed it. He has two choices - exile or prison," said one self defence volunteer who declined to be named.
"It's too early to say," said Andriy Paruby, the commander of the opposition's disparate army of "self defence" volunteers, dozens of whom were killed in Thursday's fighting. "There's a third power in Ukraine - I'm talking about Russia. So Yanukovych can sign anything he likes, but the snipers could still get a different order."
He declined to comment when asked if he meant that the snipers who opened fire on protesters yesterday were Russian.
Rumours about Russian special forces being deployed to Kiev in Ukrainian uniforms have been rife since protests first erupted in December, but they reached fever pitch in the aftermath of the shooting on Thursday morning, with a purported recording of intercepted radio chatter between snipers speaking Russian going viral on the internet.
Like other rumours of Russian involvement, the video is impossible to verify and may well have been edited or even entirely faked. But in the febrile atmosphere of post-masacre Maidan, many are ready to believe in the implications.
13.40 Ukraine's three opposition leaders are at presidential administration headquarters and are ready to sign a proposed agreement to resolve the crisis, a spokeswoman for one of them told Reuters.
Asked if the opposition was ready to sign with President Viktor Yanukovich, a spokeswoman for Vitaly Klitschko, one of the opposition leaders, said: "Yes. They should be. They are already there (at presidential headquarters)."
13.22 In central Kiev, friends and relatives of the missing are scouring the ranks of protesters for news of their loved ones.
12.47 Vitaly Klitschko, one of the three mainstream opposition leaders, has told the German newspaper Bild that the opposition will sign the deal. But, he says, further talks are needed with protesters. This might signal concern within the opposition that not everyone within the disparate alliance will accept the agreement.
12.42 Olesya Zhukovskaya, the young medic feared dead after she was shot in the neck and tweeted "I'm dying" yesterday, is alive. "I live! Thank you to everyone who supported and prayed for me!" she tweeted this morning.
12.36 In Independence Square, police defectors from the western city of Lviv have joined with protesters:
12.31 The German and Polish foreign ministers are headed for talks with opposition protesters, where they will discuss the draft agreement just signed with Viktor Yanukovych.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: RadosÅ&amp;sbquo;aw Sikorski - Together with F.W.Steinmeier on the way to meet Maidan activists to discuss the draft agreement.&lt;/noframe&gt;
12.03 Just when we thought it might all be over... Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk has sounded another note of caution, saying that the agreement signed today has not yet been approved by the opposition. He said that a definitive deal is still very distant, and that the risk still remained that the worst case scenario could materialise in Ukraine.
11.19 Here is the full presidential statement, via BBC Monitoring:
"In these tragic days, when Ukraine has suffered such heavy losses, when people have died on both sides of the barricades I see it as my responsibility to the glorious memory of those killed to declare: nothing is more important than human lives. And there are no steps that we cannot take together to restore peace in Ukraine.
"I announce steps required to restore calm and avoid further victims in the stand-off.
"I announce that I will call an early presidential election.
"I will also initiate a return to the constitution of 2004 with a redistribution of powers towards a parliamentary republic.
"I call for the start of a procedure to form a government of national trust.
"As president of Ukraine and guarantor of the Constitution, I am fulfilling my duty to the people, Ukraine and God Almighty in the name of preserving the state, in the name of defending human lives, in the name of peace and calm in our land."
11.17 Here is the text of today's agreement, via ICTV TV and BBC Monitoring:
1) Within 48 hours, a law restoring the 2004 constitution will be passed and published. The signatories state their intention to form a coalition and a national unity government within 10 days.
2) A constitutional reform which balances the remit of the Ukrainian president, government and parliament will be started immediately and completed in September 2014.
3) A presidential election will be held right after the new constitution is adopted but no later than December 2014. New election legislation will be adopted and a new composition of the Central Electoral Commission will be formed on the proportional basis, according to the rules of the OSCE and the Venice Commission.
4) An investigation into the recent acts of violence will be carried out with joint monitoring by the authorities, opposition and the European Council.
5) The authorities will not declare a state of emergency. The authorities and opposition will refrain from use of force.
11.14 President Viktor Yanukovych has said he is calling a presidential poll and starting the process of changing the constitution and forming a government of national unity, under the deal signed today in Kiev.
"I am initiating early presidential elections," Mr Yanukovych said in a statement, without specifying a date.
10.45 The signing ceremony is being held at the Presidential Administration Building in Kiev. Telegraph correspondent Roland Oliphant has been denied access. The EU foreign ministers were tight-lipped as they entered - asked for comment as to the content of the deal, Radislow Sikorski, the Polish foreign minister, replied "compromise", while French foreign minister Laurent Fabius said only "good". The deal is expected to be published online shortly.
10.21 No announcement on the deal as yet. But AFP has reported a senior EU diplomat as saying the bloc expects a "temporary deal" to be signed today. The source said the pact would provide for some constitutional reforms and early presidential and parliamentary elections at a date yet to be set.
Channel 4's Matt Frei says the next few hours for Ukraine are decisive, according to the Polish foreign minister Radoslaw Sikorski. Frei doubts whether the agreement will be enough to appease the protesters.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Matt Frei - German FM &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/steinmayr" target="_blank"&gt;@steinmayr&lt;/a&gt; showed me draft agreement. Pres election by December latest. Far too late for &lt;a href="https://twitter.com/search?src=hash&amp;q=%23maidan" target="_blank"&gt;#maidan&lt;/a&gt;.&lt;/noframe&gt;
10.00 As we await an announcement on the reported deal, scheduled for 10am GMT, take a look at this YouTube video I am a Ukrainian, which has been viewed more than 5 million times on the site.
09.53 The regional parliament of the heavily pro-Russian Crimea is to vote on secession from Ukraine, reports Damien McElroy, Telegraph Foreign Affairs Correspondent:
Vladimir Konstantinov, the speaker of the predominantly Russian region that is home to Russia's Black Sea naval fleet, warned that Ukraine is falling apart and the region must protect its interests.
"It may happen if the country splits. Anyway, the entire situation is heading towards it," Mr Konstantinov was reported as saying on Voice of Russia radio.
A day earlier a Russian official told the Financial Times that Russia would protect the Crimea just as it embraced breakaway Georgian regions in 2008. "If Ukraine breaks apart, it will trigger a war," the official said. "They will lose Crimea first [because] we will go in and protect [it], just as we did in Georgia."
09.47 A certain amount of confusion surrounds the reports of shooting near Independence Square. AP has reported gunfire but says it is unclear who and where it came from. The government has said forces fired back at protesters after being fired upon between the parliamentary building and the square. But some reporters who have visited the scene, including The Telegraph's Roland Oliphant, say they have not seen evidence of any current shooting in that location. More details to follow.
09.26 Watch our live stream from Independence Square, where protesters are fortifying barricades in preparation for what they believe is the inevitable return of security forces.
09.20 Police in Kiev have released a statement saying they fired back when shot at by protesters between Independence Square and the parliament building.
09.15 Inside the Ukrainian parliament scuffles have broken out, after the speaker, Volodymr Rybak, from Mr Yanukovych's Party of the Regions, proposed an adjournment until 2pm amid talks on new bills on curbing presidential powers and amnesty for protesters. The adjournment is now only to last for one hour.
09.06 The BBC's Duncan Crawford has tweeted that dozens of police from Lviv, the western city where the assembly this week voted to split from the rest of Ukraine, have arrived in the square having defected. A large number of activists bearing hunting rifles have also arrived, he says.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Duncan Crawford - Several dozen police from Lviv have arrived in Independence Sq. They have defected. Over 100 activists also arrive. Some have hunting rifles&lt;/noframe&gt;
09.01 Amid confusion over the status of the deal announced by President Viktor Yanukovych, violence has once again broken out in central Kiev. Shots have rung out across Independence Square and nearby protesters have opened fire on police, according to Reuters and AP.