Six parishioners shot dead while worshipping at Kenyan church
Two gunmen have stormed a church near the Kenyan coastal city of Mombasa and opened fire on worshippers, killing six people and wounding more than a dozen others, in what police are labelling a terrorist attack.
One witness says the gunmen, who burst in through the church's back doors, began shouting in a foreign language before shooting indiscriminately at the congregation.
Blood-spattered Bibles and overturned plastic chairs lay strewn across the church's floor after the attack.
"Both [men] carried big guns and began shooting all over the place. I fell to the ground and could hear screams," said Lilian Omondi, who was leading a prayer recital at the time.
Another bystander said the assailants walked unhurriedly out of the church and opened fire on people standing outside.
An interior ministry official later said the men escaped on foot.
"They were ordinary looking guys, one of them tall, dark and wearing a long-sleeved shirt. They walked casually as if all was OK," bystander Peter Muasya said.
"Then they started shooting at those of us who were standing outside."
The attackers tried to raid a second church nearby but fled when armed police on patrol in the area appeared.
Somali militant group Al Shabaab and local sympathisers have carried out multiple attacks in Kenya, in revenge for the Kenyan army's intervention in Somalia to crush Islamist rebels.
The Kenyan coast's large Muslim minority, many of whom feel marginalised by the predominantly Christian government, have been a fertile recruitment ground for Islamist militant networks.
Breaking up those networks has become a priority for the Nairobi government, but moderate clerics say its heavy-handed tactics have fuelled resentment among Muslim youths.
Kenya's parliament has called for better coordination between the security and intelligence agencies after 67 people were killed in a shopping mall attack in Nairobi in September.
The church shooting took place in Likoni, located across a deep-water channel from Mombasa city, a major tourist hub.
Police threw a dragnet over the neighbourhood following the shooting, rounding up more than 100 youths for questioning.
The attack came just days after prosecutors charged two Somalis with terrorism offences after police seized a car packed with explosives.
There was no immediate claim of responsibility. Likoni's police chief Robert Mureithi said it appeared the gunmen were armed with automatic weapons.
"This has all the indicators of a terrorist attack because the attackers did not steal anything and appeared focused on killing," Mr Mureithi said.
Two people were killed at the church and four more died of gunshot wounds in hospital, according to the Kenyan Red Cross.
At Mombasa's main hospital, doctors handed reporters X-rays showing bullets lodged in the skulls of a two-year-old boy, whose mother was killed, and a male adult they were treating.
Kenyan security officials say the Indian Ocean coastline has become a hotbed of radicalisation.
"Terrorism continues to grow in shape, colour and behaviour and when it assumes the phase of radicalisation ... it will be met (with) full force," interior minister Joseph Ole Lenku said.
Moderate clerics in Mombasa warn the forceful crackdown on militant recruitment networks is fuelling resentment.
"The attackers have not done this on behalf of any religion or right-thinking group," said Sheikh Juma Ngao, a prominent Muslim cleric in Mombasa.
"If they are hoping to drive a wedge between religious groups in this region, then they are greatly mistaken."
Kenyans are increasingly alarmed at the relative ease at which militants appear to move within the country, east Africa's biggest economy and a recipient of US counter-terrorism funding.
Al Shabaab said it carried out the Westgate mall siege in the capital to avenge the military deployment in Somalia and has threatened more strikes in Kenya and other nations which have sent troops to Somalia, including Uganda and Ethiopia.