Karzai’s cousin killed by turban bomber in fresh blow to Afghan government
The assassination of a powerful cousin of President Karzai, as he celebrated the end of the Muslim holy month Ramadan, has damaged the government and strengthened the Taliban insurgents, analysts said.
Hashmat Karzai was killed this morning when a Taliban ‘turban bomber’ posing as a well-wisher hugged him to celebrate Eid, the end of the fasting month.
His death is also a blow to Afghan presidential candidate Ashraf Ghani whom he served as a Kandahar campaign manager.
Eyewitnesses said the bomber had been wearing a traditional white salwar kamiz pyjama suit and was among dozens of people who had called on the powerful Popalzai tribal leader for tea and dried fruit in the courtyard of his sprawling and heavily guarded compound in Kandahar.
Haji Mohammed Karim, a Noorzai tribal leader, said he was about to leave the compound when he saw the bomber approach Mr Karzai.
“We were saying we would go when this man came to greet Hashmat. He hugged him and blew himself up. It was not a big explosion but there was smoke and when we saw Hashmat he was lying on the ground covered in blood”, he said. Another man was seriously injured.
His killing is the latest in a series of assassination of powerful figures and allies of the Karzai government in the last few years and analysts said it would undermine its attempts top persuade business and tribal leaders to remain loyal.
In the last three years, three of President Karzai’s closest aides in Kandahar, the birthplace of the Taliban, have been killed.
His provincial deputy governor was killed in January 2011 and his brother Ahmed Wali Karzai was assassinated later that year in July.
Kandahar’s mayor was murdered a few weeks later while in Kabul another Karzai advisor Jan Mohammed Khan, was shot dead at his home.
The former president Buhanuddin Rabbani, head of President Karzai’s High Peace Council, was killed by a turban bomber in September 2011.
Michael Semple, a leading Afghanistan analyst and former deputy European Union envoy to the country, said the killing of the president’s cousin would undermine the government’s writ by highlighting its inability to protect even senior leaders.
“It makes Pashtuns less willing to take risks on behalf of the government because they’ll start to think if the government can’t look after its own, what will it do for me?” he said.
It may also drive business and tribal leaders to give more money to the insurgents.
“It’s a good advertisement for Taliban extortion”, he added.