Pakistan protests: Three dead, hundreds injured as anti-government demonstrators clash with police
At least three people are dead and over 200 have been injured in clashes between police and anti-government protesters in Pakistan's capital, Islamabad.
The fortnight-long political impasse took a violent turn when police fired tear gas and rubber bullets at anti-government protesters who had been attempting to storm prime minister Nawaz Sharif's official residence.
The shelling began when the protestors tried to remove some barricades located in front of the residence using cranes.
The Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS) reported two deaths – one man who had sustained rubber bullet injuries and another who had died of a heart attack, spokespeople said.
Some of the injured were rushed to the city's two major hospitals, PIMS and Poly Clinic.
Protesters have been camped outside parliament since August 15 demanding that Mr Sharif quit.
They claim the election which swept him to power last year was rigged, though international observers said the vote was largely free and fair.
Opposition politician Imran Khan and cleric Tahir ul-Qadri demand wholesale changes to Pakistan's political system and called for an interim "unity government" while changes were being implemented.
Information minister Pervaiz Rashid said on Sunday the government remained open to restarting negotiations to end the situation peacefully.
"The government did not initiate the clashes. They turned violent and tried to enter sensitive government buildings, which are the symbol of the state," he told a local television channel.
"They wanted their demands to be met at gunpoint, but still, our doors are open for talks."
About 25,000 people began to march towards on the prime minister's house late Saturday (local time) after talks with the government mediated by the powerful army failed to end the impasse.
Television pictures showed police in riot gear and some bloodied protesters being carried to ambulances.
Paramilitary troops and soldiers standing guard to protect Mr Sharif's house, as well as other sensitive installations, have not yet been called into action.
The government, meanwhile, has struck a defiant note, issuing a statement saying that Mr Sharif would not be stepping down.
"There is no question of resignation or proceeding on leave by prime minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, nor any member from the government side has made such suggestion," the statement said.
Mr Sharif had earlier dismissed the two-week old impasse as a "tiny storm" that would end soon.
The state-owned Pakistan Television quoted defence minister Khawaja Muhammad Asif as saying: "No-one would be allowed to enter inside the sensitive buildings".
The crisis took on a new dimension earlier this week after the government asked the army to mediate, raising fears the military would use the situation to enact a "soft coup" and increase its dominance over civilian authorities.