'Relentless' campaign to destroy ISIS
The president who ran to end the Iraq war announced a broad, aggressive military campaign in the region to stop a new terrorist threat on the eve of the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11 attacks.
In a primetime address to the nation Wednesday night, President Obama forcefully laid out plans to dramatically expand U.S.-led airstrikes in Iraq well beyond their original missions and to extend the aggressive military action into Syria — all in a “relentless” effort to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria.
“Our objective is clear: We will degrade, and ultimately destroy, [the Islamic State] through a comprehensive and sustained counter-terrorism strategy,” he said in an address from the White House's State Room.
Although he stopped short of saying he plans to launch airstrikes in Syria, he signaled his willingness to begin a bombing campaign across the porous Syria-Iraqi border by expressing a determination to attack ISIS “wherever they are.”
“That means I will not hesitate to take action against [ISIS] in Syria, as well as Iraq,” he said. “This is a core principle of my presidency: If you threaten America, you will find no safe haven.”
At the same time, he sought to show that this latest effort is consistent with other Obama administration counter-terrorism polices in places like Afghanistan and Pakistan, where “we took out Osama bin Laden,” Yemen and Somalia, where his administration has used drone strikes to kill leaders of al Qaeda and al Shabab.
“This counter-terrorism campaign will be waged through a steady, relentless effort to take out [ISIS] wherever they exist, using our air power and our support for partner forces on the ground,” he said.
Obama also announced plans to send 475 more military advisers to Iraq, increasing the total number of U.S. servicemen there to more than 1,500, though he clearly pledged that none of them would play a combat role.
“I want the American people to understand how this effort will be different from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan,” he stressed. “It will not involve American combat troops fighting on foreign soil.”
Obama said he waited until the Iraqis formed a new, more inclusive government to launch the next “offensive phase” of his campaign against ISIS.
“So tonight, with a new Iraqi government in place, and following consultations with allies abroad and Congress at home, I can announce that America will lead a broad coalition to roll back this terrorist threat,” he said.
Along with 10 mostly western countries and Turkey who have formed a core coalition of the willing, a senior administration official earlier Wednesday said that Saudi Arabia over the weekend had agreed to join the fight and more regional allies are expected to sign onto the campaign.
While the U.S. is now working with cooperative partners in Iraq to fight ISIS, more support is needed inside Syria, Obama argued. Even though Syrian leader Bashar Assad welcomes U.S.-led airstrikes against ISIS inside its borders, he said the U.S. will not coordinate any attacks with a leader who commits atrocities against his own people and whose time to relinquish power has long since passed.
Instead, the U.S. military plans to train and arm Syria’s moderate rebels to take the fight to ISIS on the ground. All of the training and arming would take place in Saudi Arabia so no U.S. troops would need to enter into Syria, the administration official said.
While the president believes he has the power to broaden his military campaign against ISIS, he said he lacks the so-called Title 10 authority to arm the rebels and pressed Congress to quickly vote to provide it.
“I believe we are strongest as a nation when the President and Congress work together,” he said. “…I again call on Congress to give us additional authorities and resources to train and equip these fighters.”
A senior administration official earlier Wednesday said Obama planned to launch airstrikes well beyond the original limited missions he set to provide humanitarian relief to Iraqis and protect U.S. personnel in Erbil. The official also signaled that airstrikes in Syria would likely be part of the plan.
“We are going to take military action in Syria at a time and place of our choosing,” the official said. “I will expect there to be action in Syria. We will do that as necessary as we develop targets, but we are not going to telegraph our moves.”