Abbas's Fatah honors Jerusalem hit-and-run terrorist
Mahmoud Abbas’s Fatah movement published a poster Thursday celebrating Palestinian terrorist Abdel Rahman Al-Shaludi, who killed three-month-old Chaya Zissel Braun and injured eight other Israelis in a hit-and-run car attack in Jerusalem the previous day.
“The Silwan branch of Fatah honors the heroic martyr Abdel Rahman Al-Shaludi, who executed the Jerusalem operation which led to the running over of settlers in the occupied city of Jerusalem,” read the notice, posted on Fatah’s official Facebook page.
Shaludi, a nephew of slain Hamas explosives expert Mohiyedine Sharif, was believed to be a Hamas supporter based on his militant Facebook posts. But the new Fatah poster may indicate an organizational affiliation with the rival Palestinian organization.
Get The Times of Israel's Daily Edition by email and never miss our top stories Free Sign Up
The Palestinian Authority issued no official comment on the incident, but Fatah Central Committee member Sultan Abu-Aynayn dubbed Shaludi “a hero” in Facebook comments posted Thursday, citing his time spent in Israeli prisons, the watchdog Palestinian Media Watch said.
Shaludi’s body — he was shot by police while attempting to flee the scene and subsequently died in hospital — was transferred to the Abu Kabir Forensic Institute on Thursday for an autopsy against his family’s will, Palestinian news agency Ma’an reported. The assailant’s mother claimed that the incident was a car accident, and that her son was “killed in cold blood.”
The Palestinian youth spent the past two years in and out of Israeli prisons. Shaludi’s mental state had deteriorated following his release after three weeks in Jerusalem’s Russian Compound prison, where he was interrogated by the Shin Bet security service earlier this year, his mother added. Just hours before the attack she had taken him to a doctor, who referred him to a psychiatrist.
“The occupation forces continued harassing him following his release by summoning him for questioning time and again,” she told Ma’an. “They would always threaten him and curse at him, telling him once: ‘We will not let you continue with your life; you will not study or work.'”