1 killed as driver plows into Jerusalem crowd in terror attack
An Arab driver plowed his vehicle into a crowd of people at a light rail station along the seam-line between East and West Jerusalem late Wednesday morning, killing a Border Police officer, and injuring 14 more people, one of them critically.
“Ten people were wounded, one of whom is in critical condition,” emergency services spokesman Zaki Heller said.
Magen David Adom paramedics reported that two people were seriously hurt, and three moderately injured.
Get The Times of Israel's Daily Edition by email and never miss our top stories Free Sign Up
Policemen were among the injured, according to Internal Security Minister Yitzhak Aharonovitch.
The fatality was named as Border Police officer Jedan Assad, 38, from Beit Jann, a Druze village. Assad was a father to a three-year-old boy; his wife is five months pregnant. His father said later that Assad “loved his service, and loved Jerusalem,” and called for agreements that would prevent more fatalities, “be they Jews, Arabs or Druze.”
Palestinian Ma’an news agency identified the terrorist as 48-year-old Ibrahim al-Akary from Shuafat in East Jerusalem, a father of five. Hamas’sIzz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades tweeted out pictures it said showed the attacker, who it called Akazi, one of which showed him lying on the ground after being shot.
Police said the driver hit several pedestrians at a light rail station on the corner of Bar Lev and Shimon Ha’Zadik streets, close to the Border Police headquarters on Route 1, and then continued driving along the tracks, hitting several cars along the way until finally crashing to a halt.
Akary then got out of his white commercial van, carrying a metal bar, and began attacking a group of policemen before Border Police at the scene shot and killed the attacker.
Footage quickly emerged (WARNING: graphic images)of bystanders at the light rail stop being run down by Akary, while some managed to elude the speeding van.
The attacker’s brother, Musa Muhammad al-Akary, served 19 years in an Israeli prison for the 1992 kidnapping and murder of IDF soldier Nissim Toledano in Lod. He was released in the 2011 deal that freed IDF soldier Gilad Shalit from Hamas captivity, and was expelled to Turkey.
Police spokesman Asi Aharoni said the presence of police who had been deployed to increase security in the capital enabled a quick response to end the attack.
Aharonovitch, Jerusalem Mayor Nir Barkat, and Police Commissioner Yonatan Danino arrived at the scene soon after the attack.
Hamas spokesman Mushir al-Masri wrote on his Twitter account a message of support for the attack. “We join hands with those who avenge the blood of those injured in al-Aqsa,” he wrote.
This was the second such attack in the last two weeks.
On October 22, Abdel Rahman Al-Shaludi, a resident of Silwan in East Jerusalem, drove his car into a group of pedestrians waiting at a light rail station in Ammunition Hill, killing two people, including a three-month-old girl, and injuring several others.
Shaludi was shot by security guards as he tried to make an escape on foot and later died of his wounds in the hospital.
On August 4, a Palestinian man rammed a tractor into a bus – near to the site of Wednesday’s attack – killing one man. A pedestrian, later named as Avraham Walz, 29, was run over by the tractor as it headed toward the bus and died of his injuries.
A police officer and Prisons Service official who realized what was happening ran up to the tractor and fired a volley of shots at the terrorist as he sat in the cab, killing him.
AP and AFP contributed to this report.