U.S.-Led Raid Frees 8 Qaeda Hostages From a Yemeni Cave
Earlier this month, in another attempt to bolster Mr. Hadi, the Obama administration imposed sanctions on two Houthi leaders, as well as Mr. Saleh. The United States’ action, though, seemed only to prompt new controversy and further isolate Mr. Hadi.
The captives were held in Hadhramaut, Yemen’s largest province and a sparsely populated region where vast spaces outside its cities are beyond the government’s control. Long known for its fierce independence, the oil-rich province has also struggled in recent years with a security vacuum. It has become the stage for a growing number of shadowy militant attacks on the security forces, for which the government blames Al Qaeda.
And the province, which stretches from the Gulf of Aden in the south to the desolate Empty Quarter near the border with Saudi Arabia, has also been the site of repeated strikes by missile-firing United States drones.
The Supreme Security Committee in Yemen said in a statement carried on the official Saba agency that one of those freed was Khalil al-Mekhlafi, who was kidnapped from the southern province of Bayda in June 2013. Mr. Mekhlafi holds a doctorate in computer science from China and lectures at Al Bayda University.
According to Mr. Mekhlafi’s friends, he was abducted along with two of his colleagues after finishing classes last year. Prof. Sailan Al Arami, president of Al Bayda, said Mr. Mekhlafi was installed as a teacher at the university last year after serving for months at a police academy in the capital.
But a local journalist who has followed Mr. Mekhlafi’s abduction said that Qaeda militants had kidnapped him because they thought he had expertise in making explosives, and because he had worked as a police officer. “They think that he would help them making bombs,” said the journalist, who spoke on the condition of anonymity out of fear for his safety.
The official statement did not say whether the freed Saudi citizen was Abdullah al-Khalidi, a Saudi diplomat who was kidnapped from the port city of Aden in 2012 and has appeared on Qaeda videos, appealing to his government to secure his release. A spokesman at the Saudi Embassy in Washington said he had no information about the Saudi who was reportedly released.