Paris hostage crisis ends without bloodshed as suspect gives himself up
The latest Paris hostage crisis ended without bloodshed today after a gunman who claimed he had a Kalashnikov and grenades surrendered to police. 
In a sign of the increasingly tense atmosphere in the city, the alarm was raised just before 1pm, with reports of a 'terrorist incident' in Colombes. 
Dozens of armed officers trained their weapons on a post office where the man had reportedly taken people hostage.
But it turned out to be a 31-year-old 'depressed and unstable' local man on medication who had 'romantic problems'.
Dramatic pictures show the suspect holding his hands in the air after emerging from the post office as armed police point their weapons at him.
He is made to kneel on the ground as officers move in to handcuff him, all the time aiming their guns at his head. The hostages escaped unharmed.
Some 80 heavily armed RAID polices commandos arrived within minutes and surrounded the post office, where the man was said to be holding at least two hostages.  
But after about an hour he gave himself up and turned out to be a man who 'is known to police and who is on medication for psychiatric problems,' said a local police source. 
Police had surrounded the post office in Colombes, around seven miles from the centre of the French capital after reports that he 'heavily armed'. 
The gunman reportedly phoned police to confirm that he had taken captives in the post office on 158 boulevard du general de Gaulle.     
BFM TV, citing an unidentified source, had earlier said the hostage-taking was not related to last week's attacks in Paris.  
It comes as Belgian authorities raided an Islamist cell planning attacks against police as dozens of people were arrested in sweeps across Europe, keeping the continent on alert one week after the Paris massacres.
Two suspected jihadists were shot dead in a police raid in the eastern Belgian town of Verviers last night.
Prosecutors said 13 suspects had been detained across Belgium, with two more held in France.   
French police separately detained 12 people in the suburbs of Paris in connection with last week's attacks on the Charlie Hebdo satirical magazine, a Jewish supermarket and a policewoman, in which 17 people were killed.
Hundreds of German police meanwhile raided alleged Islamist sites in Berlin, arresting two men suspected of being part of a group planning to carry out an attack in Syria.
The raids highlighted fears about young Europeans travelling to fight with the Islamic State and Al Qaeda-linked groups in the Middle East before returning to carry out attacks on western targets.