Israel kills 6 Hezbollah fighters in southern Syria: TV - Xinhua
DAMASCUS/BEIRUT, Jan. 18 (Xinhua) -- Israel killed six Lebanese Hezbollah fighters in its airstrikes against a southern Syrian town on Sunday, Syria's national TV reported.
"An Israeli helicopter fired two rockets from inside the occupied territories Sunday toward the Mazrat al-Amal town in al-Quniatera," said the TV.
It said that a child was critically wounded by the attack, spelling no further details.
Also on Sunday, the militant group's media body confirmed the death of its members in Israel's airstrikes in a statement.
"The strike resulted in the martyrdom of a number of jihadist brothers, whose names will be announced later, after informing their honorable families," it said.
Earlier, the Lebanese al-Manar TV said Israel launched airstrikes on the Hezbollah fighters surveying the town of Mazrat al-Amal in Syria's southern al-Qunaitera province, bordering the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights.
It added that the names of the "martyrs" will soon be aired.
Meanwhile, the pan-Arab al-Mayadeen TV said Jihad Mughniyeh, the son of the late field commander of Hezbollah, Emad Mughniyeh, was killed in the Israeli attack.
Emad Mughniyeh was a senior member of Hezbollah. He was generally understood to have been a principal leader and operative for a number of years within Hezbollah's military, intelligence, and security apparatuses. He is also believed to have been among the founders of Hezbollah in the 1980s.
Mughniyeh was killed on Feb. 12, 2008 by a car bomb that detonated as he passed by in the Kafr Sousa neighborhood of Damascus.
Back then, Hezbollah accused Israel of being behind the assassination of Mughniyeh the father.
Throughout Syria's long-running conflict, Hezbollah fighters fought alongside the Syrian government troops on several fronts across Syria.
Israel has also repeatedly targeted several Syrian positions over the country's nearly four-year-old conflict, saying that it has been trying to target weapon depots or convoys bound to Hezbollah.