Nigerian Boko Haram 'leader' claims responsibility for deadly Baga attack in new video
A man purporting to be Islamist Boko Haram leader Abubakar Shekau has claimed responsibility for an attack on the northeastern town of Baga in which scores of civilians were killed when the insurgents seized a multinational military base.
The insurgents, who invaded Baga at the start of the year, razed many buildings and homes in the week that followed, shooting civilians as they tried to flee, witnesses said.
Some local officials put the death toll as high as 2,000, although the military said it was 150.
The video was in the trademark Boko Haram style, with the bearded man claiming to be Shekau in combat fatigues talking in the northern Nigerian Hausa language surrounded by masked gunmen.
The military said it killed the real Shekau.
"We are the ones that carried out the attack and it is just the tip of the iceberg," the man said.
"There are more coming."
Commenting on weapons seized from Baga, he said they were "enough to annihilate Nigeria."
Soldiers fled the area after the nearby army base, which is the headquarters of a multinational force comprising troops from Chad, Niger and Cameroon, by Lake Chad was overrun.
Chad and Cameroon are being drawn into the fight against Boko Haram, but mistrust has hampered cooperation.
The man claiming to be Shekau taunted the leaders of Cameroon, Niger and Chad: Paul Biya, Mahamadou Issoufou and Idris Deby.
He also made it clear he did not care for either Nigerian president Goodluck Jonathan, a southern Christian, or his main opposition contender in February 14 presidential elections, Muhammadu Buhari, a northern Muslim.
"Jonathan you are in trouble," he said.
"And Buhari, do you think he is a true Muslim? He's an infidel."
Meanwhile, Nigeria has ordered a brigadier general and 21 other army officers to face a court martial over alleged sabotage in the war against Islamist militant group Boko Haram, two military sources said.
The charges were not specified but sources confirmed it was the first time senior army officers had been put on trial for offences relating to Boko Haram.
The case opened on Monday at the Ikeja Military Cantonment in Lagos and was expected to last over a week.
Elements of the Nigerian military had long been suspected of colluding with Boko Haram, which killed an estimated 10,000 people last year in its battle to revive a medieval caliphate in Nigeria, Africa's biggest energy producer.
Meanwhile, the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in The Hague, Fatou Bensouda, said she was investigating alleged mass killings by Boko Haram, and promised to charge those responsible for any atrocities.
Nigerian president Goodluck Jonathan said last May the Sunni jihadist group had "infiltrated... the armed forces and police".
Besides the brigadier general, 14 colonels, a major, a second lieutenant and five captains were arraigned.
"The officers are being prosecuted for offences they committed during the ongoing war against Boko Haram insurgents in the northeast of the country," a military source said.
In December last year, 54 soldiers were sentenced to death following a secret trial for conspiracy to commit mutiny.
The army said the soldiers disobeyed a direct order while facing insurgents in the northeast.
Twelve soldiers were also sentenced to death for mutiny in September last year after the military said they attempted to kill their commanding officer.
Morale was extremely low among foot soldiers in Nigeria's northeast, where poorly equipped and underpaid troops faced a determined foe currently controlling an area the size of Belgium.
After a blood-soaked 2014, killings had continued apace this year, with a string of suicide attacks, including some carried out by young children.