Islamic State: Up to 150,000 civilians reportedly flee embattled city of Ramadi
Up to 150,000 civilians have reportedly been forced to flee their homes in the Iraqi city of Ramadi as Islamic State (IS) militants lay siege to the embattled city, 100 kilometres west of Baghdad.
Fighting continues for control of Anbar province, with United States-led coalition forces launching air strikes against three outlying villages that were seized by IS forces on Wednesday.
On Thursday, hundreds of families fled after security forces came under attack from IS militants in Albu Ghanim, about 5km north-east of Ramadi.
One member of Anbar provincial council said Ramadi had not fallen and the IS advance had been halted.
Anbar is overwhelmingly Sunni — its leaders have accused Iraq's Shia-dominated government of ignoring their concerns.
Iraq's prime minister Haider al-Abadi has said his government forces would focus on taking on IS in Anbar province when he discussed war strategy with US officials during a visit this week.
Meanwhile, Iraq's largest refinery in Baiji was not "at risk", despite an offensive by IS that breached parts of the facility, the US military's top general said.
The IS militants have "penetrated the outer perimeter" of the vast oil refinery and the US-coalition was concentrating bombing raids and surveillance flights over the area, General Martin Dempsey said.
"The refinery itself is at no risk right now, but... we're focusing a lot of our ISR (intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance) and air support there," the chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff said.
Iraqi officials acknowledged that the IS group had seized some roads and buildings at the refinery, and that the militants were hiding among fuel tanks, complicating counter-attacks by Iraqi forces.
Asked about an IS assault in the western city of Ramadi, General Dempsey said the Baiji refinery carried more strategic importance.
"I would much rather that Ramadi not fall, but it won't be the end of the campaign should it fall," he said.
"We got to get it back. And that's tragic for the people, as we've seen along the way."
Fighting in Ramadi has created a humanitarian problem and prompted a flood of refugees to Baghdad, he said.
Baiji, however, is crucial for the country's oil infrastructure and is the focus of coalition efforts, General Dempsey said.
"Once the Iraqis have full control of Baiji, they will control all their oil infrastructure, both north and south, and deny ISIL the ability to generate revenue through oil," said General Dempsey, using an alternative acronym for the IS group.
The IS jihadists repeatedly have tried to seize the refinery over the past 10 months but Iraqi security forces have fended off the assaults.