Syria: ISIS destroys ancient Muslim shrines in Palmyra
(CNN)ISIS fighters have destroyed two ancient Muslim shrines in the oasis city of Palmyra, the Syrian government confirmed Wednesday, the latest act of cultural vandalism by the Sunni extremists.
ISIS seized control of Palmyra , a UNESCO World Heritage Site dating back 2,000 years, last month, prompting fears for the site's survival.
An email sent on behalf of Syria's antiquities chief, Maamoun Abdulkarim, head of the Directorate-General of Antiquities and Museums, said the body had heard four days ago from people in Palmyra of the shrines' destruction.
"ISIS has blown up two ancient Muslim shrines in Palmyra, and has published photos of this awful crime against the Syrian cultural heritage on Facebook," the statement said.
ISIS seized control of Palmyra , a UNESCO World Heritage Site dating back 2,000 years, in May, prompting fears for the site's survival. The Syrian government confirmed ISIS fighters have destroyed two Muslim shrines in the ancient oasis city. It's the latest act of cultural vandalism by the Sunni extremists.
ISIS released a propaganda video showing its fighters destroying Iraq's ancient Assyrian city of Nimrud in March. The destruction follows other attacks on antiquity carried out by the militant group in Iraq and Syria. The United Nations has described such deliberate cultural destruction as a "war crime."
The Iraqi Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities announced in March that ISIS had bulldozed the ruins of Nimrud, seen here in 2009.
Bas-relief panels from the Palace of Ashurnasirpal II are seen in Nimrud in 2009.
This file photo from 2003 shows the ancient ruins of Hatra in Iraq. It is another one of the cultural sites that have reportedly been damaged by ISIS.
A statue of the goddess Shamiya, or Shahiro, at Hatra in 2009
In this image made from video posted on a social media account affiliated with ISIS, a militant uses a power tool to destroy a winged-bull Assyrian protective deity at the Nineveh Museum in Mosul, Iraq.
"It's tragic to see this destruction," said William Webber, from the UK-based Art Loss Register. "Each time you see this you think it can't happen again, but it does." The Mosul museum held 173 original pieces of antiquity and was being readied for reopening when ISIS invaded Mosul in June.
An exterior shot of Nineveh in May 2008
Two Parthian Kings of Hatra, seen in the Mosul museum in 2008
In July, a video was released showing the destruction of Jonah's Tomb in Mosul. The tomb was inside a Sunni mosque, seen here in 2008, called the Mosque of the Prophet Yunes (Arabic for Jonah).
One of the tombs destroyed is that of Mohammed bin Ali, a descendent of Ali bin Abi Taleb, the Prophet Mohammed's cousin, the website DGAM said. It's in a hilly area 4 kilometers (2.5 miles) north of Palmyra.
"ISIS militants also blew up the shrine of Shagaf, known as Abu Behaeddine, a religious figure from Palmyra, dated to 500 years ago. The shrine is located in the oasis 500 meters away from the Ancient City's Arch of Triumph," a statement said.
Images posted on the DGAM website Images posted on the DGAM website show dust and debris flying into the air as the shrines are destroyed.
Other monuments, temples and historic buildings have been mined, and a statue of a lion at the entrance to Palmyra's museum has been destroyed, the website reported.
summary executions of scores of captive fighters and residents ISIS' capture of Palmyra was followed by the summary executions of scores of captive fighters and residents , according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a London-based monitoring group.
The group also reported Tuesday that ISIS had destroyed a shrine in the Palmyra area, but it wasn't clear if it was one of those the government named. ISIS blew it up on the pretext of "removing the landmarks of polytheism," the monitoring group said.
Its history as an important caravan city at the crossroads of ancient civilizations is reflected in the eclectic mix of architectural styles found among its colonnades and temples.
British historian and novelist Tom Holland describes the site as "an extraordinary fusion of classical and Iranian influences intermixed with various Arab influence as well."
Destruction of Palmyra wouldn't just be a tragedy for Syria, it would be a loss for the entire world, he told CNN last month.
"This isn't just about Middle Eastern history -- these are the wellsprings of the entire global culture. Mesopotamia, Iraq, Syria, this is the wellspring of global civilization. It really couldn't be higher stakes in terms of conservation."