5 cops die as Maoists strike ahead of Phase-II
MUZAFFARPUR: Five police personnel were killed on the spot and another injured when Maoists triggered a landmine blast at a bridge near Lalgarh in Bihar's Sheohar district at around 8.45 pm on Friday. The victims include the SHO of Shyampur Bhataha police station, Praveen Kumar, and four Special Auxiliary Police (SAP) jawans. The incident occurred only 36 hours prior to Sheohar going to the polls in the round of the Bihar elections on Sunday. Bihar DGP Neelmani told TOI from Patna that the blast was triggered by Maoists when the policemen, travelling in two jeeps, were trying to open a road for polling officials before their departure to different polling stations in the area. The rebels triggered the landmine blast even as one of the jeeps reached the Jhitkahi bridge. The policemen travelling in second jeep, which narrowly escaped the blast, immediately retreated and informed police control room about the incident, Neelmani said. The injured jawan has been rushed to hospital in serious condition, sources said. The site of blast is six km from Shyampur Bhataha police station, the sources added. Tirhut range IG Praveen Vashist and DIG Pankaj Darad along with additional forces have rushed to the spot. The entire area has been cordoned off and a massive combing operation has been launched by security forces to nab the Maoists involved in the incident. The DGP said the government would provide Rs 10 lakh as ex-gratia and Rs 13.75 lakh as insurance cover to the next of kin of each of the deceased police personnel. It may be mentioned that Maoists had triggered a similar landmine blast near a bridge under Deoria police station in the district minutes after the conclusion of the last parliamentary elections killing three policemen, including the sub-inspector of Kazimohammadpur police station, and a patrolling magistrate. This time the rebels have pasted a number of posters in Sheohar and Muzaffarpur districts calling the public to boycott the elections, besides creating terror in the northern and eastern parts of the district.