Chad: At least three killed in double suicide bombing
NGOUBOUA, Chad, Nov. 8 (UPI) -- At least three people were killed Sunday when two suicide bombers detonated in a village near the border with Nigeria in western Chad.
Xinhua news agency, quoting Hassan Sylla Bakari, Chad's communications minister and government spokesman, reported the attacks occurred in Ngouboua, a remote village near Lake Chad where in February Nigerian terrorist group Boko Haram launched its first documented attack inside Chad's borders.
One bystander and two bombers were killed in the Sunday blasts, while four others were injured, Bakari said in a statement.
The attacks come one month after at least 37 people were killed and more than 50 injured during a series of suicide bombings in Baga Sola, Chad. Boko Haram was suspected of carrying out the attacks, which also occurred near Lake Chad where thousands of Nigerian refugees who fled Boko Haram took up residence in a camp on the town's outskirts.
The week prior, 11 Chadian soldiers and 17 Boko Haram militants were killed in a firefight near the lake.
Boko Haram has been known to conduct attacks in Cameroon, Niger and Chad -- each members of a multinational force launched against the group -- but a majority of its efforts have been focused in Nigeria, its native country.
Since 2009 the group, which pledged allegiance to theIslamic State in March, has conducted an insurgency in a bid to create an Islamic government in the region. Most of its attacks have taken place in northeastern Nigeria's Borno state.
Boko Haram was suspected of conducting an Oct. 23 suicide bombing at a mosque in Maiduguri, the Borno state capital, killing at least 18 people and injuring more than 20 others.
Four days later, the Nigerian military unveiled a new task force specifically placed in Borno state to combat Boko Haram.
At the time, Lt. Gen. Tukur Buratai, chief of staff of the Nigerian army, told troops of the task force they had to "maintain the momentum to achieve" a December deadline previously set by President Muhammadu Buhari to defeat the terrorist group.