Paris attacks: Authorities piece together identities of attackers; Syrian passport found next to dead bomber
A cross-border investigation to identify the terrorists who carried out a wave of attacks that killed 129 people across Paris is gathering pace, as police hunt for possible accomplices.
French president Francois Hollande called the attacks an "act of war" by Islamic State militants, declared a state of emergency and set three days of official mourning as a stunned nation sought to comprehend the simultaneous assault on the Bataclan concert hall, a series of bars and restaurants and the Stade de France sports venue.
Prosecutors said there were seven attackers killed in total, working as part of three multinational "teams" with links to the Middle East, Belgium and possibly Germany as well as home-grown French roots.
Greek police said one and perhaps two of the assailants had registered as refugees with Greek authorities earlier this year.
A Syrian passport was found near the body of one of the terrorists who detonated a bomb outside gate D of the Stade de France, killing himself and a passerby.
Greek officials confirmed the passport had been used by its owner to pass through the island of Leros near the coast of Turkey on October 3.
The authenticity of the passport was being checked, but its discovery indicates a possible Syrian connection in the violence.
Any identity documents and fingerprint records would have to be matched with the remains of the actual attackers to establish whether they passed through Greece posing as refugees, or perhaps bought or stole passports along the way.
In France, police have taken six people into custody, including the father, brother and sister-in-law of one of the attackers, identified as Ismael Omar Mostefai.
The 29-year-old French national had not done any jail time but had been identified as "radicalised" by police.
He was identified using a severed fingertip.
His brother, who is 34, contacted police on his own initiative before being taken into custody along with his father.
Police searched the family's home in the small town of Romilly-sur-Seine, 130 kilometres east of Paris, as well as his brother's home in nearby Bondoufle.
In Belgium, three people were arrested as part of an anti-terrorism probe centred on a Belgian hired car found near the site of one of the Paris attacks, Belgian prosecutors said.
It was one of two vehicles used in a string of attacks in central Paris within the space of less than an hour.
The Paris prosecutor said one of the vehicles — a grey Volkswagen Polo — used in the attacks was registered in Belgium and hired by a French national living in Belgium.
The car was found near the Bataclan concert hall in the French capital where scores of people were killed, Belgium's justice minister said.
Parking tickets from Molenbeek in Brussels were found inside the car, according to Belgian media.
A Seat car, used by gunmen who fired at people in restaurants during the attacks, was found in the eastern suburb of Montreuil, police said on Sunday.
It was used at two of the six locations — a bar on rue de la Fontaine-au-Roi where five were killed, and a restaurant on rue de Charonne where 19 died.
The attacks left more than 350 people injured, including 99 who were in a serious condition.
The prosecutor said all of the attackers used Kalashnikov assault rifles and wore the same type of suicide vests with shrapnel mixed with explosives, intended to cause maximum casualties.
European security officials have previously voiced concerns jihadists could take advantage of the flow of asylum seekers that Europe has experienced this year.
"It is clear now that together with the victims of Islamo-fascism in the Middle East that come as refugees, extreme elements are crossing to Europe," Greek defence minister Panos Kammenos said.
However, prime minister Alexis Tsipras insisted the refugees fleeing Syria "are hunted by the same terrorists" that struck Paris.
"We must find solutions to the drama of the people who leave their homes, hunted by the same terrorists, and drown in the Mediterranean," he said in a televised address.
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said he had spoken to a 19-year-old Hobart woman injured in the Paris attacks, who is nowrecovering in good spirits after being shot in the hip.
Mr Turnbull said the attacks strengthened the need to find a political solution to the Syrian crisis and said the terrorists acting in the name of God were "utterly godless".
"These terrorists commit a double crime. They are murderers. They are mass murderers," he said.
"They are barbarians, but at the same time, they also defame religion. They defame, they blaspheme, they defame Islam."
Addressing Mr Hollande's claim the terrorist attacks were an were an "act of war", Mr Turnbull said: "It's guns and bombs, yes, it does look like a war."
"But ... we have to recognise that the resources, the strength of our states, of our nations, are so much greater than those of the terrorists."
He later downplayed the links between refugees and terrorism, saying that most of Australia's security threats have come from second and third generation Australians.
"We cannot allow our national security or our national security policies to be dictated to by terrorists ... We have strong and capable security services," he told Insiders.
"They keep us safe at home and, so far as they can, when we are abroad. There's no reason to be complacent, but we have every reason to be assured that our nation is safe."
Mr Turnbull said terrorism would be a major issue at G20 talks in Turkey.