Soldier murdered in route 443 attack
A terrorist killed 20-year-old Ziv Mizrahi, an Israeli soldier, at around 3pm on Monday at a gas station on Route 443, on the same day that a series of other attacks wounded several others, including a Palestinian.
A preliminarily investigation showed that Mizrahi and a woman had arrived at the gas station when the Palestinian terrorist tackled the soldier as he exited the car. The terrorist stabbed and killed the Mizrahi and lightly wounded the woman. An officer at the scene shot and killed the terrorist. 
Hours before the deadly attack, female terrorists aged 14 and 16 wielding scissors stabbed an elderly Palestinian in Jerusalem's Mahane Yehuda market. 
In the attack committed by the teenagers, two people were lightly wounded in the attack, an 80-year-old who suffered head wounds, and a 27-year-old wounded in his hand. The 80-year-old victim of the attack was later reported to be a Palestinian resident of Betlehem. The 27-year-old may have been wounded by a ricochet from a bullet.
One terrorist was shot dead by security forces and the other was moderately wounded.
The terrorist who was killed was later identified by Palestinian sources as 14-year-old Hadil Wajiya Awad from the Qalandyia refugee camp. The reports mentioned that Awad's brother had been wounded in clashes with Israeli troops in 2013 and later succumbed to his wounds at an area hospital.
The other terrorist, who was seriously wounded, was identified as Norhin Awad, Hadil's cousin.
According to a police statement, "two female minors aged 14 and 16 from north Jerusalem arrived at Jaffa street near the Mahane Yehuda market wielding identical scissors. The two managed to stab a man in his upper body, lightly wounding him according to MDA.
"An initial investigation of the incident reveals that the 70-year-old man stabbed in the incident was a resident of the West Bank," continued police.  
"The terrorists attempted to stab several innocent civilians," said police.  "A police bomb technician how was leaving the market noticed the woman and leaped out his vehicle, drew his gun, and called on the terrorists to stop and drop their weapons, the terrorists did not answer his calls and ran towards him. The policeman than conducted accurate fire and neutralized both terrorists," the statement concluded.
The wounded Palestinian, Yussuf Alharoub, told Ynet: "I thank God it ended this way. What happened was a matter of fate. Both the Jews and the Palestinians are suffering because of what's happening now and no one benefits."
Soon after the attack, an apparent vehicular attack occurred near Shavei Shomron in the West Bank, wounding one. Security forces were investigating whether the incident was an accident or a deliberate attack.
Later, a terrorist unsuccessfully attempted to stab a soldier at the entrance to Nablus and was killed.
The last attack to take place in the city was two weeks ago, when two Palestinians aged 11 and 14 stabbed a security guard on Jerusalem's light rail in the Pisgat Ze'ev neighborhood. In accordance with legal precendents, the younger of the two won't be prosecuted due to his age.
Hadar Buchris, a 21-year-old Israeli woman from Safed, was seriously wounded and later declared deceased after a stabbing attack at the Gush Etzion junction in the West Bank on Sunday afternoon. IDF troops from the Kfir Brigade shot and killed her attacker.
The attack happened at a hitchhiking station where two terrorists who tried to commit a stabbing attack were shot to death three weeks ago.
On Sunday morning, two stabbing terror attacks were thwarted in the West Bank when a 16-year-old Palestinian girl tried to stab Israelis near Itamar and a Palestinian taxi driver tried to stab an Israeli man after failing to run over pedestrians near Jerusalem. Both terrorists were shot dead, while an Israeli was lightly wounded.
The taxi driver tried to run over Israelis at the Kfar Adumim junction near Jerusalem. When he was unsuccessful, he got out of the taxi and tried to stab an Israeli driver.