At least 10 dead in Istanbul suicide blast blamed on ISIL
At least 10 people, including nine Germans, have been killed in a ISIL suicide blast at a tourist hub in Turkey's largest city Istanbul.
"There are at least nine Germans among the 10 killed," a Turkish government official told AFP after the suicide bombing ripped through the historic Sultanahmet district, wounding 15 others.
Turkish Prime Minister said a jihadist from Islamic State carried out the bombing.
"We have determined that the perpetrator of the attack is a foreigner who is a member of Daesh," Dautoglu said in Ankara, using an Arabic acronym for ISIL.
 President Recep Tayyip Erdogan had earlier confirmed the bomber was of Syrian origin.
The force of the blast was sufficient to be heard in adjacent neighbourhoods.
Emergency services are at the scene and Turkish police have sealed off a section of the square. 
The Sultanahmet district is in the heart of Old Istanbul, and the site of the world famous Blue Mosque and Hagia Sophia monuments. 
The explosion follows two blasts in the country's capital Ankara in October, which killed more than 100 people. 
The suspected suicide bombings at a peace rally outside the Ankara Central train station were the deadliest attacks in modern Turkish history. 
The Australian government's Smart Traveller service currently advises tourists to "exercise a high degree of caution" in Turkey, as a host of separate groups clash across the country.
Turkish authorities have in recent weeks detained several suspected members of terror group ISIL, with officials saying they were planning attacks in Istanbul.
But Turkey is also waging an all-out assault on the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), which has staged dozens of deadly attacks against members of the security forces in the southeast of the country.
A Kurdish splinter group, the the Freedom Falcons of Kurdistan (TAK) claimed a mortar attack on Istanbul's second international airport on December 23 which killed a female cleaner and damaged several planes
Meanwhile, the banned ultra-left Revolutionary People's Liberation Party-Front (DHKP-C) has also staged a string of usually small-scale attacks in Istanbul over the last months.
Do you know more or did you witness the explosion? Email contact@9news.com.au