Taliban attack on Pakistan park kills 65
ISLAMABAD (AP) — The Latest on the bombing of a park in the Pakistani city of Lahore (all times local):
A spokesman for Lahore rescue administration says that the Easter Sunday bomb attack on a park in the eastern Pakistani city has killed 65 people.
Deeba Shahnaz said Sunday that over 300 people were wounded in the bombing at Gulshan-e-Iqbal park, which was claimed by the Jamaat-ul-Ahrar faction of the Pakistani Taliban.
The park was crowded with Christians celebrating Easter.
A breakaway faction of the militant Taliban group in Pakistan has claimed responsibility for an Easter Sunday bomb attack on a park in the eastern city of Lahore that killed 60 people, and wounded 300.
Ahsanullah Ahsan, spokesman for Jamaat-ul-Ahrar, told the Associated Press Sunday that a suicide bomber with the faction deliberately targeted the Christian community. He warned that more attacks would follow.
Senior police officer Haider Ashraf says the explosion took place close to the children's rides in Gulshan-e-Iqbal park, which was crowded with Christian families celebrating Easter.
A spokesman for the Punjab government says that a bomb attack on a park in the Pakistani city of Lahore has killed 60 people and injured 300.
Zaeem Qadri said Sunday that the chief minister of Punjab province, Shahbaz Sharif, has announced three days mourning and pledged to ensure that those involved in the attack are brought to trial.
Senior police officer Haider Ashraf says the explosion took place close to the children's rides in Gulshan-e-Iqbal park. He says the explosion appeared to have been a suicide bombing, but investigations were ongoing. The area was crowded with Christians celebrating the Easter holidays, he said.
A health official says that 44 people have been killed and 91 wounded in a blast in a park in the eastern Pakistani city of Lahore.
Salman Rafiq, an adviser to the chief minister of Punjab province, said Sunday that many of the wounded are in a critical condition.
Senior police officer Haider Ashraf says the explosion took place close to the children's rides in Gulshan-e-Iqbal park. He says the explosion appeared to have been a suicide bombing, but investigations were ongoing. The area was crowded with Christians celebrating the Easter holidays, he said.
Pakistani police say at least 10 people have been killed and 30 wounded in a blast in a park in the eastern city of Lahore.
Senior police officer Haider Ashraf says the explosion took place Sunday in the parking area of Gulshan-e-Iqbal park. He says the explosion appeared to have been a suicide bombing, but investigations were ongoing.
He says the area was crowded because Christians are celebrating the Easter holiday and many families were leaving the park when the blast occurred. He says the death toll could still rise as many of the wounded were in a critical condition.