Bashar al-Assad's air strikes kill 'at least 30' Syrians despite ceasefire
America condemned Syria’s regime in the “strongest terms” on Friday after air strikes on a school and a hospital in a suburb of Damascus killed at least 30 people, including women and children.
The attack on the rebel-held area of Deir al-Assafir broke a ceasefire that has supposedly been in place since Feb 27.
Bashar al-Assad’s regime dispatched warplanes which killed rescue workers and civilians, including 12 children and nine women, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a London-based group.
The "White Helmets", a rescue organisation, said that one of its volunteers was also killed after arriving in an ambulance at the scene of one air strikes.
Video footage showed a white-helmeted rescue worker, carrying a stretcher over his shoulder, rushing through a rubble-strewn alleyway towards what appeared to be the site of an explosion.
The US State Department pointed out that United Nations Resolution 2254 obliges Syria’s regime to refrain from attacking any civilian targets. A statement said that America was “appalled” by the bloodshed, adding: “We condemn in the strongest terms any such attacks directed at civilians.”
The US urged an “immediate end to any attacks against civilians and for all parties to comply with their obligations under international law”.
The French foreign ministry bluntly accused Assad's regime of carrying out the air strikes, saying: “This attack, which deliberately targeted civilians, including children, shows that the regime is continuing its abuses and violating the truce."
At least 250,000 people have been killed since Assad began suppressing an uprising against his rule in 2011. More than half of Syria’s entire population has been displaced, whether inside or outside the country.
Peace talks have taken place in Geneva, but the key stumbling block remains the future of Assad himself. The dictator has refused to discuss the possibility of stepping down, offering instead to include a handful of opponents in a “unity government”.
But the opposition are adamant that Assad must step down during a transitional period before a new presidential election in which he would not be a candidate.
Philip Hammond, the Foreign Secretary, backed this demand, saying: “Bashar al-Assad talks about a unity government, by which he means bringing one or two handpicked, regime-friendly oppositionists into minor posts in the government. That is not sufficient."