ISIS captures Syrian Air Force pilot after terror group claims it shot down warplane
ISIS has claimed it has shot down a Syrian Arab Air Force MiG 23 and captured the pilot who ejected clear of the doomed fighter. 
The terror group claimed it shot down the Russian-built aircraft after it took off from the Al Dumayr military airbase east of Damascus. 
The Amaq news agency, which is affiliated to ISIS, claims they captured the pilot, who they have named as Azzam Eid from Hama.  
Poor-quality video footage appears to show the remains of a burning aircraft. 
The Syrian government has not yet confirmed one of its aircraft had been shot down. 
The aircraft is believed to have come down near Bir Al-Qassab, which is controlled by ISIS. 
Several apparent ISIS fighters in military-style fatigues circle around the wreckage, pointing to the two-starred Syrian government flag clearly visible on one of the wings.
Syrian state news agency SANA had no immediate news on the incident.
ISIS fighters have shot down several Syrian government warplanes in recent weeks, including over the Dmeir military airport near Damascus and in the southern province of Sweida.
But the pilots were able to land in regime-held zones on both occasions.
In December 2014, ISIS shot down a warplane from the US-led coalition striking the group in Syria and captured the Jordanian pilot alive.
The terrorists later burned pilot Maaz al-Kassasbeh alive and posted video footage of his death online. 
At least 18 people were killed Friday when airstrikes hit several rebel-held neighborhoods in Syria's contested northern city of Aleppo, anti-government activists said, an escalation that placed added strain on a fragile cease-fire.
Aleppo, Syria's largest city and former commercial centre, has seen sporadic clashes since the cease-fire took effect in late February, as government troops have advanced, boxing in opposition-held areas from all sides except for a corridor from the northwestern edge of the city.
The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said at least 19 people were killed in the airstrikes in Aleppo's Bustan al-Qasr neighborhood and other parts of the city controlled by rebels. The Observatory described the series of airstrikes as the most intense on the city since the cease-fire began. The Local Coordination Committees, an activist-operated media outlet, said at least 18 people were killed in Friday's airstrikes.
The February cease-fire has been teetering amid rising violence, and U.N.-brokered talks in Geneva to resolve the conflict have been bogged down, with the Saudi-backed opposition delegation recently suspending its participation.
The High Negotiations Committee, which represents most of the opposition at the U.N.-brokered talks, accuses the government of repeatedly violating the U.S. and Russian-brokered cease-fire, illegally detaining thousands of people and blocking humanitarian aid access.
France's foreign minister, Jean-Marc Ayrault, warned that the negotiations over Syria's political future have entered a 'danger zone'.
Speaking with reporters in Paris, he said that humanitarian access to besieged areas 'must be total' and that there have been 'too many fetters'.
The Syrian government's envoy to peace talks in Geneva, Bashar Ja'afari, defended his government's record on humanitarian aid, lashing out at the opposition for shedding 'crocodile tears' about alleged lapses.
Ja'afari spoke to reporters at U.N. offices in Geneva where indirect peace talks and other meetings on Syria's crisis have been held in recent months. He said his delegation will meet with U.N. mediator Staffan de Mistura again on Monday.