Real Madrid pay tribute as 16 fans killed after Isis attack meeting of supporters club with machines guns
At least 14 people have been killed after Islamic State terrorists attacked the headquarters of a Real Madrid supporters club armed with AK-47s.
At least 14 people have been killed after Islamic State terrorists attacked the headquarters of a Real Madrid supporters club armed with AK-47s.
The incident took place in Samarra, Iraq during a gathering of the team's fans. Spanish publication AS is reporting that there were 50 people present at the meeting and that 20 of them are injured, some seriously.
The publication also spoke to the president of the supporters club, Ziad Subhan, who described the attack as a 'terrible tragedy' carried out by the terrorists because they think football is 'anti-Muslim'. "They don't like football, they think it's anti-Muslim. They just carry out attacks like this. This is a terrible tragedy,” Ziad Subhan told the Diario AS newspaper.
Real Madrid have released a statement condemning the attack, and their players will wear black armbands during the title decider away to Deportivo de La Coruna tomorrow afternoon. Madrid are one point behind Barcelona with one game to play. "Real Madrid C. F. deeply regrets the terrible attack in Iraq which today saw 16 members of a Real Madrid supporters club lose their lives and which has also left over 20 injured. The club expresses its great sadness and offers its regards and condolences to the families and friends of the victims. Real Madrid extends all of its solidarity to the people of Iraq, who suffer the excessive injustices of extreme violence.
"The Real Madrid players will tomorrow wear symbolic black armbands as a sign of their mourning and respect. Football and sport shall always be spaces in which to come together and in which harmony and peace reign and with which no form of barbaric terrorism will be able to compete. Today Madridismo across the whole world cries for its supporters, who shall never be forgotten." 