ISIS attacks gas plant north of Baghdad killing 11 in massive explosions
ISIS terrorists launched a suicide attack on a state-run gas plant in Baghdad's northern outskirts on Sunday, killing at least 11 and injuring 22, officials report. 
Jihadi fighters set off a suicide car bomb at the entrance of the facilityin Taji,12 miles north of the Iraqi capital, at around 6am local time, allowing anothervehicle carrying at least six attackers with explosive vests toenter and clash with security forces, police sources said. 
A spokesman for Baghdad Operations Command said three of thefacility's gas storages were set alight before security forceswere able to bring the situation under control.
Iraq's Oil Ministry said the attack had not disrupted theplant's production of gas for cooking and electricityproduction.
But the Electricity Ministry said two nearby power stationshad halted operations due to a cut in gas supplies from the Tajiplant. It was not clear how long it would take to restore flowto the power stations, which provided 153 megawatts to thealready overstretched national grid before the attack. 
An employee who lives nearby said after hearing a powerfulblast he saw flames and black smoke coming from inside thefacility. Dozens of police and army vehicles rushed to the sitewhere shooting lasted for about an hour, he said.
A U.S.-led coalition backing the Iraqi government in its fight against ISIS has been training army forces for months at a military base located in Taji.
In an online statement, the Islamic State group said the attack was carried out by four suicide bombers, for whom it provided noms de guerre.
'They killed the guards at the gate before raiding the headquarters and killing all inside,' the statement said.
When additional Iraqi forces massed at the gate for an attack, 'our brothers detonated a car bomb in the middle of their gathering,' it went on, saying that the militants clashed with security forces and detonated explosive belts among them.
IS has been steadily losing ground to the Iraqi security forces in recent months.
According to the government, IS controls only 14 percent of Iraqi territory, down from the 40 per cent it held in 2014.
But the group has intensified its attacks behind the front lines, detonating car bombs in civilian areas and infiltrating sensitive sites with suicide commandos. 
Separate explosions in Baghdad's southern outskirts onSunday left three people dead and 12 wounded, police sourcessaid.
On Saturday, a group of IS fighters snuck into Amriyat al-Fallujah, a government-held town west of Baghdad, in a similar suicide raid that killed five people.
The group also claimed responsibility for a spate of bombings in Baghdad on Wednesday that killed close to 100 people, the bloodiest day in the Iraqi capital this year.