Taliban Suicide Bomber Hits NATO Convoy Near Kabul
The NATO-led military coalition in Afghanistan says a suicide bomber struck one of its vehicles north of Kabul Saturday, but caused no casualties to its personnel.
The attack occurred in Bagram district, which hosts the largest U.S. military airbase in Afghanistan, some 55 kilometers from the Afghan capital.
“Resolute Support can confirm that one coalition vehicle was struck by a personnel borne IED (improvised explosives device) this morning in the vicinity of Bagram. Despite Taliban claims and reports in the media, there were no injuries to coalition personnel involved,” said a statement the NATO-led coalition released in Kabul.
Earlier, a Taliban spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahid, claimed responsibility for the suicide car bombing on a convoy of the “invaders,” a references the Islamist insurgency uses for U.S. and allied forces.
The spokesman claimed the attack inflicted “several casualties and damage to vehicles,” though the Taliban often exaggerates details of such attacks.
Saturday’s bombing came a day after NATO foreign ministers and alliance partners agreed to extend beyond 2016 the Resolute Support mission, which is mandated to train, advise and assist Afghan security forces and institutions.
The Taliban says its violent campaign will continue until the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Afghanistan and implementation of an Islamic system in the country.
Separately, officials in the restive southern Uruzgan province say six Afghan police personnel were killed when their colleagues turned their guns on them at a security outpost early Saturday.
The police chief for the Charghino district, the site of the violence, told reporters that three officers involved in the shooting have escaped taking weapons and vehicles with them.
On Friday, an Afghan security guard at a U.N. compound in Kabul shot dead a Nepalese guard and wounded another. U.N. officials say the incident is under investigation.
The Taliban often claims responsibility for such “insider” attacks, saying its loyalists have“infiltrated enemy ranks."
Earlier in the week in the southern Zabul province, eight policemen were shot dead by a colleague.
The Taliban quickly claimed responsibility, saying the shooter was its member and managed to escape and return to insurgent ranks.