Ahmad Rahami, Suspect in N.Y. and N.J. Bombings, Charged With Attempted Murder
Rep. Albio Sires, D-N.J., said Monday on MSNBC's "Meet the Press Daily" that Rahami got in contact with his office in 2014 asking for help because his pregnant wife's Pakistani passport had expired.
"I assumed she did" get the visa, Sires said — before adding a personal assessment of Rahami: "He was kind of nasty, too."
Rahami is the man seen in surveillance footage taken Saturday night in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood, the site of an explosion that injured 29 people, a senior law enforcement official with direct knowledge of the investigation told NBC News.
The blast was so powerful that it sent a dumpster flying more than 150 feet down the sidewalk and shattered windows more than a block away. Police later found a second bomb that did not detonate a few blocks away on 27th Street.
The FBI said it does not yet know why the Chelsea neighborhood was targeted.
Other physical evidence links Rahami to the pressure cooker bombs that went off or were found in New York and New Jersey, a senior law enforcement official said.
Rahami, who is a U.S. citizen, was identified as a suspect after a fingerprint was found on one of the devices that failed to detonate, a senior law enforcement official told NBC News.
Investigators also found more information that pointed to Rahami on cellphones that were wired to the unexploded bombs, the official said.
"He certainly seemed to do virtually nothing to cover his tracks," the official said.
But the official downplayed any talk of Rahami's being part of a "cell" and said that at this point investigators have no idea whether anyone else was involved. There was no indication that an ISIS cell was operating in New York City, FBI Assistant Director-in-Charge William Sweeney said at an afternoon news conference.
New York Mayor Bill de Blasio said at the same news conference: "There is no other individual we are looking for at this time."
Nonetheless, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said officials could not rule out international terrorism.
"Today's information suggests it may be foreign related, but we'll see where it goes," Cuomo said Monday on MSNBC's "Morning Joe."
Rahami visited Afghanistan as recently as April 2013, a senior U.S. official told NBC News on Monday evening. In the last decade, Rahami has also made several trips to neighboring Pakistan — and his older brother Mohammad is believed to still be in Afghanistan, the official said.
Rahami was caught hours after a backpack that appeared to contain pipe bombs exploded in Elizabeth, N.J., as a police robot examined it near a New Jersey train station. That blast, which happened shortly before 1 a.m. ET Monday, was the second in New Jersey since Saturday morning.
Elizabeth Mayor Chris Bollwage told reporters that the robot was "cutting into the device when it exploded."
Multiple senior law enforcement officials told NBC News that the device in Elizabeth appeared similar to the one that exploded Saturday morning in Seaside Park, N.J. The package, a backpack, was found by two men in a garbage can about 300 feet from the front door of a crowded pub in Elizabeth, Bollwage said.
When they saw wires and pipes, they dropped it and immediately went to police headquarters, he said.
"We do not believe those two are involved," the mayor said. "We believe they did the right thing."
Five hours later, FBI agents were spotted at the Rahami family's fried chicken restaurant in Elizabeth.