How Do You Solve a Problem Like Mubarak?
On Tuesday night, we heard these stirring words from the boss: “Let us be clear: the United States of America stands with the people of Tunisia, and supports the democratic aspirations of all people.”
More recentlyfrom his No. 2, we get, well, this: “Time has come for President Mubarak to begin to move in the direction of being more responsive to some of the needs of the people out there …”
Then the vice president doubled down: “Mubarak has been an ally of ours in a number of things. And he’s been very responsible on, relative to geopolitical interest in the region, the Middle East peace efforts; the actions Egypt has taken relative to normalizing relationship with – with Israel. … I would not refer to him as a dictator.”
Nobody expects the likes of “Mr. Gorvachev, tear down this wall” from Joe Biden — but, as Blake Hounshell of Foreign Policy put it: “Whose bright idea was it to send Joe Biden out to talk about Egypt?”
Hounshell adds that Biden’s not the only White House figure serving weak tea: “Earlier today, outgoing White House spokesman Robert Gibbs turned some heads when he said of the protests, ‘This is not about taking sides.’ But if you look at the full context of his remarks, it’s clear the Obama administration is still counting on the Mubarak regime toughening this one out.”
“It’s a delicate business all around,” admits Donald Douglas at American Power, who then proceeds to undelicately critique the White House:
Marc Lynch, a.k.a. Abu Aardvark, has a more sympathetic take:
Well, he can understand it up to a point, anyway:
American Spectator’s Aaron Goldstein attempts to rate the Bidenisms: “It certainly ranks up there with his assertion during the 2008 Vice-Presidential debates that the United States and France had ‘kicked Hezbollah out of Lebanon.’ That would certainly be news in the streets of Beirut.”
And Allahpundit at Hot Air writes of Mubarak, “The guy’s been governing under ’emergency’ powers for 30 years. As we speak, his security forces have reportedly cut off access to Facebook and Twitter in order to handicap tomorrow’s protests. And at least eight leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood have been arrested with more doubtless to come in order to weaken the opposition”
While conservatives are having a field day trouncing Biden, they may not be so excited about the man coming to the rescue. “Mohamed ElBaradei, the Nobel laureate who has become a leading opponent of President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, returned to Cairo on Thursday in an attempt to galvanize youth-led street protests that extended into a third day across the country,” write Kareem Fahim and Liam Stack of The Times.
When ElBaradei left the International Atomic Energy Agency in 2009, Allahpundit’s colleague Ed Morrissey had this to say:
It would surprise few to find ElBaradei cooking the books for Iran. The IAEA chief has acted as the UN’s chief apologist for inaction on both Iran and earlier with Iraq, during the Saddam Hussein era. ElBaradei succeeded Hans Blix as IAEA chief, but mainly continued the emphasis on talk over action. In this case, though, it looks like ElBaradei may have gone a little too far in covering up for Tehran. France and Israel have seen the same intelligence as ElBaradei, something ElBaradei should have known. The sudden omission of evidence of weaponization seems rather significant, and ElBaradei apparently offered no explanation for it. That prompts the question of what else ElBaradei has chosen to keep hidden, about Iran’s nuclear efforts and those of other nations as well. The US should call for a complete audit and investigation of the IAEA
Well, if ElBaradei ever escapes his apparent house arrest, perhaps the right will have to choose sides. For now, though, Salon’s Justin Elliottis taking a look at Mubarak’s friends in high places:
Elliot also pointed to this 2009 report from ProPublica:
Politico’s Ben Smith, however, doesn’t seem to think the White House is under the sway of Egypt’s hired American guns:
This isn’t the Ivory Coast, though, where Lanny Davis briefly became the conduit for an embattled president who was refusing to speak to the State Department. A White House official told me today that while President Obama hasn’t spoken to President Mubarak since the unrest began, and doesn’t have a call scheduled, the U.S. government is in regular contact with the Egyptian government through the embassy and other organizations. And even many of the conservatives who wish Obama had continued Bush’s “Freedom Agenda” of more public criticism of Arab autocracies say he has a pretty limited range of action now, given how uncertain the outcome in Cairo is. This “Arab Spring” is the stuff of Bush Administration dreams, but the U.S. has long had an interest in Mubarak’s stability, and it’s not obvious that Bush would have been cheering on the protesters at this point more openly than Obama and Clinton, who have limited themselves to blanket assertions of U.S. principles regarding democracy and non-violence.
Indeed, the protests have put the White House in something of a box. The mystery is how Joe Biden escaped it.
So President Obama filled the Biden void last night: “The people of Egypt have rights that are universal. That includes the right to peaceful assembly and association, the right to free speech, and the ability to determine their own destiny. These are human rights. And the United States will stand up for them everywhere.”
I think the instant analysis badly misread his comments and the thrust of the administration’s policy. His speech was actually pretty good, as is the rapidly evolving American policy. The administration, it seems to me, is trying hard to protect the protestors from an escalation of violent repression, giving Mubarak just enough rope to hang himself, while carefully preparing to ensure that a transition will go in the direction of a more democratic successor. It’s crucial to understand that the United States is not the key driver of the Egyptian protest movement. They do not need or want American leadership — and they most certainly are not interested in “vindicating” Bush’s freedom agenda or the Iraq war, an idea which almost all would find somewhere between laughable, bewildering, and deeply offensive. Suspicion of American intentions runs deep, as does folk wisdom about decades of U.S. collaboration with Mubarak. They are not really parsing Hilary Clinton’s adjectives. Their protest has a dynamic and energy of its own, and while they certainly want Obama to take their side forcefully and unequivocally they don’t need it.
“It was a stern, public rebuke of an important ally and a demand for concrete action,” added James Joyner at Outside the Beltway. “And, given the nature of diplomacy, one presumes that the private phone conversation was much more candid, leaving Mubarak with no illusions that he could continue on his current path and continue to receive American backing.”
Also, a curious story this morning from theTelegraph of London:
Andrew Sullivan is skeptical: “Interesting, though my gut, looking at the Telegraph’s headline, is that they’re blowing the story out of proportion. But I could be wrong!”
Ryan W. McMaken at LRC, however, thinks this sort of double-dealing was to be expected:
Not surprisingly, it seems that while the US was looting the taxpayer to shower the dictator Mubarak with crisp $100 bills, it was also training some anti-Mubarak dissidents. It wasn’t much of an opposition, of course, since the US government wants Mubarak to stay in power and has no problem with the brutality of his regime. But there’s no harm in training a few agent provocateurs, right? Also, from the US state’s point of view, in the unlikely event that the opposition actually manages to topple the dictator, it will then have a friend in the new regime. But realistically, the Feds probably viewed the activist as just an informant to buy off, as the memos reveal. Unfortunately for US prestige in Egypt (as if it couldn’t get any lower), WikiLeaks has made it all public.