Thousands gather near UN in New York to support anti-government protests in Egypt
NEW YORK — As he banded with more than 1,000 peaceful but passionate protesters today to call for the end of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s 30-year rule, Mazen Mokhtar was mindful that his 73-year-old father, Moein, had been doing the same thing in Cairo.
And despite the 5,600 miles of distance between them and the more urgent level of furor in demonstrations that have rocked Egypt’s capital city for days, Mokhtar couldn’t help but feel the unity of the anti-Mubarak sentiment and the need for change now.
“Old, young, men, women, religious, secular — what has brought them all together is that they have suffered too long,” Mokhtar, 42, of North Brunswick, said in front of the United Nations. “It’s a struggle for freedom, it’s a struggle for values.”
Five days of protests of Mubarak’s authoritarian regime have resulted in the deaths of more than 70 Egyptians. While President Obama huddled yesterday with advisers to discuss the ramifications of Mubarak’s weekend appointment of a vice president and dismissal of his Cabinet, anti-government demonstrations formed in the United States from New York to Jersey City, Washington, D.C., and San Francisco.
By noon today, hundreds of protesters, mostly Egyptian-Americans, flooded Dag Hammarskjold Plaza on 47th Street near First Avenue, toting signs of solidarity that read “Egyptian blood is our blood” and “Pharaoh, Pharaoh, let my people go.”
Mokhtar, president of the New Jersey chapter of the Muslim American Association and leader of a delegation of New Jerseyans who attended the protest, said: “As you can see, events are happening very fast.”
Protesters from New Jersey said their cause had developed a seemingly unstoppable momentum in recent days. Waves of optimism rippled through the crowd at the prospect of a severely weakened Mubarak administration.
They hoped yesterday’s protest would send a message to Egypt’s mission at the U.N.
“We’ve just had enough of Mubarak rule,” said Bassem Abdelhamid, 17, of Jersey City. “Enough is enough is enough.”
“These people have been robbing the country for decades,” said Amro Saber, 20, of Bayonne, a child of Egyptian immigrants who also lived in Egypt for several years. “People live on two dollars a day.”
Tarek Bahgat of Robbinsville repeatedly called out “Enough sin!” in Arabic during the protest.
“I’m very excited,” Bahgat said. “It’s never going to go back. The people want this government to end.”
When asked of the likelihood that Mubarak would step down, Bahgat said, “If not today, tomorrow.”
• Dozens protest in Journal Square, calling for the removal of the Egyptian president