US, Israel and Turkey evacuate citizens from Egypt
Britons should avoid nonessential travel, says Hague, but government does not offer to evacuate those already there
International alarm about the political and security implications of continuing unrest in Egypt intensified tonight as the United States, Israel and Turkey sent aircraft to evacuate their stranded citizens, and other countries advised their nationals to get out by any means possible.
Britain's foreign secretary, William Hague, said UK nationals should avoid nonessential travel to large cities such as Cairo, Alexandria and Suez. But the government did not offer to help evacuate those already there. They should leave by commercial flights unless they had vital reasons for remaining, Hague said.
The situation in Egypt's Red Sea resorts, where most Britons are staying, remained calm, he added. "We will watch over it very, very carefully, I'm sending extra resources to our embassy there."
The US government announced an immediate airlift for all Americans wishing to leave. "The department of state is making arrangements to provide transportation to safe haven locations in Europe," it said. Airlifts were also announced by Turkey and Israel.
Hague said Britain was concerned that Egypt could fall into the hands of extremists, but would not intervene directly. "What matters is that the process [of political reform] takes place, whatever that means for President Mubarak personally," he told Sky News. "It is important for him to initiate that transformation and broadly based government, and that is what we would like to see. That is far preferable of course to Egypt falling into the hands of extremism or a more authoritarian system of government."
No 10 said David Cameron had spoken to Mubarak by telephone on Saturday night to express his "grave concern" about violence against anti-government demonstrators. The prime minister urged Mubarak to "take bold steps to accelerate political reform and build democratic legitimacy" rather than attempt to repress dissent, Downing Street said.
Reactions to the unrest differed widely around the world. Iran's opposition leader, Mir Hossein Mousavi, believed by many to have won the disputed 2009 presidential elections, said he hoped the protests would bring to Egypt democratic change that has so far eluded his country.
In contrast, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, whose autocratic regime has repeatedly rejected pressure for reform, suggested sinister foreign forces were at work in Egypt. "No Arab or Muslim can tolerate any meddling in the security and stability of Arab and Muslim Egypt by those who infiltrated the people in the name of freedom of expression, exploiting it to inject their destructive hatred," Abdullah said.
Other Arab leaders were keeping their fingers crossed as financial markets across the region tumbled. "We are looking for a stable Egypt and hoping things will be restored soon," said Abdulrahman al-Attiyah, secretary-general of the Gulf Co-operation Council.
In Israel, the prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, addressed growing concern that his country's principal Arab ally could turn into a foe again under a new government. "We are following with vigilance the events in Egypt and in our region … at this time we must show responsibility and restraint and maximum consideration," Netanyahu said. "Our efforts have been intended to continue to preserve stability and security … I remind you that the peace between Israel and Egypt has lasted for over three decades."
Apparently concerned that reformist ideas could prove contagious, China blocked the word "Egypt" from micro-blog searches and suggested Egyptians were not suited to democracy. The Global Times, published by the Communist party, said that democracy was not compatible with conditions in Egypt or Tunisia, and that "colour revolutions" could not achieve real democracy.
"Democracy is still far away in Tunisia and Egypt. The success of democracy takes concrete foundations in economy, education and social issues," the newspaper said. "But when it comes to political systems, the western model is only one of a few options."