Egypt protests - Wednesday 9 February
Time to wrap things up for tonight. Here's what we've seen this evening:
• Talks between the Egyptian regime and opposition figures are on the brink of collapse
• The Egyptian military has been involved in beatings and other abuses, according to an investigation by the Guardian
• Egypt's provinces have seen widespread protests, in further signs that the uprising has spread beyond the major cities
• A wave of strikes erupted across the economy, including railway workers, public employees and electricity staff
It sounds like the next big protest is being planned for Friday but there will be more to come tomorrow. Thanks for reading.
Canada's Globe and Mail has an interview with Ahmed Saleh, a former member of the April 6 Youth Movement and one of the earliest protesters, on what happens next:
Al-Jazeera's influence on events in Egypt and Tunisia is hard to ignore, and yet the channel's English off-shoot remains shut out of US households because cable service providers refuse to carry it.
In response al-Jazeera has started a public campaign, "Demand al-Jazeera", to win support in the US, with a day of action tomorrow:
Having said he wouldn't speak to foreign media, Wael Ghonim today broke his silence to do an interview with CNN, as we reported earlier.
Now he's taken to Twitter to explain why.
More on the disruption and strikes taking place outside of Cairo from AP:

An update on the wave of strikes in Egypt today from the Associated Press:
Ahmed Zewail, the US-Egyptian scientist who won the Nobel prize for physics, calls on Mubarak to step down "tomorrow," in an interview with Reuters:
Significantly, Zewail dismissed any idea that the Muslim Brotherhood might hijack the protests or that Egypt's 1979 peace treaty with Israel was in peril, saying democracy could only benefit the region.
If you can't beat Facebook, join it. Spotted by The Awl, the president of Sudan wants his supporters to wage social media cyber-war to avoid the fate of the Mubarak and Ben Ali regimes:
Not sure those "younger citizens" will agree, but the state media is confident:
This is a must-read: Robert Tait, a radio journalist who was formerly the Guardian's correspondent in Iran, describes his experience at the hands of the Mukhabarat – the regime's sinister security force – after he was detained last Friday in Cairo. It's stomach-turning stuff:
Puncturing the idea that the Egyptian army has been impartial is this piece by the Guardian's Chris McGreal, detailing allegations that the army has secretly detained and even tortured government opponents:
A question for Barack Obama: "How hard would it be to back Egyptian democracy, Mr President?" asks Joshua Treviño on Comment Is Free America:
The talks between the Egyptian regime and opposition figures are on the brink of collapse, according to a new report from Cairo just posted on the Guardian's site:
Reporting by the Guardian's Jack Shenker and Chris McGreal.
The protests outside Egypt's Parliament and cabinet offices forced prime minister Ahmed Shafiq to move to temporary accomodation in the Civil Aviation Ministry on the other side of the Cairo, it is being reported.
The blogger and top tweeter Sultan Al Qassemi has a string of tweets from the al-Jazeera Arabic interview with Mohammed Hasanain Haykal, billed as one of the most respected Egyptian journalists, a former editor of Al Ahram and a friend of Nasser himself.
According to Wikipedia, Haykal's first post as a journalist was to cover the famous battle of El Alamein in 1942, when Montgomery defeated Rommel. So he's been around.
Dramatic news of the unrest and violence in the Egyptian countryside, with Reuters correspondent Yasmine Saleh in Cairo filing this:
A sense that the protests have entered a new and perhaps final phase are reinforced by the Guardian's Jack Shenker on the ground in Cairo:
Good afternoon from Washington DC, where the Obama administration's messages to the Egyptian government remain frustratingly oblique. But one explanation comes in this Associated Press analysis of the pressures on the US:
Interesting that the Saudi government is classed here as "moderate". Anyway, more details from AP:
There are several reports on Twitter that the Ministry of Interior has released more than 1000 (presumably political) prisoners today.
I'm going to handover to my colleague Richard Adams now.
The Egyptian prosecutor general seems to be trying to meet the concerns of the protesters who still feel no one is being held accountable for the violence against them. Not only has he announced an inquiry in to the violence at Al-Wadi al-Jadid but he has also ordered an inquiry into the killing of the Ahram's Ahmed Mohamed Mahmoud, according to al-Jazeera. He was the first journalist killed in the protests and was honoured in a symbolic funeral in Tahrir Squre.
Reuters also has more on Egyptian foreign minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit's riposte to Joe Biden (see 7.07pm)
Asked why he found Biden's demands for "immediate, irreversible progress unhelpful", Aboul Gheit told PBS:
He also said he was astounded Biden had called for ending the emergency law:
The Obama administration has said Egypt's government must do more to meet the demands of protesters in the country's streets, Reuters reports. White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said:
Al-Jazeera's Ayman Mohyeldin reports that there have been repercussions as a result of the violence in Al-Wadi al-Jadid/Gadeed (see 5.12pm and 8.36am):
Here's another significant line from the interview Wael Ghonim gave to CNN today. He said the time to negotiate is over:
More from the Egyptian foreign minister is being flashed up on Reuters. Ahmed Aboul Gheit has reportedly said that he is "amazed" by US vice president Joe Biden's call for an immediate end to emergency law, as the government needs more time to stabilise the country. Abdoul Gheit also said the US advice on political change was "not at all helpful". The quotes come from an interview with the PBS NewsHour programme.
The cartoonist Carlos Latuff is continuing to send an unambiguous message to Mubarak through the power of his pen:
After vice president Suleiman's ominous talk about "a coup" being the only alternative to dialogue (see 8am), the country's foreign minister has said the army could step in to protect national security if "adventurers" try to take power, Reuters reports. Ahmed Aboul Gheit told al-Arabiya:
The new culture minister Gaber Asfour, who was only appointed last week, has resigned citing health reasons, according to al-Arabiya TV. Asfour is a prominent literary figure in Egypt.
Wael Ghonim, the Google executive and activist who has been anointed by many as the voice of the revolution since being released from detention, has given his first interview to foreign media. He told CNN he was "ready to die" to bring change to Egypt and that it is "no longer the time to negotiate". Addressing the Egyptian government, he said: "If you are true Egyptians, if you are heroic Egyptians, it's time to step down."
Hossam El-Hamalawy, a journalist and blogger who has closely followed labour activism in Egypt for several years, has told Jack Shenker that today was a significant day for the pro-democracy struggle because the "working class has officially entered the battle":
The Guardian has a video interview with the Egyptian actor, Mohsena Tawfik, explaining why she has joined the protesters in Tahrir Square:

Alastair Burt, the UK's minister for the Middle East and North Africa, met with the Egyptian ambassador to the UK, Hatem Saif el Nasr, today. He appears to have reiterated the British position on Egypt, according to this press release from the Foreign and Commonwealth office:
Concerns are rising over a crackdown on protesters in Al-Wadi al-Jadid. Egyptian state TV is now saying three people were killed in the south-west area overnight and that clashes continued today.
(Al-Kharijah is the capital of Al-Wadi al-Jadi)
Al Masry Al Youm reports that 3,000 Egyptian national railways (ENR) employees have gone on strike with some sitting on rail lines to stop trains getting through, and bus drivers will start a strike tomorrow that will lead to the suspension of services.
Another video has emerged of a police van running over protesters in Egypt. This was taken in Mahalla, according to one of the people circulating it, although it is not clear when. After it ploughs through a crowd, people seem to overpower the occupant or occupants of the vehicle, and in the last second of the video tip it over. (Beware: contains upsetting footage.)
The April 6 Youth movement has sent a defiant reply in response to vice-president Omar Suleiman's warning that the protests were "very dangerous" and the only alternative to dialogue was "a coup" (see 8am). In an email sent to followers of its Facebook page it says:
Brian Whitaker, the Guardian's former Middle East editor, has been below the line answering your questions.
ABC News's Lara Setrakian says she has been speaking to Ayman Nour, who challenged Hosni Mubarak for the presidency in 2005 and was thrown in jail for his troubles. She has been tweeting what he said:
As part of the Guardian's alliance with other media organisations reporting on the seismic events in the Middle East, I just spoke to Ana Carbajosa from El Pais, who has been in Ramallah, in the Palestinian territories, this morning. She said:
Meanwhile Wael Ghonim tweets the following:
CNN's Ben Wedeman tweets that Egypt's schools and universities will remain closed next week in an extension of the mid-term break.
Here is an afternoon summary:
• Protesters have continued their demonstration outside the parliament after thousands set up a new front there in the demonstrations last night. They appear not to have been cowed by vice-president Omar Suleiman's warning that the protests are "very dangerous". He said the alternative to dialogue was a coup (see 11.37am).
• In an interview with the Guardian, a Muslim Brotherhood leader gave Mubarak a week to stand down. "They need some time. We give them this chance. A week," said Essam el-Erian.
• The Egyptian government has agreed to amend six articles of the constitution immediately, according to Al Jazeera. These included provisions on who can run for president and on how long a president can serve (see 2.08pm).
• More workers have begun strikes, including factory workers in Mahalla, Suez and Helwan, journalists and sanitation workers in Cairo. Reports of other strikes elsewhere have also been coming in (see 1.34pm).
• Two people are reported to have died in violence last night in Al-Wadi al-Jadid, an isolated town in south-west Egypt (see 2.25pm). There are unconfirmed reports a soldier has been shot by a pro-Mubarak supporter in Mahalla (see 2pm).
• Human rights organisations have accused the minister of information, Anas al-Fiqqi, of being responsible for the deaths of protesters by spreading false propaganda about them (see 11.48am). Human Rights Watch estimates that 302 people have died in the protests so far.
The newly released activist Wael Ghonim says he has given an interview to CNN to respond to Suleiman (presumably his comments about the dangers of the protests and possibility of a coup). Frustratingly Ghonim doesn't go into details.
He had previously said he was not giving interviews to foreign media.
A writer who called for peaceful protests in Libya has been arrested on the pretextof an alleged car accident, Amnesty International said.
Jamal al-Hajji, who has dual Libyan and Danish nationality, was arrested on February 1 shortly after he issued a call on the Internet for demonstrations in support of greater freedoms in the North African country, it said.
Hajji was arrested in a car park in Tripoli by a group of about 10 security officials in plain clothes who told him a man claimed to have been hit by Jamal al-Hajji's car, which he had just parked, reported.
Protesters outside the parliament building in Cairo are preparing for the long haul, according to Channel 4's Lindsey Hilsum
The pro-government Ahram Online confirms two people were killed in the south west area of Al-Wadi al-Jadiafter protesters set a police station and prison on fire.
There are unconfirmed reports that three died in the clashes and that one of the protesters was shot in the eye.
Platitudes from the US about Egypt are now available in an Arabic Twitter feed.
The State Department said the new service would provide"situation updates" on Egypt.
Automatically translated versions of the feed's first three tweets are available here:
Al-Jazeera reports that the Egyptian government has agreed to amend six articles of the constitution immediately.Evan Hill has tweeted the details of the articles in question. They include the respective articles that restrict who can run for president and allow for unlimited presidential terms.
Egyptian blogger Mohammed Maree claims a soldier has been shot by a pro-Mubarak supporter in Mahalla. If true, it will be interesting to see how that affects the dynamic of the relationship between those two groups.
The April 6 Youth movement has sent an email message to all members of its Facebook page, reiterating its opposition to any talks with the government until Mubarak resigns. The English is not perfect but there is no mistaking the message from the group:
It's being reported that the governor's office in Port Said has been set alight by protesters.
Back at the parliament in Cairo, writer/producer Jon Jensen has posted a picture of a new sign put up by protesters outside the building. It says "Down with the regime."
More news of strikes seems to be coming in by the minute.
• Protesters have continued their demonstration outside the parliament after thousands set up a new front there in the demonstrations last night. They appear not to have been cowed by vice-president Omar Suleiman's warning that the protests are "very dangerous". He said the alternative to dialogue was a coup.
• More workers have begun strikes including factory workers in Mahalla, Suez and Helwan, journalists and sanitation workers in Cairo. Yesterday, steel workers and canal workers in Suez went on strike and Telecom Egypt staff in Cairo among others.
• Two people are reported to have died in violence last night in Al-Wadi al-Jadid, an isolated town in south-west Egypt. The Egyptian paper Youm7 reported 100 people were injured including 8 seriously amid an unconfirmed report of a massacre.
• Human rights organisations have accused the minister of information, Anas al-Fiqqi, of being responsible for the deaths of protesters by spreading false propaganda about them. Human Rights Watch estimates that 302 people have died in the protests so far.
The Interior Ministry has been sending some interesting and ominous-sounding text messages to CNN's Ben Wedeman, he reports on Twitter.
Another Interior Ministry SMS: "Police have returned to streets to protect citizens and their security. Please cooperate with them" #Egypt
A round-up of the strike action, from the New York Times in part via the pro-government Al Ahram newspaper.
Two people have died in that violence last night in Al-Wadi al-Jadid, an isolated area in south-west Egypt, al-Jazeera reports.
The subject is trending on Twitter under #NewValley.
Twenty-four human rights organisations have accused the minister of information Anas al-Fiqqi, of being responsible for the deaths of protesters by spreading false propaganda about them, the Egyptian paper Al-Masry Al-Youm reports.
What did Suleiman mean by "coup"? His Delphic comments at a meeting with journalists yesterday are being pored over.
Media attention has focused on the dramatic events in Cairo, but Reuters has this interesting piece on what is happening in the countryside where more 57% of the population live. If the regime is counting on support from the silent majority, it may be disabused if the report is anything to go by.
The Guardian has footage of Wael Ghonim's appearance and speech at yesterday's rally.

Several hundred Egyptian protesters have tried to block the parliament building, AFP reports.
A round up on the strike action today via Twitter.
The blogger Issandr El Amrani, founder of the Arabist blog:
With protests and strikes popping up everywhere the centralised system of governance will become weaker and less effective. #egypt #jan25
More on the pop star Tamer Hosny, described Egypt's Justin Bieber. Al-Jazeera has unearthed this video of him expressing remorse for his pro-Mubarak comments.
There is an unconfirmed report that he was beaten yesterday.
Another journalist at a state controlled broadcaster has resigned in protests at the pro-Mubarak coverage of the unrest, Al-Masry Al-Youm reports.
Last week Shahira Amin resigned from her post as deputy head of Nile TV for similar reasons.
Omar Suleiman has questions to answer about the torture of detainees, Joe Stork deputy director of the Middle East and North Africa division of Human Rights Watch says.
On the release of Wael Ghonim, Stork said.
Omar Suleiman's veiled warnings of a coup are being greeted with a mixture of fear and derision, Chris McGreal reports from Cairo.
On the extension of the protests to the parliament building, Chris said:
A number of strikes have started, including telecommunication and Suez canal workers, Chris reports.
The Egyptian newspaper, Youm7, has images and reports of violence overnight in the town of Al-Wadi al-Jadid in the south-west. It says 100 people have been injured including eight seriously.
Scott Lucas, an academic from the University of Birmingham, writing on the blog Enduring America has an unconfirmed report of a "massacre" taking place in the area. It names one man reported to have been killed.
Protesters have turned on the Egyptian pop singer Tamer Hosnyafter he appeared on state TV to support Mubarak, al-Jazeera reports.
He tried to address the crowd in Tahrir Square, but was shouted down, it reports. It also shows avideo of protesters chanting against him.
Wael Ghonim, the released activist and newly anointed voice of the revolution, has urged protesters to keep up the pressure for Hosni Mubarak to stand down.
In a series of Twitter messages today he spoke of his pride following yesterday's massive demonstration in central Cairo, and he urged Egyptians living aboard to return home to join the protests.
He also rejected opposition talks with the government.
His comments come after vice-president Omar Suleiman, who has been leading those negotiations with the opposition, warned that protests were "very dangerous" and ominously said the only alternative to dialogue was "a coup".
Meanwhile, Human Rights Watch now estimates that 302 have died in the unrest and continues to warn that hospitals have been ordered to downplay the casualties.
It also condemned the arrest of an estimated 119 people in the crackdown on the protests.It has evidence that five of those people were tortured.
Joe Stork, deputy director of the Middle East and North Africa division of Human Rights Watch, said:
Here's a round up of the other recent developments.
• Protesters have spilled out of Tahrir Square to set up camp outside Egypt's Parliament building. They have erected a sign outside the building which reads "closed until the fall of the regime". How the army handles the protest outside Parliament is being seen as a key test.
• In an interview with the Guardian, a Muslim Brotherhood leader gave Mubarak a week to stand down. "They need some time. We give them this chance. A week," said Essam el-Erian. • US vice president Joe Biden told Suleiman in a phone call the US wanted "prompt, meaningful, peaceful, and legitimate" reforms. He also urged Egypt to scrap its emergency laws.
• Britain's foreign secretary William Hague warned that the unrest in the Arab world is threatens the Middle East peace process. "Amidst the opportunity for countries like Tunisia and Egypt, there is a legitimate fear that the Middle East peace process will lose further momentum and be put to one side, and will be a casualty of uncertainty in the region," Hague told the Times (paywall).