Egypt protests - Friday 11 February
President Hosni Mubarak's announcement last night that he would not stand down after a day of fevered speculation has enraged protesters. In a televised address he stunned crowds massed in Cairo's Tahrir Square and elsewhere by saying he would hand power to his vice-president, Omar Suleiman, but stay on as president until elections in September.
Mass demonstrations are expected once more today as opponents of Mubarak's regime show their anger at his refusal to step down. Protesters are already gathering in Tahrir Square, outside the state TV building in Cairo and the presidential palace.
The president's statement not only angered the Egyptian protesters but also the US, as Barack Obama issued his strongest criticism of Mubarak so far, criticising the Egyptian government's failure to put forward a "credible, concrete and unequivocal path to democracy".
The military is expected to issue a statement in the next two hours, before Friday prayers, amid continued speculation of a military takeover. There are hopes among some protesters that the military will oversee the transition to democracy.
Here is some video of Hosni Mubarak's speech last night.

There is a lot of coverage of the Egyptian situation in today's Guardian.
This is Chris McGreal's front page story on Hosni Mubarak's speech.
This is novelist Ahdaf Soueif's experience of watching the speech in Cairo's Tahrir Square last night.
And here is Ewen MacAskill on the latest reaction from Barack Obama on Mubarak.
Slavoj Žižek of Birkbeck University asks: "Where are we now?"
• Egypt's day of rumour and expectation ends in anger and confusion
The April 6 youth movement has issued a furious response to Mubarak's speech last night. In a communique sent to its Facebook followers it says "a general strike is needed to bring him down".
Mubarak's speech was an astonishing piece of hypocritical filth. This man who sat atop of the regime which brutalised his people for 30 years, and tried in the last 17 days to destroy the movement any way that it could shed crocodile tears for the people that his police had killed. Over 300 people have died to force him from power, and after cursing the movement and trying to drown them in blood he addresses his speech to the "youth of the nation". These are the youth of the nation who have risen up against him and hate him with a passion – they have nothing in common with him or his regime. They are the future and he is the past, that is why he has fought against them so violently. He promised a full investigation into anyone involved in persecuting protesters and swore again that he would resign in September, but not before. During his entire speech he did not offer one serious concession to the people - he did not even withdraw the state of emergency. He proposed the amendment of 6 sections of the constitution, including the most controversial ones of article 76 and 77. He said he would scrap article 179. Article 179 is a relatively new anti terrorism amendment which stipulates "the state will assume responsibility for safeguarding security and public order in the face of the dangers of terrorism", which allows for anti terror suspects to be investigated and arrested without any kind of judicial over view. The strikes should not be called off, they need to be extended and coordinated into an all out general strike. The strikes should be coordinated by democratic councils of the workers, they need to organise the defence of the revolution. It is also important now that the rank and file soldiers be won over to the revolution. Now the demand for a constituent assembly is crucial. It is not the military or technocrats which should decide the new constitution but a democratic assembly composed of recognised delegates from the people. Whether Mubarak is working in relative agreement with the army or defying them is not clear. Clearly the army wants to consolidate its influence in the political process. Clearly the military are divided over what to do – still the different factions within the regime do not know what to do. Some within the NPD want Mubarak gone, but Mubarak and his clique want to hold on to power. The army's position is changing, but it is not clear yet what role they will play.
As everyone awaits the army's next move the people in Tahrir Square in Cairo are chanting that the people and the army are "together". There are also reports of army officers joining the protests. From Reuters:
The BBC has issued a statement saying its Persian TV service is being jammed "from within Iran" following the corporation's coverage of the ongoing unrest in Egypt.
The Guardian's Chris McGreal, in Cairo, says people will not just be listening to what the supreme military council has to say in its announcement, expected shortly, but will also be scrutinising the army's behaviour on the streets:
Ironically given that the BBC's Persian service is being jammed (see 9.30am), Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the Iranian president, has said Egypt's popular uprising shows a new Middle East is emerging, one that will have no signs of Israel and US "interference", the Associated Press is reporting.
It sounds like the Egyptian government is still desperately manoeuvring in an attempt to appease the protesters. Reuters reports that a deputy premier is to be appointed from a council of "wise men" who have been in talks with the government to find a way out of the country's crisis:
The state news agency said vice-president Omar Suleiman had asked prime minister Ahmed Shafiq to appoint a deputy prime minister who would take responsibility for "a national dialogue" with opposition forces and independent figures. Suleiman held the first session of the dialogue on Sunday. The "wise men" council includes prominent businessmen, such as tycoon Naguib Sawiris, lawyers and academics. A date for a second session has yet to be set. Protesters who are challenging Hosni Mubarak's rule have condemned the dialogue as an attempt to fool people into thinking the government is serious about political reform. They say the reforms Mubarak has said he will implement fall well short of their demands for deep political reform.
One opposition group, the leftwing Tagammu party, said on Thursday it would no longer take part, saying the government was not responding to the people's demands.
Rosemary Hollis, professor of Middle East policy studies and director of the Olive Tree scholarship programme at City University, London, said there was "a distinct possibility" the armed forces would now split. She said there were a couple of ways this split could go.
One would be a split between older, senior officers and younger ones from the middle ranks.
"The most senior ranks are the same age as Mubarak and Suleiman," she said. "The younger men are their [the demonstrators'] generation. They will identify less with Mubarak and more with the future of the country they want to be part of."
She said the other way the armed forces could split would be ideologically, between those who wanted to concentrate on "law and order" and a "managed transition under Mubarak and co" and felt this would be "preferable to the dangers of a transition to democracy" and on the other side those "embracing change with all its uncertainty".
She had been told that this ideological split could run along the lines of the air force (Mubarak's old service) and republican guard on one side, and "everyone else", including the regular army, on the side of change.
Hollis said: "Militaries aren't good at transitions to democracy. They're more comfortable with continuity." But, on the other hand, "the army has not been clearly on the side of Mubarak" during this crisis.
Whatever happens, she said, "the army will have the final say".
The military statement has just been read out. The translation was difficult to follow but the supreme military council essentially seemed to be saying it would help see through the transition to democracy but there was no indication that it is opposed to Mubarak and/or Suleiman being involved in that transition.
The army also guaranteed a free and fair presidential election, constitutional changes and protection of the nation.
The army also said none of the "honourable" protesters would be prosecuted.
Chris McGreal, in Cairo, has given a snap response to the statement by the supreme military council. "The army has thrown its weight behind the status quo for now," he told me. However Chris suggested that the army may be warning Mubarak that he must carry out the reforms that he has promised.
That might not be enough to meet the high expectations of many of the protesters, who had place their hopes in the hands of the military.
The army said the emergency law would be ended "as soon as the current circumstances end", which indicates that the army want the people off the streets. As Chris McGreal said earlier (see 9.45am), everyone will be closely watching the reaction of the military on the streets today.
The signals are that the protests in the capital are spreading out.
Chris McGreal says outside the state TV building in Cairo there is "a very large and angry crowd shouting 'out, out, out'".
Reuters is reporting "several dozen protesters" outside Mubarak's presidential palace. It says razor wire and six tanks and armoured vehicles separate them from the palace.
Shadi Hamid of the Brookings Institution in Doha has just tweeted his response to the army statement.
Apparently the following joke is splitting Egyptians' sides:
Wael Ghonim, the Egyptian activist who wore a green wristband when he talked in Tahrir Square, sent a message to Iranians for their protest organised on Monday by giving an interview to an opposition website:
An interesting comment from below the line from OneWorldGovernment:
A lot of people seem to have reacted with enthusiasm with the army's pronouncement that the emergency law will be lifted but the qualification expressed makes it far too early to celebrate. As the activist and blogger SandMonkey points out:
An advisor to Mubarak, who yesterday said the president was going to stand aside, has said he stands by his view. Hossam Badrawi, secretary general of the ruling NDP party, has told Lindsey Hilsum of Channel 4 News: "The delivery of the speech was bad, because he spoke about himself and as if he is going to follow things up, but the reality is that he is not in power. Constitutional action is being taken."
Badrawi said that if Mubarak formally stood down, it would force an election in 60 days. But in effect he has no power and has transferred his authority to Omar Suleiman, the vice-president.
Lest we forget, Cairo is not the only place protests are taking place in Egypt. Al-Jazeera reports gathering crowds in Alexandria.
The Wall Street Journal's Tamer El-Ghobashy has been tweeting from Tahrir Square, where they have been holding Friday prayers.
Brian Whitaker, the Guardian's former Middle East editor, has given his verdict on Mubarak's speech last night:
The Iraqi embassy in Egypt is offering food, financial aid and free flights home to Iraqis there who feel threatened by the ongoing unrest, the Washington Post reports.
Kareem Amer, the first blogger to be prosecuted in Egypt, has been released and has given a harrowing account of his latest spell of detention. Amer (real name Abdel-Karim Nabil Suleiman), was freed in November last year after being sentenced to four years in jail for insulting Islam and the president but was arrested with a friend during the protests on Monday and they were only released in the early hours of this morning. He told the Daily Beast:
Someone seems to have hacked the site of the Cairo NDP, Hosni Mubarak's party. The site now reads:
There are reports on Twitter that airport police in Egypt have joined the growing numbers of workers who have walked out and are now on strike.
Plus al-Arabiya TV is reporting that protesters have take control of government institutions in Suez.
Al-Jazeera reports that there is growing anger amongst protesters outside the presidential palace at the military after an army colonel appealed to the people to allow Mubarak to make an honourable exit. He was jeered by the crowd and could not finish speaking.
The Egyptian army seems to hold the key to Mubarak's future and that of Egypt. What will they do next? Here's our story on that.
Here's an interactive map of protests in Cairo.
Giles Tremlett writes from Morocco about the reaction to Hosni Mubarak's speech and whether any similar pro-democracy movement is likely to take root in that country:
Chris McGreal has been on the phone with an update from Tahrir Square. He says signs are that the protests are spreading across Cairo:
Sultan Al Qassemi has been tweeting the details of an interview Wael Ghonim, anointed by some as the voice of the revolution, is giving to al-Arabiya TV. For a bit of context, Ghonim had been criticised by some for telling people to go home and celebrate yesterday. Here's some excerpts from the interview:
We're getting a lot of comments about the army in the comments section. An explainer by my colleague Ian Black provides useful background on the military's relationship with the government and the people.
Incidentally, a retired general has just told al Jazeera that the military will issue a third statement (the first was yesterday, the second this morning) soon.
Some facts on the Egyptian military - total personnel around 468,500 active personnel, plus a reserve of 479,000 - from Reuters:
The blogger Zeinobia says there are protests in the following places in Egypt:
BBC Arabic is reporting that Mubarak left the country at 1pm, according to Zeionobia. Al-Arabiya also reported that he had left the country but then clarified and said he had left Cairo. All reports of Mubarak fleeing should be taken with a pinch of salt until confirmed. There have been so many rumours since the protests began that have turned out to be wrong - not least yesterday.
Al-Arabiya TV is now saying Mubarak has gone to Sharm el-Sheikh for "a break"!
Meanwhile, there are reportedly at least 2,000 protesters outside the presidential palace.
A sizeable demonstration is taking place in Mansoura, 120km north-east of Cairo, as can be seen in this picture (thanks to @orlandobeetle in the comments section for the link).
A couple of additions to the list of places where protesters are marching from al-Jazeera. It is reporting more than 50,000 protesters in Qin, the hometown of vice-president Omar Suleiman, and 20,000 in Arish, 344km north-east of Cairo.
Iraqis in Egypt have been offered free flights home by the Iraqi government:
Al-Jazeera Arabic is now reporting "multiple sources" say Mubarak has flown to the United Arab Emirates (link is in Arabic).
Again, one to treat with a very healthy dose of cynicism until it is confirmed.
The Libyan president has made a call of support to Mubarak, al-Masry al-Youm reports.
• The Egyptian army has issued a statement backing away from ousting Hosni Mubarak and supporting a gradual transition to democracy (see 9.51am). "Communique No 2" said the hated emergency law would be lifted, but did not give a timeframe.
• There is speculation the army could now split into a pro- and anti-Mubarak factions (see this story). There are reports of Egyptian army officers joining the protesters (see 9.24am).
• Mass demonstrations are taking place in Cairo's Tahrir Square and elsewhere in the country, including Alexandria. Protesters have gathered around the presidential palace in the capital (see 12.34pm). Strikes are also continuing.
• Barack Obama has expressed dismay at the failure of Mubarak to stand down (see 9.04am).
Matthew Cassel is tweeting details of what sound like encouraging scenes outside the state TV building
Simon Tisdall writes that Barack Obama's statement yesterday about Hosni Mubarak's speech has wider implications for the Middle East's rulers and may be the start of a new "Obama doctrine".
The implications of this new doctrine, for that it is how it must be viewed, are almost endless. The most obvious point is that since the US is backing the popular pro-democracy revolt in Egypt, it is bound in all conscience to do so elsewhere, as occasion demands. This is a direct challenge not just to Mubarak and his old guard but to the legitimacy of the previously untouchable, US-allied autocrats of Saudi Arabia, the UAE and the Gulf. Universal values are universal after all.
This Egyptian video, entitled Sout al Horeya, or The Sound of Freedom, by Moustafa Fahmy, Mohamed Khalifa, and Mohamed Shaker, seems to be getting a lot of play on Twitter and Facebook at the moment.
Reuters has written a story on the al-Arabiya report that Hosni Mubarak and his family have left Cairo from a military airbase in the suburbs and travelled to Sharm el-Sheikh:
The news agency also has this on the spread of the protests to the presidential palace:
Al-Jazeera is reporting tens of thousands of people protesting outside the state TV building in Cairo.
Chris McGreal says some people are concerned about the likely content of the third communique, which is due to be released today:
Things seem slightly sedate at the presidential palace protests in Cairo.
Nadia El-Awady has tweeted a number of amusing messages about the well-heeled nature of the demonstrators there.
The Danish prime minister Lars Loekke Rasmussen has become the first European Union leader to publicly call for president Mubarak to step down. He said: "Mubarak is history. Mubarak must step down."
You may know him as the former Fugees rapper or you may know him as the man who tried unsuccessfully to run for the presidency in Haiti but now Wyclef Jean has turned his attentions to another country in need of help – Egypt. He has composed Freedom (Song for Egypt) as well as becoming a cheerleader for the revolution on Twitter.
This, according to blakehounshell, is where Mubarak hangs out in Sharm.
A local government official has confirmed that Mubarak is in the red sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh, the Associated Press reports.
The New York Times is portraying this as a significant moment in the protests. It says diplomats are trying to confirm that Mubarak's speech last night "signalled his irrevocable handover of presidential authority":
Sorry for the delay – technical problems. Apparently a statement from the presidency is due "soon". On previous days "soon" has sometimes been several hours away. We'll just have to wait and see. Some people are reading significance into the fact that the statement is coming from "the presidency" and not "the president".
An al-Jazeera reporter says tens if not hundreds of thousands of people have marched on the Ras el-Tin palace, another of the president's official residences, in Alexandria, Egypt's second biggest city.
Some interesting tweets from al-Jazeera reporter Rawya Rageh, outside the presidential palace:
Karim Ennarah, who has been in Tahrir Square for about two weeks has now joined the throng outside the presidential palace in Cairo. He told me:
On the impending statement by the presidency, Ennarah said: "Yesterday people were very optimistic when they heard about the statement. We are not getting our hopes up but I got my hopes up when I saw the number of people on the streets of Cairo today."
We are closing this blog and continuing our coverage here.