Security Forces in Bahrain Open Fire on Protesters
What was clear though, was that if the king’s goal was to intimidate his critics into staying home, he appears to have miscalculated, at least so far. The politics of the Shiite community — which already felt disenfranchised — are deeply and inextricably linked with a faith that reveres martyrdom and holds social justice as a principal value. With each outrage this week, more people turned to the streets, perpetuating the cycle Bahrain now seems caught in, with no obvious way out.
Friday night, thousands of angry demonstrators gathered outside the hospital, chanting “Death to Khalifa,” referring to the king.
“We are not going to stop and we are not scared at any time,’ said Raed Aman, 31, one of the demonstrators who escaped uninjured and was at the hospital checking on his friends. “If anybody in my family dies, I will have more power. Even if I lose my life, I will be there every time.”
This small Persian Gulf nation, a strategic ally of the United States, has long strained against the pressure of the political tensions between a Shiite majority and a king and ruling class of the Sunni minority. That tension has been supercharged in recent weeks as demands for democracy, rule of law and social justice have rocked the Middle East with popular movements that have forced the resignation of the presidents of Tunisia and Egypt.
By Friday night, the royal family appeared to be trying to find a more peaceful solution, with the king authorizing the crown prince, his son, to begin a dialogue with the opposition, but it was unclear if the protesters would accept talks. In an appearance on Bahraini TV, the prince, Sheik Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa, pleaded for calm and offered “condolences to the people of Bahrain for the painful days they are living.”
After the violence erupted, President Obama condemned the use of violence by governments throughout the region, including Bahrain, where the United States’ Fifth Fleet is based. The White House said the president had spoken with the king on Friday evening, urging the government to show restraint, especially against peaceful protesters, and pressing for meaningful reform.
On Monday, young people began their protests, organizing Bahrain’s own “day of rage,” hoping that peaceful protests could force the evolution of their nation from an absolute to a constitutional monarchy.
But on that day, the king unleashed his police force, and every effort at demonstrating was met by a wave of tear gas and rubber bullets. By the end of the night, one young man, Ali Mushaima, 21, was dead, shot in the back by the police. The next day, as thousands gathered to mourn, another young man was killed.
Washington pressured the government here to ease off and the authorities agreed. The king went on television and expressed regret. The opposition saw its chance, and marched into Pearl Square. Thousands of people set up tents, created a speakers’ podium and reveled in their first chance for a public display of dissent.
Then Thursday early morning, the government changed its mind and again unleashed the police, who shot at sleeping protesters. There were four or five reported deaths and dozens of injuries. More than 25 people, including children who were separated from their families in the chaos, were still missing on Friday.
Again, the deaths caused the crowds to surge, and the Shiite-led Al Wefaq movement, the largest bloc in Parliament, withdrew and demanded the government’s resignation.
Friday began with a huge funeral in Sitra for two of the men killed in Pearl Square. Thousands of mourners began a march that underscored how faith and politics intersect in Bahrain. Chants of “There is no God, but God,” were followed by “The government must fall.”
By the afternoon, the faithful poured into the small, poor Shiite village of Al Diraz, where Sheik Issa Qassem, the most revered Shiite religious authority in Bahrain, told the crowd, “The massacre was on purpose to kill and to hurt and not to clear any demonstration.”
Thousands of men poured out of the mosque, pumping their fists in the air and echoing chants from Egypt and Tunisia: “The people want the fall of the regime.”
Outside Manama, the protests began at the Jidi Haffiz cemetery, where four days earlier, Mr. Mushaima had been buried. It is the Shiite custom to mourn a death three days later, but because of the tensions in the streets, the Mushaima family delayed until Friday, day four. Their village, Al Daih, filled with mourners.
The crowd outside started the processions to the cemetery, first a few dozens, then hundreds, then thousands. The intersection of politics and religion emerged again, as young children dressed in death shrouds carried signs with verses of the Koran and the crowd roared against the government. They carried huge banners with color photographs of Mr. Mushaima.
By 4:46 p.m., the mourning ceremony was over and the crowd, fired up, began a march back to the village, then changed course, heading toward Manama. They waved Bahrain flags and shouted “We are Sunni, we are Shiite, this country is not for sale.”
The tension rose as the crowd grew closer to the city. The government had announced that it would use severe means to preserve what it called public order. The group started to thin out and when it hit that critical fork in the road, there were about 1,000 people left, struggling, it appeared, to hide their nervousness. They had to know the army was up ahead.
“It’s not my decision, I would have went the other way, but this is a popular uprising, and this is how it works,” said Muhammad Yussef, 26, as he went with the crowd. “This is going to have bad consequences for both sides.”
The marchers expected to see police officers, or soldiers, or hear the familiar crack of tear gas. They did not, and for an instant seemed delighted that they might enter the square. And then, from somewhere, the army opened fire. Everyone ran and the helicopter overhead chased people, shooting at them.
(The helicopter appeared to be American-designed, according to an official at Bell Helicopter, who said the aircraft looked like versions that had been sold, unarmed, to Bahrain.)
At 5:45 p.m., Ali Maltani, 25, with a scarf wrapped around his face and shaking with rage, grabbed a fist-size rock and started to run toward the soldiers. It took five people to restrain him. “My darling, my darling,” said Aziz Abu Dris, 37, kissing the man on the forehead repeatedly, “Throwing a rock at these animals is not worth your life. We should remain peaceful.”
By nightfall, the army had posted soldiers all around the square. On a bridge overlooking the area, the army stationed an armored vehicle with a large gun.
But still there was no sign that the opposition would relent. A group of political parties announced that they planned to march on Saturday, from the Bahrain Mall — to Pearl Square.