Obama warns Gaddafi of 'consequences' if attacks continue
THE Libyan government and rebels fighting strongman Muammar Gaddafi's regime accuse each other of breaching a ceasefire announced by Tripoli following a UN resolution to impose a no-fly zone over the war-torn nation.
A warplane was shot down today over the rebel-held Libyan city of Benghazi, an AFP reporter witnessed.
The plane, which had been heard flying over the city for several minutes was suddenly spotted with flames coming from the right rear, before it spun down on a residential area south of the city.
An explosion and a plume of black smoke marked the spot where it crashed.
Earlier, a plane bombed an area south-west of Libya's rebel stronghold of Benghazi early today and two columns of smoke were seen rising from the targeted zone, AFP journalists reported.
The sound of the aircraft could be heard from the centre of the city, where explosions could be heard overnight.
France's Ambassador to the UN, Gerard Araud, has said he expects military intervention in Libya within hours of a summit in Paris later today on taking UN-sanctioned action.
"We will have a summit in Paris with all the major participants in the operations and in the diplomatic effort. So I think it will be a good moment to send the last signal," he told BBCtelevision.
"The US, the UK and France, we have also launched the ultimatum about the ceasefire.... we have set the conditions.
"So I guess that after the summit, I think that in the coming hours, I think we will go to launch the military intervention."
A UN Security Council resolution has authorised the use of "all necessary means" to protect civilians and enforce a ceasefire and no-fly zone against Libyan strongman Muammar Gaddafi's forces.
France, the United States and Britain issued a joint ultimatum to Gaddafi to "immediately" end attacks against his people or face military intervention based on the UN resolution.
France, Britain, Canada, Qatar and other countries have indicated that they are prepared to take part in enforcement of a no-fly zone and Washington has said the US will play a role.
Saturday's summit includes representatives from the European Union, the Arab League and the African Union, as well as UN chief Ban Ki-moon.
It will be hosted by French President Nicolas Sarkozy and US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will also attend. Libya declares ceasefire
Overnight, Libya declared a ceasefire overnight in its battle to crush an armed revolt but rebels said they were still under fire. Washington warned of military action if Muammar Gaddafi refused to honour a UN demand to end the fighting.
Speaking nearly five hours after the ceasefire was announced, US President Barack Obama warned Gaddafi of "consequences" if he did not comply with the UN Security Council resolution passed yesterday. Mr Obama said: "That means all attacks against civilians must stop.
"Gaddafi must stop his troops from advancing on Benghazi, pull them back from Ajdabiya, Misrata and Zawiyah, and establish water, electricity and gas supplies to all areas."
Gaddafi must allow humanitarian aid to reach the Libyan people, he said.
Mr Obama said "these terms are not subject to negotiation. If Gaddafi does not comply with the resolution, the international community will impose consequences. The resolution will be enforced through military action." The US President said he would deploy US forces to support a no-fly zone against Libya, but left uncertain the full scope of American military involvement in any action. He made clear, however, that no US ground troops would be deployed in Libya and that Washington's action would be based on the need to protect civilians.
"Left unchecked, we have every reason to believe that Gaddafi would commit atrocities against his people," Mr Obama said. "Many thousands could die. A humanitarian crisis would ensue." Australia supports resolution
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd said the resolution was an important step towards curbing the Libyan regime's violence against anti-government rebels.
"The Australian Government was among the first to call for decisive action by the international community, including a UN-mandated no fly zone.
Australia is not expected to contribute to the enforcement of the no-fly zone and has no plans to do so, Defence Minister Stephen Smith said.
"There's no intention on the part of the Australian Government to contribute military assets and there's no expectation on the part of our partners and colleagues from NATO or from north Africa that we would be called upon."
But Mr Smith said Australia would consider humanitarian assistance including the use of a military and C17 transport aircraft to deliver aid supplies. We're still under fire, say rebels Despite Libya announcing a ceasefire, rebel military council official Khaled al-Sayeh today said in Benghazi the "Gaddafi regime never stopped firing or attacking people. Until this moment he is still attacking places ... under siege." He said there was "sustained shelling" in Zintan, Ajdabiya and Misrata. But a Libyan military source in Tripoli said the "armed forces are respecting the announced ceasefire and the commitment to protect civilians, and have not carried out any military operations" since the announcement. The United Nations has estimated more than 1000 people have been killed in the month-long uprising after Gaddafi's rule.
In The Hague, the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court warned that any indiscriminate attack on civilians in Benghazi would constitute "war crimes".
"The commanders will be responsible. As the prosecutor of the ICC, I will request an arrest warrant against them," Luis Moreno-Ocampo said.
World oil prices fell in volatile trade after the ceasefire announcement.
Brent North Sea crude for delivery in May fell $US1.61 from Thursday's close to $US113.29 a barrel in late London trade, after having dropped $US3. New York's main contract, light sweet crude for April, was $US1.20 lower at $US100.22.
The UN's refugee agency, UNHCR, and the International Organisation for Migration said one of the biggest humanitarian evacuations in history would be required to move people from Libya's borders with Tunisia and Egypt.
About 300,000 people have already fled Libya since the rebellion began and many more are expected to leave if full-blown war breaks out, the agencies said.