Omagh murder of officer stirs memories of 1998 atrocity
Families of 1998 bombing victims say it is 'simply unbelievable' that dissident republicans could strike in the town again
On hearing the news of another terrorist outrage in Omagh, Michael Gallagher felt a shiver run down his spine. Reports of an explosion close to the centre of the Co Tyrone town evoked painful memories of another Saturday afternoon 13 years ago when Gallagher's life was changed for ever. It reminded him of that day in August 1998 when a massive car bomb exploded in the centre of Omagh killing 29 men, women and children, including his son Aidan.
Since the atrocity, Gallagher has been the most vocal campaigner seeking to bring the killers to justice. His struggle has taken him to London, Washington and Madrid. He has led the battle through the courts and made history by using a civil action to name, shame and sue the leadership of the Real IRA. Nothing, however, prepared him for yesterday's news that terror had returned to Omagh.
Expressing his disbelief that the dissidents had struck again in the town, he said: "After what happened here in August 1998, it is simply unbelievable that these people would strike here again. I am extremely angry at that, and extremely sad at the loss of this young man's life. The people who did this care nothing about the lives of people or their feelings."
But Gallagher's frustration and ire were not just directed towards whichever dissident republican group placed the device under Constable Ronan Kerr's car. He also criticised the British and Irish governments over their approach to dealing with the dissident threat. He challenged the nationalist community to take more steps to ostracise and isolate the anti-ceasefire organisations.
"After all that we've done, the governments are still not taking these people seriously. How many other people are going to be murdered before the Catholic community, from which these people come, and the supposedly best intelligence agency in the world [MI5], take these people on and resolve this?"
When Gallagher lost his son, Kerr was just starting secondary school. A pupil at Omagh Christian Brothers school, the Catholic police officer had only recently graduated from the PSNI's training college when he became a target for the terror group.
Joe Byrne, a councillor from Omagh, has himself risked the wrath of the anti-ceasefire republicans for joining the Northern Ireland Policing Board. Byrne pointed out that the young officer had lost his life within 200 metres of a stadium that is a source of tremendous pride throughout the county of Tyrone. "The attack happened very close to Healy Park, which is home to the Tyrone County Gaelic football club," he said, referring to one of Ireland's most successful GAA teams in recent years.
Byrne said that hundreds of people must have passed the car, with the bomb attached beneath, just an hour before it detonated. "The Omagh mini-marathon was held in the town on Saturday and part of the route went past Highfield Close. That means the people taking part in the fun run had ran past that poor young policeman's car. What a contrast!"
Like Gallagher, Byrne recalled the chaos, mayhem and destruction that the Real IRA wrought upon Omagh in 1998. As the dead of that atrocity were buried in places as far away as Co Donegal and Madrid, politicians such as Tony Blair, Bertie Ahern and Bill Clinton vowed that never again would terrorists shake Northern Ireland to its foundations with such atrocities.
On that day, the lives of a rural town were shattered with Omagh resembling a battlefield. The fronts of shops, cafes and pubs were blasted open by the force of the explosion. Victims were carried on pub tables into buses to transport them to the small hospital at the edge of the town.
The car park of that hospital later became a makeshift heliport as British army helicopters moved the more serious casualties to hospitals in Belfast. The town's leisure centre later became a grim "clearing house" of information for families checking if their loved ones had been killed or injured.
No one imagined that normal life would be disrupted again by such an outrage. But the sight of families, some carrying suitcases stuffed with clothes, some of them walking with small children, being evacuated from homes beside where Kerr had died resurrected painful memories of the worst massacre of the Troubles.
Kerr's murder occurred less than two weeks after the PSNI announced that it had abandoned its policy of positive discrimination in favour of Catholic recruits. The 50:50 recruitment drive first introduced by the PSNI's original chief constable, Sir Hugh Orde, had been deemed a success as it had taken Catholic membership up to more than 30%, as opposed to the days of the RUC when it was well below 10% of the force.
This was seen as an indication of normalisation of security. Yet it was also the prime motivation for the Real IRA, Óglaigh na hÉireann and Continuity IRA's continued targeting of Catholic officers.
While the overwhelming majority of nationalists and Catholics support the peace process and the policing reforms, this violent minority regard anyone joining what they deem a "British police force" as traitors.
By a bitter twist of irony the fate that met Constable Kerr yesterday was the same one meted out to one of Gallagher's brothers back in the early 1970s. He had also been a Catholic recruit to the security forces, in his case the Ulster Defence Regiment. He, too, had been labelled a traitor to the republican cause and murdered.
In the minds of those behind this latest murder, they are doing nothing more than their predecessors and sometimes estranged comrades used to do when the Provisional IRA was still in existence.