Guantánamo Bay files: Interrogators told to ignore 'al-Qaida cover stories'
Interrogation techniques taught to Guantánamo Bay staff made it extremely difficult for detainees to demonstrate their innocence, the Guantánamo files reveal.
Camp staff were told any Muslim travelling to Afghanistan after 9/11 was likely to be there "to support Osama bin Laden through direct hostilities against the US forces" and that any other stated reasons were "total fabrications".
A highly classified briefing document suggested detainees who claimed to be in Afghanistan for charitable or educational reasons had been coached by terrorists to tell these stories. Answering questions slowly or confusingly, or challenging the interrogators, were further evidence of insurgent training.
The 778 detainees at Guantánamo Bay were regularly interrogated by US forces, often at weekly intervals for periods of months or years.
The briefing is dated 4 August 2004 and entitled Assessment of Afghanistan Travels and Islamic Duties as they Pertain to Interrogation. It acknowledges that Muslims routinely travel the world to provide religious education and support charitable giving, but warns insurgents have been trained to use these traditions as cover.
"Travel to Afghanistan for charity reasons or to teach or study Islam," the document warns, "is a known al-Qaida/extremist cover story without credence.
"Many of the detainees have developed their cover stories around mainstream Islam and the charity and goodwill of those Muslims to lend a benign appearance to their travel to Afghanistan."
The training material, classified as Secret/No Foreign, sets out at length the central place of religious instruction and charitable giving in the Islamic faith. It notes that "many Arabs consider Afghanistan a true Islamic state, ruled by sharia [Islamic law], but with a population that is largely uneducated" – however, it says, detainees travelling to teach often only have a high school or religious education themselves.
The briefing note presents extended extracts of material on resisting interrogation allegedly obtained from a raid on an al-Qaida base in Afghanistan.
The extracts from the insurgents' manual suggest giving answers containing little evidence, speaking slowly, asking for questions to be repeated or engaging an interrogator in "irrelevant" argument.
The US briefing document appears to give detainees few ways in which to prove they are innocent. It quotes from the al-Qaida manual section headed How to Deal with the Interrogator. Detainees who appear to be everyday people, the al-Qaida manual says, must act as if they are being helpful and co-operative. "You appear to be afraid of intelligence, torture and imprisonment and act like you want to get out of jail ... You respond to all the common things they want from you and refuse when they ask you to do something undignified or humiliating.
"When he pressures you again, then you respond. This way the interrogator will think he can get something out of you by applying a little pressure. So he keeps the pressure up. When you do not give him what he wants in response to his pressure, he will think you are innocent."
For detainees "with social status and strong character" the manual says: "You can appear to be a confident man who has nothing to hide or fear, responding to [the interrogator's] normal requests but persisting in refusing the embarrassing things despite the pressure.
"You should make him feel that you are stubborn and that it will not be easy for him to get any information out of you. Thus he will give up on interrogating you."
Hardened mujahideen are advised: "You should be obstinate and refuse to respond even to ordinary things, even in the face of pressure."
Guantánamo staff were also told, on the basis of testimony of some inmates, that many Islamic NGOs working in Afghanistan were serving as cover for al-Qaida operatives – noting the director, chief medical adviser and office managers of al-Wafa were in custody at the camp – and advised that many detainees who claimed they were in Afghanistan for charitable reasons had used al-Qaida travel routes.