Bernie Ecclestone and FIA in dispute over Bahrain Grand Prix
The deadline was imposed by the FIA last month after the original race date, March 13, was abandoned due to violent civil unrest.
With the country still in the midst of a three-month state of emergency and with many governments, including the UK’s, advising against all but essential travel to the region, the situation is still very delicate.
Sectarian tensions in the island kingdom were further enflamed yesterday after a Bahrain military court sentenced four men to death over the killing of two military policemen during anti-government protests.
Three other defendants were handed life sentences at the end of a trial carried out behind closed doors. Ecclestone claimed that a decision on the race might not be taken until June.
“We need to wait a little bit to see exactly how progress is made,” Formula One’s chief executive said. “Things can change in a couple of weeks... so you don't know.
“All of a sudden everything might be peaceful in a month's time and they are happy to run the event and so we are happy to be there. I suppose we'd be safe by early June or something like that.”
Those comments initially appeared to catch the FIA off guard, although a spokesman later said he was not aware of not aware of any plans to extend Bahrain's deadline.
"As far as we are concerned a decision is still due on Sunday," he said. "Because it's a weekend it may be Monday morning that we announce the decision, but we haven't spoken to Mr Ecclestone about any delay.
"The decision will be a joint one between the FIA, [Ecclestone’s] Formula One Management and the Bahrain authorities."
Ecclestone claimed last month that FOM would not charge Bahrain its $40million fee if no race was held and his comments regarding a possible extension to the deadline will be interpreted as borne of a desire not to lose a major revenue stream.
There are also suggestions that he may be trying to rattle FIA president Jean Todt, with whom he does not get on, by challenging the governing body’s authority.
The teams have pledged to abide by whatever decision the sport’s rulers make, although there is no particular will on their part to slot Bahrain into an already congested calendar.
A date of Nov 20, the week after the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, has been mooted, although that could mean moving the season-ending Brazilian Grand Prix back by a week to Dec 4 where it would clash with the end of their football season.
Ecclestone, meanwhile, repeated his assertion that rumours linking Rupert Murdoch’s News Corporation with a buyout of Formula One were well wide of the mark. “It's media driven," Ecclestone said.
"It looks very much like someone who is trying to see if they can make (money). "All of these people that get involved with these things, they get some victims and say 'We can make this happen, I'm sure we can do this' and then all they do is keep pumping fees in."
Media analysts have recognised the logic of a takeover by News Corp with sport the cornerstone of Murdoch's pay-TV operations, but Ecclestone said that in the unlikely event Murdoch did take over he would have to make concessions. "Definitely, 100 per cent,” he said.
“If, and I think the chances are close to zero, but if Murdoch was to buy certainly he'd have to broadcast some free to air like it is now."
Intriguingly, Martin Sorrell, chief executive of the world's largest advertising group WPP and a director of Formula One, appeared to give credence to the rumours when he said he would have no problem with a takeover by News Corp.
"I see no harm whatsoever in a pay-TV company investing in or owning Formula One," said Sorrell, who has clashed with Ecclestone in the past, notably over comments the 80 year-old made regarding Adolf Hitler two years ago.
"I see no problem with that. From what I've seen, I don't think CVC [F1’s current owners] have indicated that they want to sell the business. I'm sure there would be interest because Formula One is a very strong property.
"But (I make) those comments as a WPP employee and not as a Formula One director."
Ecclestone said last month that the race could be slotted in towards the end of the season, which is due to end in Brazil on Nov. 27 after the penultimate race in Abu Dhabi, should circumstances improve.