SYRIA: Britain, France and Germany pursue EU sanctions against regime
Britain is working with European allies to impose limited sanctions on Syrian leaders in response to the ongoing government suppression of pro-democracy protesters, Foreign Secretary William Hague told Parliament on Tuesday.
“We are now working with our European partners on targeted sanctions, on asset freezes and travel bans,” Hague said in comments broadcast by the BBC. He promised further discussions with the French foreign minister during an evening meeting and with United Nations Security Council members.
"Syria is a difficult issue at the U.N. Security Council and some of the members, including the permanent members, require a good deal of convincing that the U.N. should be taking any action," Hague said.
Hague, during meetings with the Egyptian foreign minister in Cairo on Monday, had spoken of the "grave and unacceptable situation in Syria."
"What the Syrian authorities are doing is wrong, it is counter-productive and it is against the interests of stability in Syria," he said. "The international community must send a firm message to that effect."
Earlier Tuesday, French and German officials announced plans to urge the European Union to impose sanctions on Syrian leaders including President Bashar al-Assad.
"We are trying to act through the European Union," Foreign Minister Alain Juppe said in a Tuesday statement to reporters. Asked if Assad should be included among targets of sanctions, he said: "That's what France wants."
German Deputy Foreign Minister Werner Hoyer also said it was time for action.
"The Syrian government's continuing brutal actions leave the European Union no choice but to press firmly ahead with targeted sanctions against the regime," Hoyer told Reuters.
The 27-member European Union agreed Friday to impose an arms embargo on Syria and is considering added measures.
Meanwhile, the International Committee of the Red Cross on Tuesday called on Syria to lift restrictions on the aid organization's ability to access those injured during the ongoing clashes between police and anti-government protesters.