Syria: William Hague to push for sanctions on senior officials
The Foreign Secretary met Alain Juppe, his French counterpart, last night to forge an EU response to the growing repression in Syria, where more than 500 people have been killed in a seven-week uprising against President Bashar al-Assad.
"The UK is in the forefront of pressing for action by the EU. At the end of last week we secured agreement on an arms embargo," Mr Hague told the Commons.
"We are now working with our European partners on targeted sanctions on asset freezes and travel bans. I will be discussing this further with the French foreign minister."
Amid criticism Europe's response is too slow, France became the first major power on Tuesday to call for Mr Assad to be singled out for punishment as he urged the EU to include the Syria leader on its sanction list.
But consensus within the European Union remained out of reach, with a number of states, including Greece and Portugal, rejecting sanctions against the Syrian leader.
Mr Hague, as well as Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, have, in the past, sought to present Mr Assad as a reformer who would have pursued a policy of moderation if he had not been stymied by powerful hardliners in the regime.
The United States last week imposed sanctions on three Syrian officials, including the president's younger brother Maher, but took no action against Mr Assad himself.
Syrian opposition activists say they are mystified by the West's soft approach to Mr Assad, pointing out that the hardliners he is allegedly hostage to were all appointed by the president.
Meanwhile, Mr Assad's henchmen stepped up their efforts to crush against his rule by arresting hundreds more demonstrators on Tuesday.
More than 1,000 people have been seized from their homes in house-to-house raids since Saturday, according to rights groups, and many have disappeared without trace. Many of those detained are writers and intellectuals and their arrests seem to signal a strategy of depriving the protests of their leadership.
Despite the latest evidence of the government's determination to take retribution on a massive scale, opposition activists remained unbowed and called on their supporters occupy major public places for 24-hour sit-ins.
The change in strategy by the opposition appeared to be an attempt to mimic the successful round-the-clock demonstrations in Cairo's Tahrir Square and elsewhere that forced out Hosni Mubarak, the former Egyptian president.
But Syria's security forces have proved much more ruthless than their Egyptian counterparts and they have largely taken control of town centres where earlier rallies took place.
British efforts to win a United Nations Security Council resolution condemning Syria stalled last week following objections from Russia and China, which insist that such action represents unwarranted interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign state.