Shoe hurled towards Omar at I-Day function, 15 cops suspended
A policeman hurled a shoe towards Chief Minister Omar Abdullah when he was taking salute at the official Independence Day function at Bakshi Stadium in Srinagar. The policeman was sitting in the VIP gallery behind the Chief Minister.
Police say that the policeman had been suspended earlier and a criminal case is pending against him but fail to answer how a suspended policeman managed to reach into the VIP gallery.
Eyewitnesses say that when Chief Minister Omar Abdullah was taking salute after unfurling the Tri-colour, a policeman sitting in the VIP gallery behind Abdullah hurled his shoe towards him. The shoe, however, missed the target and fell on the ground. The policeman also waved a black flag and raised pro-freedom slogans.
The policeman, who hurled show on Abdullah, has been identified as Abdul Ahad Jan of North Kashmir's Bandipore town. He was whisked away by the security guards immediately.
Police says that Jan was suspended as a criminal case is pending against him but they are unable to answer that how Jan managed to enter the Bakshi stadium and get a set in the VIP enclosure. There is strict scrutiny of all the people, who enter the Bakshi stadium and people with valid passes only are allowed inside the VIP enclosures.
Fifteen policemen including four officers were suspended by the Jammu and Kashmir Government in connection with a shoe being hurled at Chief Minister Omar Abdullah by a suspended head constable today at the Independence Day function.
Official sources said the policemen four of whom who were of sub-inspector rank faced the action pending an inquiry for lax security arrangements which enabled the constable Abdul Ahad Jahan to enter the highly-secured Bakshi Stadium.
Jahan, who was in the VIP enclosure behind the rows where Omar was taking salute from marching contingents after unfurling the national flag, was overpowered by security men and has been arrested.
Please read our before posting comments
indianexpress.comindianexpress.com TERMS OF USE: The views expressed in comments published on indianexpress.com are those of the comment writer's alone. They do not represent the views or opinions of The Indian Express Group or its staff. Comments are automatically posted live; however, indianexpress.com reserves the right to take it down at any time. We also reserve the right not to publish comments that are abusive, obscene, inflammatory, derogatory or defamatory.