Source: Gadhafi facing possible arrest warrant from court
Tripoli, Libya (CNN) -- Moammar Gadhafi is among three Libyans facing arrest warrants from the International Criminal Court for alleged crimes against humanity, an official with direct knowledge of the case told CNN Saturday.
The court's Chief Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo, who said in early March that he planned to investigate the embattled Libyan leader, will announce Monday that he's seeking the arrest warrants.
This was the first time the court investigated allegations as a conflict unfolded. The allegations include security forces killing unarmed protesters, forced displacement, illegal detentions and airstrikes on civilians.
Investigators looked at the most serious accusations in Libya since February 15, Moreno-Ocampo said, when demonstrations against Gadhafi ramped up. Since then, war has erupted in Libya as the strongman has tried to stay firm on his grip on power.
Moreno-Campo has to present all his evidence to a panel of judges before the court in The Hague, Netherlands, can decide whether to issue arrest warrants, which can take time.
In the rebel stronghold of Benghazi, hundreds of protesters marched in the streets Saturday demanding justice be meted out against Gadhafi, his family and senior officials for alleged crimes they committed against humanity.
"We want to pressure the International Criminal Court (ICC) to arrest Gadhafi," Najla Hakim, an event organizer with Libya's February 17th Youth group, told CNN.
"We want Gadhafi to be arrested and then possibly executed," said Noha Salem, a protester who marched along Amr ibn Alas street near the old section of Benghazi.
"All Libyans have been affected by those crimes, even little kids," she added. "He has been committing atrocities since 1969, not just since the start of this revolution."
Saturday's march started in the historic Omar al-Mokhtar square in Libya's second biggest city. Protesters chanted "Gadhafi, you have to go!" and "Libyans, lift your heads up high with pride."
The International Criminal Court's actions come after speculation this week about whether the combative Gadhafi had been injured in NATO airtstrikes on his compound. However, the embattled leader's voice was heard on Libyan state-run television Friday in an attempt to assure his people that he is alive and in a place where "you cannot kill me."
The audio message was broadcast several times over the course of the day and expressed gratitude to people around the world who were concerned for his safety.
"Tell the crusader cowards that I live in a place you cannot reach me," Gadhafi said.
Meanwhile, United Nations envoy for Libya Abdul Ilah al-Khatib was expected to visit Tripoli on Sunday to negotiate a ceasefire between Gadhafi's forces and rebel fighters.
It's unclear whether or how the International Criminal Court's actions would affect any negotiations.
A spokesman for the Transitional National Council declined to comment on the ICC action, noting that it has not yet been officially announced.
As the war rages with little evidence of a decisive victory for either side, rebel leaders have been trying to drum up international support, dispatching top leaders of the Transitional National Council to Europe and Washington.
Mahmoud Jibril, the top representative of the council, met with French President Nicholas Sarkozy and Foreign Minister Francois Fillon in Paris Saturday. France has been the strongest backer for the Libyan rebels and the NATO air campaign.
Jibril had tried to secure formal recognition for the interim council from the White House in meetings in Washington on Friday, but fell short of getting one. However, National Security Adviser Tom Donilon said the U.S. views the group "as a legitimate and credible interlocutor of the Libyan people," according to a White House statement released after the Friday meeting.
NATO continued airstrikes Saturday. A Libyan government official said NATO jets struck a military site in al-Aziziya, west of Tripoli.
CNN's Chuck Hadad, Jomana Karadsheh and Amir Ahmed contributed to this report.