Three dead as NATO planes hit Tripoli
AT least three people have been killed and 150 wounded as the Libyan capital Tripoli was rocked by a NATO-led aerial bombardment.
At least 18 loud explosions were heard in the Libyan capital early today in what appeared to be the heaviest night of bombing since NATO's campaign against the regime of Muammar Gaddafi began. Tripoli was rocked by the series of blasts, thought to have been mainly targeting Gaddafi's Bab al Aziziya compound. Plumes of black smoke were seen rising above the city and pro-government supporters loudly beeped their car horns and fired guns, shouting their support for the leader. Speaking from Tripoli, Sky News reporter Mark Stone said to have so many explosions in one night was "unheard of." NATO said in a statement that a number of the strikes hit a vehicle storage facility adjacent to Bab al Aziziya that has been used in supplying regime forces conducting attacks on civilians. A Libyan government spokesman said at least three people were killed and 150 injured. There was no independent confirmation of these figures. The bombardment came as the UK moves to deploy Apache attack helicopters to Libya, sources told Sky News. Although the fast jets currently being used in bombing raids are hitting their targets accurately, the constantly changing front lines are reportedly causing difficulties. In the besieged city of Misrata in the west and in Brega in the east, rebels are taking control of Gaddafi's equipment, making it more difficult for NATO to target ground troops. It is believed Britain will send 12 Apache helicopters to the Libyan coast, basing them on the HMS Ocean, an amphibious assault ship. French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe earlier confirmed that France was sending helicopters to Libya, which he said would fall within UN Security Council resolution 1973, that authorises the protection of civilians. French Defence Minister Gerard Longuet told reporters in Brussels: "The British, who have similar resources to us, are going to do the same thing we are." Speaking in London after talks with US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, UK Foreign Secretary William Hague declined to comment on the prospect of the use of attack helicopters. However, when answering questions about France deploying helicopters, he said: "While not commenting on any particular deployment, remember that the tactics of the Gaddafi regime have changed over the weeks of this action. "So sometimes, what we do in response, the assets we use in response, our own tactics, do also have to change." Both Mr Hague and Ms Clinton said "time is running out" for Gaddafi. "Time is not on the side of Gaddafi," said Mr Hague. "Because the economic and military and diplomatic pressure on the regime will continue to be intensified in the days and weeks ahead." Read more about Tripoli bombed, Gaddafi on the ropes at Sky News.