The second freedom flotilla sails
By Victor Kotsev TEL AVIV - The "Freedom Flotilla II", an attempt by international pro-Palestinian activists to break the naval blockade of the Gaza Strip imposed by Israel, is due to sail any time now. The name and the organizers themselves suggest that their goal is to emulate last year's bloody confrontation at sea in which nine Turkish activists were killed and dozens, including a number of Israeli soldiers, were wounded. It is possible that this time around, the confrontation (there is little doubt there will be one) will be entirely non-violent, but this outcome is far from certain. News reports say that 10 boats are due to sail from, among other places, Corsica, Greece. They will include two cargo boats with the rest being passenger ships. The undertaking has taken almost a whole year to organize - and this time, the confrontation has been raging, behind the scenes, for many months, alongside continued legal and political haggling   over the legacy of last year's violent events. Both sides have been preparing meticulously, and the maneuvers of a number of international actors - most importantly, Turkey - have left their imprint on the operation. Amid the Arab uprisings that have reshuffled the entire Middle East in a major way, the affair has already attracted a lot of controversy. It is ironic that the main paradigm of the organizers of the Free Gaza Movement is last year's debacle (which arguably did little good for anybody - see my article Nothing new for Israel all at sea, Asia Times Online, 3 June 2010) rather than, say, the 2008 expedition that managed to reach Gaza without violence and was widely perceived as a success. A number of other sea-borne attempts to break the blockade took place meanwhile, with varying outcomes. None was as deadly and controversial as the May 2010 one. It is not just the shadow of violence that contrasts the most recent flotillas to the previous runs on the blockade. The narrative of the activists has been evolving in the last couple of years. The early flotillas emphasized the need for humanitarian assistance over political messages. Now, that emphasis appears to be reversed. "The flotilla is not about aid and Palestinians do not want humanitarian aid. We yearn for, we demand liberation," one of the top organizers, Huwaida Arraf, told the Palestinian news agency Ma'an. There may well be a link between these threads - political undertakings traditionally hold a much greater potential for violence than do humanitarian ones. They also tend to provoke a harsher response from the "other" side. The main challenge of any non-violent movement - as the organizers claim to be - is to break this link between political activism and violence, and to reverse the logic of the famous 19th-century military strategy Carl von Clausewitz (who claimed that "war is the continuation of politics by other means"). So far, the Free Gaza Movement has had a very mixed record at that, despite its rhetoric. There is little doubt there will be a confrontation - the activists, despite numerous hiccups, have announced thy will sail, and the Israeli government has announced that it will intercept the vessels; on Monday, the latter gave its final approval for the operation to the military. However, it is difficult to forecast what exactly this confrontation will look like, just as it is unclear how many and which exactly activists will take part in it. The Free Gaza organizers were forced to scale down their plans several times in the past months. One of their main allies, the Turkish IHH charity, pulled out in the last moment, ostensibly under political pressure from the Turkish government. Arguably, Ankara decided to boycott the undertaking for a complex mixture of reasons, including the escalating tensions with Syria (which could use the flotilla to launch its own provocation against Israel, as it has done twice in as many months, in hopes of creating a distraction), a reported warming of relations between Turkey and Israel, and an alleged American offer for "major" Turkish role in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. [1] Some reports even have it that Turkey is concerned that a soon-to-come United Nations report on last year's flotilla will side with Israel and damage Ankara's credibility. [2] Whatever the truth, IHH's decision likely had an ambiguous effect on the activists' effort: on the one hand, it deprived the flotilla of its flagship, a powerful symbol, and a considerable part of its participants. The original plan was to use the Mavi Marmara, the ship where the violence occurred last year, again in order to amplify the message. The cancellation of that plan delivered a logistical blow as well, since the Mavi Marmara is considerably larger and can carry more passengers than any of the other vessels in the hands of the Free Gaza Movement. On the other hand, however, the Turkish IHH members spearheaded last year's violence, and their absence might give the activists a chance to change tactics significantly, and to rehabilitate their non-violent credentials. In particular, if the soldiers overreact, but the activists remain calm and non-violent, this would be a major symbolic victory for the latter; clearly, at least some of the participants are preparing for this scenario. [3] However, whether the non-violent activists will be able to enforce discipline among all participants, remains to be seen, and will depend on who else is on board. Reports have it that some IHH members and other provocateurs have managed to infiltrate the flotilla again. Israeli forces, moreover, have been preparing hard for the raid - and while some of those preparations suggest a possibility for overreaction, most actually point in the opposite direction. Part of Israel's less-known narrative regarding last year's naval raid is the shock of the Israeli public at images of wounded Israeli soldiers being helplessly carried away from the battle scene. The world largely saw the events through a different prism - that of armed commandos taking over vessels in international waters. Yet most Israelis regarded the raid as legitimate law enforcement action, not too different from what Israel and other countries have done in the past, and carried out with proper warnings and in accordance with international standards for such actions. They held their government accountable for not taking more precautions to protect the soldiers. This year, there is every indication that the Israeli government is taking all threats seriously. These include reports that some activists plan to attack soldiers, possibly with chemical substances such as sulfur, [4] and that Iranian agents have tried to sneak aboard the ships. [5] According to a Jerusalem Post report from early June: This time around, the navy has been preparing rigorously for the operation, enlisting all of its Flotilla 13 [Israeli naval special forces] commandos from the reserves and running different training models with various scenarios, from passive resistance - such as sit-downs - to potential gunfights and booby-trapped ships. In addition to Flotilla 13 - better known as the Shayetet - the ships will be boarded by members of the Border Police's Yasam Unit and the Prisons Service elite Masada Unit, both known for their expertise in crowd control and the use of non-lethal means to quell violent riots. The teams will be supported by snipers - whose job will be to neutralize violent protesters before the commandos board the ships - with dogs from Oketz, the Israel Defense Force's (IDF's) canine unit, and operators from Yahalom, the elite unit from the Engineering Corps. [6] News of some of these preparations - snipers and dogs - caused considerable controversy in the Israeli media, due to the uncomfortable similarity of the images they invoke to scenes from concentration camps and the Holocaust. While the comparison hardly holds on any realistic terms, the dogs in particular are almost certain to have been dropped from the final operation plans. The presence of elite crowd-control forces, on the other hand, is assuring; as subsequent inquiries into last year's events revealed, military commandos are simply not the appropriate type of force to use in circumstances requiring riot control. It seems that the Israeli government is trying hard to correct this shortcoming, and we can expect that the boarding, if one is carried out, will be conducted more professionally. It is not even certain that the boats will be boarded at sea. An alternative that has long been discussed is, once all warnings are ignored, to disable to vessels' engines and to tow them to the port of Ashdod, where they can be boarded more easily and with less danger of violence. Last year, this same scenario was also reportedly considered, but it was rejected due to the size of the lead ship, Mavi Marmara. Allegedly, disabling the engines of such a large ship would incur excessive danger that the vessel might sink, causing many casualties. This year, however, the Mavi Marmara is not sailing, and all of the vessels involved are of a smaller size. By all accounts, Israel has no interest in seeing violence erupt. The Israeli government and non-governmental organizations have been trying hard to prevent the flotilla from sailing, including but not limited to putting pressure on Turkey through various channels. Their efforts appear to be relatively successful - according to estimates, less than a half of the original vessels and participants will sail. "The Foreign Ministry is leading diplomatic efforts to delegitimize the flotilla in the eyes of the international community," Israel's Deputy Foreign Minister Daniel Ayalon told the news website Ynet. [7] Support from the United States also helped, although it did not prevent an American delegation from setting out to Greece with hopes of taking part in the expedition. The activists claim that some underhand tactics were used against them as well, including sabotage against one of the boats and back-channel pressure on Greece to halt the departure of the vessels. [8] A particularly interesting part of the campaign to delegitimize the flotilla was conducted by an independent Israeli legal organization, Shurat HaDin, which threatened to sue insurance and communications companies and other businesses providing assistance to the expedition. [9] All this suggests that Israel itself is getting better in the field of non-violent strategy, and may even be about to outpace the Free Gaza activists. Its successes on this front are part of why it is so difficult to tell who will be in the final version of the flotilla as it confronts the Israeli navy - several of the ships are still reportedly being held back in Greece, and it is unclear how that situation will be resolved. This, in a sense, presents the organizers with a dilemma - if they do not create a violent provocation, they will have to rely on their luck (an Israeli overreaction) in order to score any points. Otherwise, they will eventually end up arrested and deported from Israel, without the noise in the international media they seek. Their humanitarian cargo will be transferred to Gaza, as Israel has promised, but this is not their goal. For true followers of Mahatma Gandhi, success comes slow, sometimes over many years. If they choose to limit what they can achieve with one operation, to a strictly symbolic confrontation with Israel, and if they are able to enforce the non-violent discipline, chances are that there will be no violence. It will not be a big victory, but it will give them an opportunity to bolster their non-violent credentials, to set a new standard for their subsequent undertakings, to purge their ranks of provocateurs, and to prepare for next stand-offs. Taking this path would demonstrate that the activists are firmly persuaded in the overwhelmingly just nature of their cause. If they are right and their opponents wrong, manuals of strategic non-violence postulate, cruel repression is bound to manifest itself, if not immediately, then down the road. This, in turn, would destroy Israel's - or any opponent's - credibility and moral standing. If, however, they - or some portion of them - decide that they need to achieve results quickly, or they have any reasons to doubt their cause or the effectiveness of strictly non-violent strategy, they will actively seek a confrontation. Then it will all depend on the Israeli forces and their ability to resist the provocations without incurring unacceptable casualties. Notes 1. Report: U.S. to offer Turkey major role in Mideast talks if it stops Gaza flotilla, , Ha'aretz, 3 June 2011. 2. Israeli official: Turkey wants UN to tone down report on Gaza flotilla raid, Ha'aretz, 26 June 2011. 3. In preparation for Gaza flotilla, passengers briefed on how to face Israeli soldiers, Ha'aretz, 27 June 2011. 4. IDF: Some flotilla activists planning to kill soldiers , Jerusalem Post, 27 June 2011. 5. 'Iranian spies falsified travel documents for IHH flotilla' , Jerusalem Post, 19 June 2011. 6. How will Israel deal with the next flotilla, , Jerusalem Post, 3 June 2011. 7. Gaza flotilla losing momentum,, ynetnews.com, 27 June 2011. 8. Gaza flotilla activists: One of our ships was sabotaged, Ha'aretz, 27 June 2011. 9. Lawyers, not IDF, at forefront of battle against flotilla, Jerusalem Post, 6 June 2011. Victor Kotsev is a journalist and political analyst based in Tel Aviv. (Copyright 2011 Asia Times Online (Holdings) Ltd. All rights reserved. Please contact us about sales, syndication and republishing.) Did Egypt really open Rafah crossing? (Not) all is quiet on the Israel-Palestine front   Iran carves out an AfPak hub  European harakiri in Libya Nine war words that define our world Singapore casinos defy odds Poisoning the well of animal welfare The real face of Hizbul Tehrir Politics in China's exam system  India hedges its bets in Myanmar Red alert (24 hour to 11:59pm ET, Jun 27, 2011)