iafrica.com  Violence scars strikes
Violence and intimidation flared in the nationwide public servants' strike on Thursday, as government gave notice that it would unilaterally implement a seven percent pay hike.
Strikers in Gauteng prevented patients ? and at least one ambulance ? from entering hospitals, and threw stones at police.
In KwaZulu-Natal union members burned tyres, intimidated non-striking colleagues, and boasted that they had achieved a total shut-down of a number of health facilities.
Police used a water cannon to disperse strikers outside Johannesburg's Helen Joseph hospital, while two Hospersa members were injured when police fired rubber bullets in a confrontation at Soweto's Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital.
Five strikers were hit by rubber bullets when Johannesburg Metro Police opened fire on protesters on the M1.
However Cosatu's Gauteng provincial secretary Dumisani Dakile denied that protesters had intimidated people or prevented them from entering hospitals.
"We are not blockading anyone from entering any hospital. Even if they enter, there are no people inside the hospital," he said.
Government said on Thursday it would unilaterally implement its final offer of a seven percent wage increase for public servants if it needed to. It again dismissed workers' demand for 8.6 percent, saying it simply was not affordable.
"We urge the unions to change their position... otherwise government will be left with no choice but to implement the offer," said Dumisani Nkwamba, spokesman for the ministry for public service and administration.
He said the department had signed the offer, which would remain on the table for 21 days before the state implemented it, regardless of unions' response.
Government spokesperson Themba Maseko told a post-Cabinet briefing that "we are reaching a stage where the offer will be implemented despite the concerns or the happiness by the unions."
He said the state's coffers could not fund a bigger wage hike than the offer of a seven percent annual increase and R700 a month housing allowance rejected by unions.
"The days of spending money as though it is unlimited are essentially over," Maseko said.
"The offer is already way above the inflation rate of 4.5 percent."
He warned that high wage increases would push up inflation, potentially triggering more job losses and placing a crippling debt burden on future generations.
He said Cabinet condemned unreservedly the violence, intimidation and acts, bordering on thuggery and criminality, that had characterised the strike in parts of the country.
President Jacob Zuma told the SABC that government had the right to fire striking employees, and condemned threats of violence against non-striking workers.
He said it was "in the law" that the government could fire workers engaged in a prolonged strike.
You can't sit for a year - Zuma
"If you declare a strike in that manner... you can't sit for a year without the kids going to school," he told the broadcaster.
Military doctors, nurses, specialists and soldiers had been sent to perform duties at strike-hit hospitals in KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng after a call for help by the health minister.
Soldiers had also been sent to provide protection at the hospitals.
Defence spokesperson Ndivhuwo Wa Ha Mabaya said the defence ministry received a call for help in KwaZulu-Natal at 2am on Thursday and "in the speed of lightning moved some of our doctors from military hospitals to those hospitals".
The national education department said it had received reports of several incidents of assault, damage to property and intimidation at schools.
Spokesperson Granville Whittle said from the partial information received from provinces, it was established around 110 000 teachers were taking part in the strike.
The SA Democratic Teachers Union said the first day of the strike, on Wednesday, had been a "resounding success" as more than 90 percent of its members heeded the strike call.
In the Western Cape, where less than five percent of schools were closed on Thursday, unions vowed to "shut down the entire public service" in the province on Friday.
However they said provision would be made for essential services.
The government has offered public servants a seven percent salary hike and a R700 housing allowance: unions demand 8.6 percent and R1000.