At least 6 dead in Yemen protests
TEL AVIV (MarketWatch) – Half a dozen or more people were killed in Yemen on Sunday as protesters against the regime of President Ali Abdullah Saleh clashed with government forces, according to media reports
The Arab League was scheduled to meet on Sunday and could suspend Syria from membership to pressure the government to end its crackdown on the protests there, reports said.
The United Nations says as many as 3,000 people have been killed in protests against the rule of Syrian President Bashar Assad.
In Yemen on Sunday, tens of thousands of people demanded that Saleh step down. The demonstration followed the deaths of at least 18 people and injuries to many on Saturday when security forces fired on a protest in the capital, Sana’a.
Bloomberg News also reported that an attack on a gas pipeline prompted Yemen LNG, a producer of liquefied natural gas, to halt production on Saturday. Such attacks this year have disrupted exports and left Yemenis short of gas as well, the news service reported.
The protests in poverty-stricken Yemen began in January, not long after demonstrations against entrenched governments began sweeping through the Arab world. Egypt and Tunisia deposed their leaders, and citizens of a number of other states are demanding similar changes.
Saleh, who’s been in office for 33 years, has said a number of times that he was prepared to step down but he has not done so. He was the target of an assassination attempt in June and spent several weeks in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, for treatment.
The emergency meeting of the foreign ministers of the Arab League members was set for Cairo to address the Syrian situation, reports said.
The protests in Syria started several months ago and demand that Assad leave. He succeeded his father, Hafez Assad, who died in 2000 after nearly 30 years in power.
Several Gulf countries called the meeting. Saudi Arabia and other neighbors have withdrawn their ambassadors from Syria to protest the government’s crackdown, media reports say.
Israel late Saturday released a list of 477 prisoners that it will release immediately in exchange for Gilad Schalit, a soldier that the Islamic extremist group Hamas kidnapped more than five years ago.
The exchange, which is set for Tuesday, will be followed in a second stage by the release of 550 additional prisoners. The prisoners to be released are responsible for killing hundreds of Israelis in terror attacks, reports say.
The swap of the soldier for the prisoners has generated a sharp debate in Israel over the question of whether it would encourage terrorist groups to conduct similar kidnappings.
Leaders of Hamas, classified as a terrorist group by the U.S., the European Union and Israel, have said that the swap will encourage the group to kidnap more soldiers.
Families of the victims of terror attacks are planning to challenge the exchange in court, reports say.