At least 17 killed in Kabul suicide bomb attack
Five troops and eight civilians were killed in the attack, NATO's International Security Assistance Force said. Afghan officials said four Afghans, including two students, were also killed.
Among the dead was Master Corporal Byron Greff, a Canadian, according to the Canadian Expeditionary Force Command. It was not immediately clear whether he was included in the ISAF-provided figure.
The U.S. official emphasized details are continuing to unfold. A heavily damaged vehicle was believed to be an armored bus that was carrying U.S. troops from one base to another. A senior NATO official identified it as a custom-built, heavily armored Rhino.
The attack caused a "number" of NATO and local Afghan casualties, ISAF said in a statement. Four Afghans, including two students, were also killed, said Hashmat Stanikzai, spokesman for Kabul's police chief.
Afghan President Hamid Karzai offered his sympathies to the families of the victims in a statement and said the cowardly character of the attack demonstrates "the very evil and heinous nature of the enemy."
The U.S. Embassy in Kabul expressed condolences to families and said it will continue the victims' "dedicated work on behalf of peace in this country and region."
"It's a shock. It makes you mad. It makes me angry," said U.S. Ambassador Ryan Crocker. "We are not going to let these guys win."
A gunman wearing an Afghan army uniform turned his weapon on coalition forces during training, killing three and wounding several others, ISAF said. The shooter was killed in the incident in southern Afghanistan.
The coalition did not provide any other details about the shooting, and did not disclose the nationalities of those killed.
She tried to enter the National Directorate of Security and was shot at, but she still managed to detonate herself, said Sabour Alayar, deputy police chief of Kunar province.
Two officers and two civilians were wounded, he said, adding that the female suicide bomber was about 25 years old.
"I am both saddened and outraged by the attacks that took place today against Coalition forces and the people of Afghanistan," Allen said in a statement. "The enemies of peace are not martyrs, but murderers. To hide the fact that they are losing territory, support, and the will to fight, our common enemy continues to employ suicide attackers to kill innocent Afghan fathers, mothers, sons and daughters, as well as the Coalition forces who have volunteered to protect them."
Nearly 2,800 troops from the United States and its partners have died during the 10 years of war, according to a CNN count.