After Damascus attack, Syria vows to strike with 'iron fist'
The Damascus suicide bombing, the second such strike in the capital in two weeks, took place in the al-Midan quarter of the city. Casualties included mostly civilians and some law enforcement personnel, the Syrian Arab News Agency said. At least 26 people died and at least 63 people were injured, SANA said.
"The FSA does not conduct operations of that kind that may kill civilians, and we are in direct contact with Col. Riad al-Asaad, head of FSA, before executing any attack.  We have confirmed information that the intelligence is funding and has formed units that perform terrorist operations under names of Islamic extremist groups and issue statements on the Internet, so that the government proves to the West that Islamic extremists are a threat and may take over if the regime is toppled."
"The SNC had previously warned that the regime was planning to carry out bombing attacks in several areas in Syria. Today's bombings, in the area that has experienced the largest of the anti-regime demonstrations, clearly bear the regime's fingerprints," the group said in a statement.
One activist told CNN that the government was looking for an excuse to block off central Damascus as protesters planned to converge on the area. Abu Yassir, a pseudonym for a 22-year-old from the neighborhood, told CNN he was at home when he heard the blast erupt a couple of streets away. He didn't immediately leave the house to see what had happened because security forces were blocking the area.
Another witness from al-Midan, an activist who goes by the pseudonym Mar, described a chaotic scene after hearing the blast and said people demonstrated en masse throughout the neighborhood. He said security forces made arrests and shot and wounded people. Mar said pro-government thugs armed with knives and small swords chased protesters.
The LCC reported massive outpourings of protesters in Aleppo and a huge deployment of security forces in other parts of the country. At least 35 people were killed in those demonstrations, the LCC said: 14 in the Damascus suburbs, nine in Hama province, eight in Homs province, three in Idlib province, and one in Daraa province.
According to an activist from Rastan, the three soldiers were at a checkpoint when they attempted to run away and join the Free Syrian Army in the area. As soon as they started running away, they were shot and killed, and their bodies were taken by the Syrian army, the activist said.
Hamado, who is in charge of Free Syrian Army operations in the coastal city of Latakia, said the regime is detaining protesters in cargo containers, loading them on ships and transferring them to security headquarters. He said the regime has been detaining women and blackmailing men by saying if they do not turn themselves in the women will be raped. He charged that the crackdown in Latakia is being led by Hafez Munzer al-Assad, the son of the president's first cousin.
Estimates of the death toll have ranged from more than 5,000 to more than 6,000 during the months-long protests and crackdown. Activists blame the killings on the government, but al-Assad's regime says it is putting down armed terrorists, whom it blames for the bloodshed.