25 killed in northern Nigeria as sectarian violence surges
An Islamic militant group in northern Nigeria has claimed responsibility for attacks that killed at least 25 people in a rash of violenceagainst the country's minority Christians, officials said, after it issued an earlier ultimatum that gave Christians three days to leave the area.
Furious Nigerians have already taken to the streets this week, staging "Occupy Nigeria" protests and mass demonstrations across the country, and there have been calls from some quarters for the president to be impeached.
Nigeria, an oil-rich nation of about 167 million people, is regularly voted among the most corrupt countries in the world, and citizens complain that the money saved by ending the fuel subsidy is highly likely to be siphoned off by a few and salted away into offshore accounts.
The government has said the money will be used to fund infrastructure projects, such as building refineries so Nigeria can produce its own gasoline rather than having to import it.
Elizabeth Donnelly, with the Africa Programme at London-based think tank Chatham House, told CNN the two issues together -- the sectarian violence and the fuel subsidy protests -- present the biggest challenge yet for Jonathan, who was elected president last year after taking the reins in 2010 when the former president died.
Although the government struck a blow against Boko Haram in 2009 with the capture of its leader, Mohammed Yusuf, it has since become more of a "franchise," or umbrella organization, for the actions of individual groups, making it harder to manage the problem, Donnelly said.
"We can trace these sorts of attacks to issues of underdevelopment, poverty, lack of resources and so on. The fact that it's framed in religious language is worrying," she said, particularly given the sectarian violence that has broken out in Nigeria in recent years.
The country's leadership needs to rise above politics and use the kind of language that will bridge the growing gap between different parts of Nigerian society, she said, rather than just treating the problem as a security issue.
That skepticism has grown since Jonathan came to power, Donnelly said, in part because of his lack of governing experience. The fact that he is southern also plays into tensions between the mainly Muslim north and predominantly Christian and animist south.
"It's a very challenging time for Nigeria, and for Goodluck Jonathan, it's a very interesting moment. It could be when he and his team really prove themselves -- or where everybody's suspicions about his lack of ability could be proved right," she said.
Emira Woods, co-director of Foreign Policy In Focus at the Institute for Policy Studies, agrees that economic discontent is at the heart of the unrest, in a country where many live on less than $2 a day and are less well-off than their grandparents.
"It's people who are fed up, the have-nots seeing the haves continue to do well at their expense," she told CNN from Washington.
"The core issue is not Boko Haram, and Christians versus Muslims, it's economic inequality -- and unless and until the government is able to address that, they will continue to have these tensions increase."