U.S. considers closing its embassy in Syria as protests persist
"While no decision has been made, we have serious concerns about the deteriorating security situation in Damascus, including the recent spate of car bombs, and about the safety and security of embassy personnel," it said in a written statement.
"We have requested that the government of Syria take additional security measures to protect our embassy, and the Syrian government is considering that request. We have also advised the Syrian government that unless concrete steps are taken in the coming days we may have no choice but to close the mission," the State Department said.
The U.S. Embassy in Damascus has only a handful of people working with Ambassador Robert Ford. Most of the staff were evacuated earlier in the year, and the diplomatic team was further reduced last week.
In October, the United States pulled Ford after he was attacked by what a U.S. official described as an "armed mob" in Damascus. About 100 pro-government protesters tried to storm a meeting, not in the embassy, between Ford and opposition leader Hassan Abdul Azim, trapping Ford and others for more than an hour. Later, his convoy was attacked.
Ford, who has been outspoken against the Syrian government's use of violence against protesters, is seen by Syrian government supporters as an activist more than a diplomat. He returned to Syria in December.
"They have taken our concerns seriously and are engaged," the official said. "They have taken some steps, but at this point they are not sufficient to address what we see is a very real threat against the embassy buildings."
For more than 10 months, Syria has been in the throes of an anti-government public uprising and a brutal security crackdown against protesters. The United Nations last month estimated well over 5,000 deaths since mid-March. Opposition groups estimate more than 6,000 people have died.
The purpose of its month-long fact-finding mission was to see if the government was adhering to an agreement to end the violence. The mission was scheduled to end Thursday but the League was negotiating an extension.
"The Arab League should make its monitors' report public to address increasing concerns that its monitoring mission is being manipulated by the Syrian authorities," Sarah Leah Whitson, Middle East director at Human Rights Watch said on Friday. "Only a transparent assessment of the monitoring mission can determine whether the monitors should stay in the country."
"The criteria for selecting the monitors have not been made available nor has any information about their monitoring experience. The mission has relied on the Syrian government for security and to transport monitors around the country, compromising the mission's ability to access victims and witnesses safely. The mission's interim report on January 8 has not been made public, and the Arab League has not shared information about the mission's methodology," the group said.
Citing local activists, it says 506 civilians have been killed by security forces since the Arab League monitors started the mission. It said "attacks against security forces have also intensified in certain parts of the country."
"The report must document the atrocities committed by the Syrian regime against civilians in all cities and towns," the group said in a statement. "Ongoing human rights violations include direct orders by the regime to kill civilians using snipers, and executions by firing squad, in public squares. The SNC delegation will stress that the report must contain clear language indicating genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes committed by the regime against unarmed civilians."
While Western powers have imposed sanctions on Syria during the government crackdown, opposition by Russia and China has kept the U.N. Security Council from following suit.
Syria said U.S. and EU sanctions on its oil sector have led to a $2 billion loss, the state-run Syrian Arab News Agency said, citing the country's oil minister. The government blames oil and gas pipeline sabotage on the terrorist groups.