World seeks next step on Syria as deaths mount
Most of the deaths occurred in Homs, where an opposition activist known as "Omar Shakir" said more than 60 people had been killed Monday. Government troops have pounded the area since last week in the latest attempt to crush an 11-month-old popular uprising.
"More than 500 shells have come down on us since the morning, targeting homes, protest places and mosques," he said. Much of the bombardment targeted the neighborhood of Baba Amr, where rockets, tank fire and mortars were hitting "from all sides."
A mosque was hit by more than 10 shells, destroying a large part of it as well as surrounding homes, he said. He some of the wounded are likely to die due to lack of proper care, while some survivors have suffered crippling or disfiguring injuries.
"There is no bread, no medication and no nutritional supplies, and as we mentioned in our last report, a field hospital was targeted and we lost a number of our medical crew," he said. "There is no form of communication inside the area, and any moving thing is targeted by snipers surrounding the area."
"I want really to thank the entire world for watching us so silently," he said. "We are getting killed every moment. We are not able even just to get some basic medicine to injured people. Children are really hungry. I swear, children are hungry. No power, no fuel. It's too cold."
The London-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said 98 civilians were killed nationwide, most of them in Homs. Another 13 died in and around Idlib, while 15 were killed in the Damascus area and one person died in the village of Mari, near Aleppo.
"The army can't be everywhere at the same time, so then it has to withdraw, and then the armed opposition comes up somewhere else," he said. "This is wearing down Assad's forces and is slowly putting the Syrian conflict out of control."
Western powers, meanwhile, stepped up their criticism of the al-Assad regime and of its supporters in the Security Council. Speaking to the House of Commons on Monday, British Foreign Secretary William Hague said Moscow and Beijing were backing "a doomed regime as well as a murdering regime."
"Such vetoes are a betrayal of the Syrian people," he added. "In deploying them, they have let down the Arab League; they have increased the likelihood of what they wish to avoid in Syria -- civil war -- and they have placed themselves on the wrong side of Arab and international opinion."
Chinese and Russian representatives said they want the violence to end and to see dialogue among Syria's opposition factions. On his way to Damascus for talks with al-Assad, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said Western states "are trying to obscure the developments with hysterical statements on Russia's veto of the Syria resolution," according to comments carried on the Foreign Ministry's Twitter page.
"The UNSC's attempt to force the Syrian regime to stop the violence without the same for the armed groups shows support for one side," Lavrov said. He added that it was "disrespectful" for council members to bring the resolution up for a vote "despite our request to wait for Russia's report after its visit to Damascus."
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's office issued a statement saying he "is appalled" by the violence. "The lack of agreement in the Security Council gives no license to the Syrian authorities to step up attacks on the Syrian population. No government can commit such acts against its people without its legitimacy being eroded," he said.
"The secretary-general calls upon all concerned in Syria and in the international community to redouble efforts aimed at stopping the violence and seeking an inclusive Syrian-led political process, in accordance with international law, that respects the will and legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to a democratic and pluralistic political system."
"We are following the developments anxiously and extremely disturbed about the situation on the ground in Syria, especially in Homs and the suburbs of Damascus, in the escalation of the military operation and the usage of heavy artillery against the civilians," Elaraby said in a statement.
"China does not accept the accusation. We are not selfish in our decision," the ministry said. "China does not shelter anyone. We uphold justice and take a responsible attitude. We want the Syrian people to be free from the scourge of conflict and warfare."