4 killed in Afghanistan amid outrage over Quran burning
Hundreds of protesters took to the streets Saturday across Afghanistan, the fifth day of demonstrations over the burning of Qurans at a U.S. base, officials said.
Four civilians were killed and 50 injured amid protests near the United Nations office in Kunduz, said Saad Mokhtar, head of the city's health department. Twelve police officers were among the wounded.
The U.N.'s Afghan mission said all its staff in Kunduz and throughout the country are "unhurt." It denounced the attack on its compound, regretted the casualties and thanked Afghan police for their timely response to the violent protests.
"At the same time, we call upon those who would wish to express their legitimate religious sentiments to reject calls to violence, to exercise self-restraint and to avoid resorting to protests and demonstrations in order not to allow the enemies of peace to take advantage of the situation," the mission said in a statement.
A military official said the materials burned were removed from a detainee center's library because they had "extremist inscriptions" on them and there was "an appearance that these documents were being used to facilitate extremist communications."
A Taliban spokesman said the attack, for which the group claimed responsibility, was in response to the recent burnings. NATO and Afghan officials are investigating and have not confirmed involvement by the Islamist militant group.
The commander of U.S. forces in Afghanistan, Gen. John Allen, addressed the Quran burning issue during a visit to a military base where two U.S. soldiers were killed Thursday by a man wearing an Afghan National Army uniform. A protest over the burning of Qurans was taking place outside the base at the time of the killings.
Allen called on troops to "show the Afghan people that as bad as that act was at Bagram, it was unintentional, and Americans and ISAF soldiers do not stand for this. We stand for something greater than that."
Police and soldiers intervened, with some injured in the confrontation, said Abdul Rahman Sarjang, a local police chief. Two civilians and an officer were in critical condition, Sarjang said.
At least eight people were killed and 27 wounded in protests Friday, mostly in Herat province, according to Sediq Sediqqi, spokesman for the interior ministry.
The burning at Bagram was not the first time that damaging Qurans -- or even the threat to do so -- has provoked angry Muslim reaction.
Terry Jones, the pastor of a tiny evangelical church in Florida, announced plans to burn the Muslim holy book on the ninth anniversary of the September 11, 2001, attacks on the United States. He was persuaded not to do it at the time, but he made good on the threat six months later.