Syrian opposition calls for international military intervention
All sides called for an immediate end to the violence even as an opposition group said that dozens of women and children in the city of Homs had been stabbed and burned to death over the weekend.
"There is a growing understanding of the need not to talk to each other on the basis of take-it-or-leave-it, but bring the positions together and be guided not by the desire of revenge, of punishment, who is to blame and so on and so forth, but by the basic interests of the Syrian people," Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov told reporters after the Security Council met. "And this requires an immediate end of violence as the number one priority."
Still, the Russian foreign minister described a cease-fire in Syria as "an absolute must." He said he hoped weekend meetings between al-Assad and Special Joint Envoy Kofi Annan "would succeed in developing some ideas which would make it possible for us to agree on how to stop the bloodshed immediately, how to stop the fighting, irrespective of the source of the violence."
"The United States believes in the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all member states, but we do not believe that sovereignty offers a grant of immunity when governments massacre their own people," U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told reporters. She described as "cynical" the Syrian army's "fresh assault on Idlib and continuing its aggression in Hama, Homs and Rastan," even as al-Assad was meeting with Annan in Damascus.
In an acknowledgment that Russia and China last month vetoed a Security Council resolution that would have condemned al-Assad and called on him to step aside, Clinton called on "all nations, even those who have previously blocked our efforts," to speak with one voice in calling for the killings of civilians to end and a transition to democracy to begin.
Valerie Amos, U.N. humanitarian chief, described as "clear deadlock" the situation on Syria at the world body. "It's not an ideal situation," she told CNN. "But we have to keep working on this, we have to keep trying, because there are people who need help."
Asked whether Annan had left Damascus empty-handed, British Foreign Secretary William Hague said it was "far too early" to draw that conclusion. "He has said that he has made proposals. Clearly, all concerned will be taking some time, but I hope not much time, to react to those proposals," he said.
"Stores should remain closed; work, universities, and schools should not be attended; and streets should be blocked," the group said in a statement. "We urge everyone to participate, even if only symbolically, by wearing black ribbons, raising black flags, or wearing black."
The Syrian Network for Human Rights described a scene of brutality, saying the men were separated from the women and children and "systematically tortured" for hours. Some were sprayed with gasoline and set afire, while others were shot, the network said.
But the majority of reports from inside Syria indicate the regime is slaughtering civilians to wipe out dissidents seeking al-Assad's ouster. The al-Assad family has ruled Syria for more than four decades.
The United Nations says more than 7,500 have died in the past year, and at least one activist group says more than 9,000 people have been killed.
funeral was held Monday for American Marie Colvin funeral was held Monday for American Marie Colvin , one of several journalists killed in Homs, on Long Island, New York. She and French photographer Remi Ochlik were killed February 22 in a shelling attack on a makeshift media center in the neighborhood of Baba Amr.