Annual Ovarian Cancer Blood Test May Save Lives
THURSDAY, Dec. 17, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- An annual blood test to screen postmenopausal women for ovarian cancer could reduce deaths from this killer by 20 percent, a large British trial suggests.
Currently, with no reliable screening method, most ovarian cancer is diagnosed at an advanced stage, and 60 percent of patients die within five years, the study authors explained.
Using newly developed software to analyze blood test results, the researchers hope routine testing can find cancer early when it's curable and significantly reduce deaths.
"This is an important step forward in managing a disease that has a very poor prognosis," said lead researcher Dr. Ian Jacobs, a professor at University College London.
"This is the first time that there has been evidence of a reduction in deaths from ovarian cancer through early detection by screening," he said. "It opens up the prospect that, in due course, a national screening program for ovarian cancer could become available alongside breast cancer and cervical cancer screening."
The study findings were published online Dec. 17 in The Lancet.
The trial enrolled more than 200,000 women aged 50 to 74 between 2001 and 2005. The women were randomly selected to have no screening (50 percent of the women); annual screening of a blood marker (CA125) plus ultrasound (25 percent of the study group); or ultrasound alone (the remaining 25 percent). Screening ended in December 2011.
Instead of a being a one-time blood test, this new approach analyzes a woman's CA125 pattern over time to detect any significant increase.
Over a follow-up of roughly 11 years, 630 women who had no screening were diagnosed with ovarian cancer, as were 338 women screened with the blood test and 314 screened with ultrasound alone.
At first glance, screening appeared to have no significant life-saving effect. But when the researchers excluded women who had undiagnosed ovarian cancer when they entered the study, an average reduction in deaths of 20 percent appeared.
According to Jacobs, 641 women would have to be screened to prevent one death from ovarian cancer.