Draft Recommendation Statement: Aspirin Use to Prevent Cardiovascular Disease and Colorectal Cancer: Preventive Medication
CVD and cancer are the leading causes of death in adults in the United States. CVD, including heart attack and stroke, is responsible for 30% of all deaths in the United States. More than 26 million adults have been diagnosed and are living with heart disease. Nearly 8 million adults have a history of MI and 6 million have a history of stroke. The costs of caring for persons with CVD were estimated at $315 billion in 2010.
Cancer accounts for one in four deaths in the United States. Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer in the United States. In 2014, there were an estimated 137,000 new cases and 50,000 deaths due to colorectal cancer.
The USPSTF commissioned three systematic evidence reviews and a decision analysis model to develop its recommendation on aspirin use to prevent CVD and cancer. The systematic review on aspirin use to prevent CVD is an update of the 2009 USPSTF review. The systematic review on aspirin use to prevent colorectal cancer is an update of the 2007 USPSTF review. The systematic review on aspirin use to prevent cancer other than colorectal cancer is new. A review of potential harms was incorporated across all three systematic reviews. The primary studies of interest for all reviews focused on primary prevention of CVD. Findings from the three coordinated systematic reviews were integral to determining the parameters and assumptions used in the decision analysis model, which was used to estimate net benefit for the recommendation.
The USPSTF used a calculator derived from the 2013 ACC/AHA pooled cohort equations to estimate CVD risk thresholds. The USPSTF selected this tool because of its broader focus on CVD outcomes (combining both cerebrovascular and cardiovascular outcomes), its external validation in various U.S. populations, and its reasonable performance in studies. The calculator predicts 10-year risk of a first hard atherosclerotic CVD event, defined as nonfatal MI, CHD death, and fatal or nonfatal stroke. It was derived from participants in four community-based cohort studies sponsored by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. The tool accounts for a variety of CVD outcomes, in contrast to many earlier tools that report only CHD outcomes. In addition, the cohorts from which it was derived allowed the development of sex- and race-specific equations.
The USPSTF focused its review of the evidence on studies of the primary prevention of CVD. It considered 11 randomized, controlled trials (RCTs) that evaluated the benefits of aspirin for the primary prevention of cardiovascular events. Four of these studies were published since the last USPSTF review in 2009. The trials had a total of 118,445 participants; three were conducted exclusively in men and one exclusively in women. Participants’ mean ages ranged from 55 to 65 years. Eight trials used doses of aspirin of 100 mg or less daily. Duration of followup was between 3 and 10 years.
Primary prevention trials consistently demonstrated effectiveness of aspirin in preventing MI and stroke. Pooled analysis of 10 trials showed a 22% reduction in MI and coronary events (relative risk [RR], 0.78 [95% confidence interval (CI), 0.71 to 0.87]). When pooled analysis was restricted to eight trials that used low-dose aspirin (≤100 mg daily), the reduction remained significant. Nonfatal strokes were also reduced when only low-dose aspirin trials were included in the analysis (RR, 0.86 [95% CI, 0.76 to 0.98]). Few fatal stroke events were reported in trials. Pooling of the 11 trials showed a nonsignificant reduction in CVD mortality (RR, 0.94 [95% CI, 0.86 to 1.03]); results were similar when analysis was restricted to studies of low-dose aspirin. Reduction in all-cause mortality was not significant in any of the trials reporting it. However, when trial results were pooled, all-cause mortality risk was reduced by 6% in participants taking aspirin (RR, 0.94 [95% CI, 0.89 to 0.99]). A sensitivity analysis of eight low-dose trials resulted in a similar relative risk (RR, 0.95 [95% CI, 0.89 to 1.01]).
Subpopulation analyses evaluated effect modification of aspirin by age, sex, and diabetes status. Analysis supports the likelihood that older age groups have greater MI benefit than younger age groups; however, the results were mixed. There was not sufficient evidence to support any sex-specific differences in CVD outcomes. This differs from the 2009 analysis, in which sex-specific outcome differences were apparent. This was likely due to the predominance of findings from the Women’s Health Study, with its relatively young and healthy study population. There were also no clear differences in outcomes based on diabetes status.
There is evidence of a potential long-term benefit on colorectal cancer mortality. Pooled data from a small selected set of primary and secondary CVD prevention trials suggest that a reduction in long-term cumulative colorectal cancer mortality is possible with aspirin use. The mortality benefit did not become apparent until 10 to 20 years after randomization. Doses in these trials ranged from 75 to 1,200 mg per day, without clear evidence of a dose-related effect. The applicability of these results to a broader CVD primary prevention trial of low-dose aspirin use only is uncertain. The USPSTF evaluated three more clearly applicable primary and secondary CVD prevention trials that reported a 40% reduction in colorectal cancer incidence with aspirin use (RR, 0.60 [95% CI, 0.47 to 0.76]) 10 to 19 years after initiation. These studies suggest that at least 5 to 10 years of aspirin use is required to achieve this reduction. A previously published individual patient data meta-analysis of four primary and secondary CVD prevention trials showed a similar but smaller reduction in colorectal cancer incidence (hazard ratio, 0.76 [95% CI, 0.63 to 0.94]).
While there is evolving evidence of aspirin’s effect on other types of cancer, it has not yet been seen in trial results. Total cancer mortality was not significantly reduced across 10 RCTs of CVD primary prevention. An analysis of six RCTs of CVD primary prevention also showed no reduction in total cancer incidence. Other published reports have demonstrated reductions in total cancer mortality and incidence, but the RCTs included in those analyses differed from those reviewed by the USPSTF (e.g., different groupings of studies, not a CVD primary prevention population, or higher doses of aspirin used).
Using aspirin for the primary prevention of CVD variably increases risk for major GI and intracranial bleeding and hemorrhagic stroke, depending on the patient’s medical history and other factors, such as concurrent medication use.
The USPSTF found only one risk prediction tool for bleeding based on a systematic review of risk estimates and incidence of upper GI bleeding and CHD with low-dose aspirin use. The tool presumes a baseline incidence rate of upper GI complications of 1 event per 1,000 person-years, and is modified for 10-year age ranges starting at age 50 years. The tool uses Framingham CHD sex-specific risk prediction equations and modifies bleeding risk with use of proton pump inhibitors or Heliobacter pylorieradication, neither of which has been tested for net benefit as part of a comprehensive prevention regimen. Two retrospective validation studies were conducted, but there are insufficient data to support its use for prospective prediction in a clinical setting.
To evaluate the risk for GI bleeding, the most common serious harm of aspirin use, the USPSTF considered seven of the CVD primary prevention trials previously discussed . These trials reported major GI bleeding events defined as GI bleeding requiring transfusion or hospitalization or leading to death. Aspirin dosages ranged from 50 to 325 mg in all but one trial. Duration of use and followup ranged from 4 to 10 years. Major GI bleeding increased by 59% in aspirin users (Peto odds ratio [OR], 1.59 [95% CI, 1.32 to 1.91]). Analyses that were restricted to trials using low-dose aspirin (≤100 mg per day) showed similar results. When all major primary and secondary CVD prevention trials were pooled (15 studies), the OR increased further to 1.65. Cohort studies reported similar bleeding risk with aspirin use.
Hemorrhagic stroke was a rare event; 15.5% of total strokes reported in the trials were hemorrhagic. Across nine CVD primary prevention trials, the rate of hemorrhagic stroke was 2.54 strokes per 1,000 person-years in aspirin users and 1.95 strokes per 1,000 person-years in nonusers. Pooled analysis of nine trials showed a significant 33% increase in hemorrhagic stroke (OR, 1.33 [95% CI, 1.03 to 1.71]). When analyses were restricted to low-dose aspirin trials, risk for hemorrhagic stroke tended to decrease (Peto OR, 1.27 [95% CI, 0.96 to 1.68]) (data unpublished).
Increased harms may result from factors that either increase bleeding risk or enhance the bleeding effect of aspirin. An adjusted individual patient data meta-analysis found that older age (per decade), male sex, and diabetes increased risk for serious bleeding. Smoking and increased blood pressure were also associated with increased major extracranial bleeding. A large cohort study of rates of hospitalization for major bleeding events also suggested older age, male sex, and diabetes had effects on increasing bleeding risk. Statin and proton pump inhibitor use may decrease the likelihood of hospitalization from a major bleeding event.
The USPSTF used a microsimulation model to estimate the magnitude of net benefit. The model incorporated findings from the three systematic reviews to inform its parameters and assumptions. Results were stratified by age decade, sex, and 10-year CVD risk. When combined with primary trial data and meta-analyses, the model provides an additional analytic basis to assess the balance of benefits and harms of aspirin use. In addition to the number of MIs and ischemic strokes prevented, the number of colorectal cancer cases prevented, and the number of serious GI bleeding events caused by aspirin, the USPSTF also considered net life-years and net quality-adjusted life-years gained (or lost) over a lifetime as a result of aspirin use (Tables 1 and 2).
Initiating aspirin use during ages 50 to 59 years and continuing its use unless contraindicated by an adverse bleeding event results in the greatest gain in net life-years (range, 21.9 to 46.3 in women and 33.3 to 60.5 in men) and net quality-adjusted life-years (range, 62.1 to 83.3 in women and 58.8 to 83.4 in men). Both CVD and bleeding risk represent a continuum of risk estimation. The USPSTF chose the 10% 10-year CVD risk threshold as the point at which the tradeoff of benefits and harms reaches an adequate level of certainty. The benefits for an individual patient may shift above or below the threshold depending on individual risk assessment.
The USPSTF determined with moderate certainty that the net benefit in life-years and quality-adjusted life-years gained from aspirin use is moderate in adults ages 50 to 59 years. Adults ages 60 to 69 years gain fewer net life-years and quality-adjusted life-years because of the increased harms from bleeding that come with older age and the reduced potential for colorectal cancer benefits (direct reduction of incidence and indirect reduction in mortality), which require at least 10 years to become apparent. The USPSTF concluded with moderate certainty that the net benefit from aspirin use is small in adults ages 60 to 69 years. In both age groups, persons with higher CVD risk will have a greater net benefit (provided their bleeding risk is not increased).
Aspirin is a NSAID. It is one of the most commonly used drugs, and is used mostly to relieve pain. Over the past 30 years, its platelet and clotting effects have become better understood. Aspirin’s anticlotting effect is useful for primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular events because it can potentially decrease the accumulation of blood clots that form due to reduced blood flow at atherosclerotic plaques, thereby reducing hypoxic damage to heart and brain tissue.
Aspirin is an irreversible cyclo-oxygenase (COX) inhibitor. The COX-1 enzyme is responsible for producing the prostaglandins that protect the gastric mucosa. Inhibition of the COX-1 enzyme leaves the mucosa susceptible to damage and GI bleeding. This negative effect increases at higher doses of aspirin.
The mechanisms for inhibition of adenoma or colorectal cancer development are not yet well-understood. COX-dependent and COX-independent pathways have been proposed. COX-dependent pathways may rely on aspirin’s anti-inflammatory properties to reduce tumorigenesis.