Scientists edit disease-causing gene mutation in human embryos
(CNN)Scientists are getting one step closer to snipping inherited genetic diseases out of human offspring using a gene-editing technique called CRISPR.
For the first time, scientists said, they corrected a gene mutation linked to inherited heart conditions in human embryos using the approach. A study demonstrating the technique was published in the journal Nature on Wednesday (PDF).
Last week, the MIT Technology Review released the first news of this scientific feat, describing the research as the first-known attempt at creating genetically modified human embryos in the United States.
However, Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte, a co-author of the study, described it as the first in the world to demonstrate gene-editing to be safe, accurate and efficient in correcting a pathogenic gene mutation in human embryos. Previous attempts by Chinese researchers were unsuccessful at achieving this without safety concerns.
"This is the first that has been demonstrated as safe and working," said Belmonte, a professor at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies' gene expression laboratory in La Jolla, California.
"All cells of the embryo were corrected," he said. "It seems to be working from these samples that we have chosen, but we need to do much more basic research with many other genes."
The study used 75 human zygotes in which the father carried a mutation on the MYBPC3 gene, Belmonte said. The eggs used to produce the zygotes did not carry that gene mutation. The researchers noted that they received informed consent from the donors of the eggs, sperm and embryos used in the study.
"So when the baby is born, all the cells do not have the mutation anymore. ... This study, it shows that we can correct the embryo and then, after the division, all the cells are corrected, so there's not what we call mosaicism," said Belmonte, who is also a member of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine's committee on human gene editing.
"The fact that it is, apparently, a new and poorly understood mechanism and it is not the now standard CRISPR 'cut and replace' method adds to the time needed for research into its safety and effectiveness," said Hank Greely, professor of law and genetics at Stanford University, who was not involved in the new study.
"First of all, there are regulations regarding use of federal funds for embryo research, so the (US National Institutes of Health) does not currently support embryo research, so that's one barrier. The other barrier is, the (US Food and Drug Administration) is prohibited from considering any clinical trials related to germline genetic modification," she said.
Still, "it is way too early to contemplate implanting the edited embryos for the purpose of actually establishing a pregnancy," said Dana Carroll, a professor of biochemistry at the University of Utah who was not involved in the new study but has used CRISPR in his own research.
"This information will help to guide ongoing research, and it demonstrates that research on early-stage human embryos will be necessary to establish safe and effective procedures in the long run," he said. "There is still a lot of work to do to understand repair processes in very early embryos and to optimize the use of the CRISPR reagents, but this study makes a valuable contribution."
The researchers wrote in their study, "PGD may be a viable option for heterozygous couples at risk of producing affected offspring. In cases when only one parent carries a heterozygous mutation, 50% of embryos should be mutant. In contrast, targeted gene correction can potentially rescue a substantial portion of mutant human embryos, thus increasing the number of embryos available for transfer."
cloning human stem cells Shoukhrat Mitalipov, director of the Oregon Health & Science University's Center for Embryonic Cell and Gene Therapy, helped lead the new study. In 2013, Mitalipov and his colleagues reported the first success in cloning human stem cells , reprogramming human skin cells back to their embryonic state. In 2007, a research team led by Mitalipov announced that they created the first cloned monkey embryo and extracted stem cells from it.
Now, when it comes to using CRISPR to correct gene mutations in embryos, Mitalipov said Tuesday, "We've done some ground work. ... There is still a long road ahead, and it's unclear at this point when we will be allowed to move on."