Zika virus: Philippines confirms first case this year as Indonesia rules out thorough testing
The Philippines has confirmed its first case of the Zika virus this year and says it is "highly likely" it has been locally transmitted, and it expects more cases after stepping up surveillance.
A 45-year-old woman who lives in Iloilo city in the central Philippines has the virus, Dr Eric Tayag, spokesman at the Health Ministry, told a media briefing.
The woman is not pregnant, he said, and was recovering at her home. It was considered "highly likely" she had contracted the virus locally as she had no history of travel to any affected country in the past two weeks, Dr Tayag said.
The Philippines reported its first case of Zika in 2012, that of a teenaged boy in Cebu island in the central Philippines. Four subsequent cases were foreigners.
A Zika outbreak is affecting large parts of Latin America and the Caribbean, with Brazil the hardest hit, but cases have been cropping up in Asia.
Singapore has reported more than 240 Zika cases since the first locally infected case was detected on August 27 and neighbouring Malaysia has reported one such case.
Singapore's said on Monday it would no longer isolate people who test positive for Zika or are suspected of carrying it.
In a statement, the Health Ministry said the presence of Aedes mosquitoes that carry the virus, as well as the fact that most people do not display symptoms, meant isolating patients already infected would have limited effect.
"As the cases of Zika in Singapore have been mild so far, confirmed cases will no longer need to be hospitalised unless medically indicated."
The Government will also pay for the cost of Zika tests for Singaporeans with symptoms of the virus, the Ministry added.
Meanwhile, an Indonesian Health Ministry official said his country could not afford to thoroughly check for a possible Zika outbreak.
The World Health Organisation lists Indonesia among Asian countries with possible endemic transmission of, or evidence of, local Zika infections, but authorities in the sprawling nation of 250 million people have yet to report any recent infections.
"At the moment we cannot go out there and test everybody or every suspected case for Zika because it is too costly," Muhamad Subuh, director general for disease prevention and control at Indonesia's Health Ministry, said.
Like many of its neighbours, Indonesia records thousands of dengue infections a year.
Indonesia is South-East Asia's biggest economy but the World Bank estimates the government spends 5.7 per cent of its gross domestic product on public health, which works out to $US99 ($131) per person per year, compared with $606 in Malaysia, the region's third largest economy.
Mr Subuh said the Ministry was actively monitoring for Zika, but experts said authorities would struggle to identify patients as few hospitals offer Zika testing, and those that did expected patients to pay more than $198 for a test, putting it out of reach of many ordinary Indonesians.