South Korea buries 1.4m pigs ALIVE in bid to eradicate foot and mouth disease
South Korea has buried 1.4million pigs alive after an outbreak of foot and mouth disease on the peninsula.
The controversial measure has been brought in after 115 cases of the disease were confirmed, originating in the city of Andong.
The country is also battling an outbreak of avian flu and recently raised its alert level to 'watch' after discovering the virus at poultry farms in four provinces.
Slaughter houses have been asked to work on holidays to boost meat supply after the mass cull saw wholesale prices of beef, pork and chicken soared by 22 per cent in the last month.
President Lee Myung-bak held an emergency cabinet meeting yesterday to discuss measures of containing the rapidly-spreading disease.
South Korea has already vaccinated 1.2million livestock against foot and mouth since November in eight of its 16 provinces.
It nows plans to expand the programme across the country, except for Jeju Island.
A statement from the agriculture ministry said: 'Today's meeting reviewed current measures and decided to strengthen preemptive measures.'
The government will import more vaccines to cover 11million livestock. Before the outbreak, South Korea only had 300,000 doses.
The cull - 10 per cent of the total number of pigs and cattle - has sparked a storm of criticism.
Joyce D’Silva, Director of Public Affairs for CIWF said: 'Compassion in World Farming is appalled that the Republic of Korea is allegedly throwing pigs into pits and burying them alive. 'This is totally contrary to international guidelines on humane culling, which the Korean government endorsed five years ago. 'We urge the Korean government to end this horrendous practice at once and to ensure that, if animals are culled, this is done humanely.'
Foot and mouth affects livestock including sheep, cows and pigs. Meat from infected animals is not harmful to humans.
The H5N1 avian influenza virus has been confirmed in 16 cases where it was suspected.
Some 470,000 poultry have been slaughtered, 0.4 per cent of the domestic stock, and commercial duck and chicken breeding farms in affected areas have been quarantined.
The outbreak was first confirmed on December 31 in ducks in the city of Cheonan and chickens in Iksan.
No human cases of the bird flu strain have been reported.
Agriculture Minister Yoo Jeong-bok as formed a national team to contain the spread of the disease. The outbreak is believed to have been brought to the peninsula by migratory birds.
Health experts fear the disease could mutate to a form that could be easily transmitted between humans.
Since 2003, the H5N1 strain of bird flu has infected around 500 people globally, killing nearly 60 per cent. Most of the deaths have been in Asia.
South Korea has said it has no plans to boost imports or cut import duties to cope with the shortage.
It imposes 40 per cent tariffs on imported beef, and around 25 per cent of tariffs on imported pork.