UN chief urges more efforts to complete Sudan’s peace implementation
January 10, 2010 (UNITED NATIONS) — UN Secretary-general Ban Ki-moon urged the Sudanese parties to exert more efforts to successfully complete the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) that ended more than two decades of civil war and where over two million people were killed.
Ban Ki-Moon’s issued his appeal on Saturday January 9 at the fifth anniversary of the CPA which was signed in 2005 between the Sudanese government and the former rebel Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) in Nairobi.
The two parties, during the past five years, have made considerable progress in the CPA implementation, Ban said. "However, the final year of the CPA will be an extremely challenging one, especially as the parties prepare for elections and the exercise of the right of self-determination for Southern Sudan," he stressed.
The UN chief pointed out that these challenges require to establish urgently the legal, political and institutional framework for the conduct in a suitable atmosphere the upcoming election, referenda and popular consultations.
"It is also important that they engage now in substantive discussions on post-referendum arrangements, regardless of the outcome of the referendum," he added.
He further urged effort to improve protection for all Sudanese through continued improvements in the areas of human rights, humanitarian recovery, rule of law and development.
The people of Sudan have witnessed the horrible consequences of war and have waited more than twenty years for the benefits of peace. If the CPA is to deliver this peace, it will require a substantially increased commitment by the parties, with the support of the international community.
Ban also said that support for the successful implementation of the CPA is one of the UN’s top priorities for this year, and that the world body will work closely with all actors to help the parties meet the final benchmarks of the peace agreement.