11 people confirmed dead, 10,000 infected in Fiji dengue fever outbreak
Fiji's Health Department has confirmed 11 people have died and over 10,000 others have been infected during an outbreak of dengue fever.
The department's launched a major campaign to get rid of possible breeding areas for mosquitoes which carry the disease.
The Health Minister Dr Neil Sharma says the outbreak involves the type-3 strain of dengue fever which has never been seen before in the country.
"The outbreak was detected in mid December, this is a dengue type-3 outbreak and this is new for Fiji," he said.
"But we know we are endemic for dengue infections periodically, every five years we tend to have a surge."
There are also fears the number of people infected may be actually closer to 15,000 with under reporting a major concern.
Dr Sharma says current testing procedures need to be strengthened.
"We had well over 10,000 already and this is probably an underestimate as the reporting system needs to be strengthened a lot more," he said.
"And of cause some patients have a higher pain threshold and remain at home for mild illnesses, they don't get tested.
"When the testing does take place in patients they miss that window where the test would be positive, so they come back negative."
As part of the Fijian Health Department's campaign people are being encouraged to report their neighbours, if they suspect them of not cleaning up their properties correctly.
Dr Sharma says communities need to work together otherwise this latest outbreak has the potential to go on for many more months to come.
"We are looking at the previous outbreaks in 1979 and we are looking at trends and patterns," he said.
"If the rainfall subsides and our active intervention advocacy programs of spraying and clearing domestic and commercial areas continues, then we hope we can stop it much earlier.
"However, if it gets delayed because of increased rainfall, stagnant water and if we don't do anything until the weather changes than we could be here in strife until July."