 White House Houses completed in 1800 Buildings of the United States government in Washington, D.C. Houses on the National Register of Historic Places in Washington, D.C. National Historic Landmarks in Washington, D.C. Presidential residences in the United States Presidential palaces Palaces in the United States Rebuilt buildings and structures in the United States Reportedly haunted locations in Washington, D.C. Federal architecture in Washington, D.C. Neoclassical architecture in Washington, D.C. Presidential museums in Washington, D.C. Historic house museums in Washington, D.C. Neoclassical palaces Buildings and structures in the United States destroyed by arson Government occupations Gubernatorial titles State government in the United States State governors of the United States Refugees of the Syrian Civil War Forced migration Consequences of the Syrian Civil War Syrian society Arab diaspora People of the European migrant crisis Serbia Hungary Turkish society Croatia Syria Demographics of Greece Capital districts and territories Capitals in North America Cities in the Baltimore–Washington metropolitan area Members of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization Planned capitals Planned cities in the United States Populated places established in 1790 Populated places on the Potomac River Southern United States States and territories established in 1790 States of the Mid-Atlantic Subdivisions of the United States Washington, D.C. Washington metropolitan area Reuters Companies established in 1851 Media companies based in London Multilingual news services News agencies based in the United Kingdom Financial news agencies 1851 establishments in the United Kingdom Webby Award winners Presidency of Barack Obama Barack Obama History of the United States (1991–present) Presidencies of the United States 2009 establishments in the United States Articles containing video clips Calling features Telephone service enhanced features Presidency of George W. Bush George W. Bush 2001 establishments in the United States 2009 disestablishments in the United States Presidencies of the United States National security Political terminology Employment Recruitment Security Information sensitivity United States 1776 establishments in the United States English-speaking countries and territories Federal constitutional republics Former British colonies Former confederations G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1776 Superpowers Communication Aftermath of war Demography Forced migration Population Refugees Right of asylum Fagus Edible legumes 