 Government agencies established in 1908 1908 establishments in the United States Espionage in the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation United States intelligence agencies White House Houses completed in 1800 Buildings of the United States government in Washington, D.C. Houses on the National Register of Historic Places in Washington, D.C. National Historic Landmarks in Washington, D.C. Presidential residences in the United States Presidential palaces Palaces in the United States Rebuilt buildings and structures in the United States Reportedly haunted locations in Washington, D.C. Federal architecture in Washington, D.C. Neoclassical architecture in Washington, D.C. Presidential museums in Washington, D.C. Historic house museums in Washington, D.C. Neoclassical palaces Buildings and structures in the United States destroyed by arson Living people United States Army generals Military intelligence Recipients of the Bronze Star Medal Recipients of the Legion of Merit Recipients of the Defense Superior Service Medal Directors of the Defense Intelligence Agency University of Rhode Island alumni Rooms in the White House Georgian Revival architecture in Washington, D.C. Presidency of George W. Bush George W. Bush 2001 establishments in the United States 2009 disestablishments in the United States Presidencies of the United States Investigative journalism Journalism genres News leaks Journalism sourcing Political campaign techniques Secrecy News media Prisons Penology Total institutions Classified information Information sensitivity Classified information Secrecy Russian Empire Early Modern history of Russia Modern history of Russia Former Slavic countries 18th century in Russia 19th century in Russia 20th century in Russia 1721 establishments in Russia 1917 disestablishments in Russia Articles containing video clips Legislative branch of the United States government 1789 establishments in the United States Bicameral legislatures National legislatures Counter-terrorism policy of the United States Emergency laws Espionage scandals and incidents George W. Bush administration controversies Privacy of telecommunications Privacy in the United States United States national security policy Surveillance scandals National Security Agency operations Banking terms Federal Bureau of Investigation Directors of the FBI United States intelligence agencies 1944 births American military personnel of the Vietnam War American people of German descent Assistant United States Attorneys Directors of the FBI Living people New York University alumni People from Pennsylvania Princeton University alumni Recipients of the Bronze Star Medal Recipients of the Purple Heart medal St. Paul's School (Concord, New Hampshire) alumni United States Assistant Attorneys General United States Attorneys for the Northern District of California United States Marine Corps officers University of Virginia School of Law alumni Identity theft victims 2007 films Chinese films Mandarin-language films 2000s comedy films Chinese anthology films Criminal law Prosecution Hoaxes Deception United States House of Representatives National lower houses United States law Legal professions Prosecution Presidents of the United States Presidency of the United States