Altered N.F.L. Settlement Wins Judge’s Approval
“The revised proposed settlement is a significant improvement over the proposed settlement presented in January,” the judge wrote. “The parties have satisfied my concern on this fundamental issue.”
The new settlement, though, allows the N.F.L. to contest an unlimited number of requests for awards by retired players as a way to prevent fraudulent claims. Some players assert that this will narrow the number of people who might ultimately receive cash awards.
In the coming weeks, retired players will receive packets explaining the terms of the settlement. Players will be deemed to be in favor of the deal unless they opt out, which preserves their legal rights. They can also object to parts of the deal.
Players who agree to the settlement can still take part in other N.F.L. retiree health care plans.
“We have received overwhelming support from the retired player community as they learn more about the guaranteed benefits and long-term security this settlement provides, and we look forward to soon finalizing this agreement,” Christopher Seeger and Sol Weiss, the lead lawyers for the retired N.F.L. players, said in a statement.
Once the retired players have had a chance to respond to the settlement, the judge will hold a hearing, scheduled for Nov. 19 in Philadelphia, to determine whether the class of retirees has been fairly represented.
A group of seven players filed a formal objection to the settlement last week. Among other things, they said that the settlement does not cover players who might currently have chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain disease. They also contended that the lead plaintiffs’ lawyers, who have asked to be paid $112.5 million, were biased to make a deal regardless of the consequences.
In her ruling Monday, the judge dismissed that claim, saying that the negotiations were at arm’s length and that the retired players would have a difficult time winning their case at trial.
Still, if the objectors feel the judge has not satisfied their claims, they can appeal the settlement to the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. No cash awards will be dispersed until all appeals are exhausted.