After 3-Year Hunt, Philippines Arrests Former General in Activists’ Disappearance
General Palparan, who appeared gaunt and frail when reporters were allowed to question him on Tuesday, denied the allegations. He also said that he stood by his record of aggressively pursuing communist rebels. “I have no regrets for what I’ve done,” he said. “What I did was for the good of the people.”
The Philippines has one of the world’s longest-running communist insurgencies; attacks by the rebels, known as the New People’s Army, take place periodically in both the north and the south of the country. Peace talks broke down in recent months after a series of arrests of high-ranking rebels, although government negotiators say that they continue to seek a deal.
After the dictator Ferdinand E. Marcos declared martial law in the 1970s, members of the Philippine military, police officers and their agents abducted, tortured and sometimes murdered leftist activists with impunity. The practice continued in the years after democracy was restored in 1986, and human rights groups say that it persists today, if to a lesser degree.
President Benigno S. Aquino III, who succeeded Ms. Arroyo in 2010, campaigned for office in part on a promise to address extrajudicial killings, particularly of journalists but also of activists. “President Aquino promised that those who evade the law will be found,” a presidential spokesman, Edwin Lacierda, said Tuesday. “That promise to capture General Palparan has been fulfilled today.”
In another recent case against a military officer, Harry Baliaga Jr., an army major, was arrested in October in connection with the April 2007 abduction of another activist, Jonas Burgos.
Carlos Zarate, a congressman who sits on the Philippine House of Representatives’ Human Rights Committee, said in an interview Tuesday that the arrest of General Palparan did not signal an end to the problem of security forces committing abuses with impunity. He said the case against the general was brought only because the parents of the abducted girls had hired lawyers and put pressure on prosecutors.
“When it comes to cases of impunity, of extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, it has lessened under Aquino but it is still going on,” Mr. Zarate said.
Mr. Zarate said he and others believed that associates of General Palparan who are still active in the military had helped him hide during his time as a fugitive. In his appearance before reporters Tuesday, the general did not say where he had spent the last three years.
In December 2012, President Aquino signed a law meant to stop the abductions of political activists by security forces. It made the “arrest, detention, abduction or any other form of deprivation of liberty committed by agents of the state” punishable by life in prison and held superior officers liable for abductions committed by those under their command.
Human Rights Watch said in a recent report that extrajudicial killings had declined under the Aquino administration but remained a problem, and that few such cases resulted in convictions. In addition to abductions by members of the military and paramilitary forces, urban death squads prey on petty criminals as part of local officials’ campaigns against crime, the report said.
“The Aquino administration has said all the right things about ending abuses in the Philippines, but what’s missing is the political will to translate those promises into action,” Phelim Kine, deputy Asia director at Human Rights Watch, said when the report was released in January.