The Pirate Bay is Offline After Swedish Police Raid
You might have noticed that The Pirate Bay is offline today; the site has disappeared after Swedish Police reportedly raided premises in Stockholm containing the service’s servers.
According to Torrentfreak, Swedish authorities confirmed that local police completed a raid in Stockholm this morning. Paul Pintér, police national coordinator for IP enforcement said “There has been a crackdown on a server room in Greater Stockholm. This is in connection with violations of copyright law.”
Fredrik Ingblad, an expert file-sharing case prosecutor said that “There were a number of police officers and digital forensics experts there. This took place during the morning and continued until this afternoon. Several servers and computers were seized, but I cannot say exactly how many.”
The Swedish Metro said police would not confirm if the raids were to target The Pirate Bay directly or not, nor if there were any arrests made at the scene.
In November, police arrested the third and final founder of The Pirate Bay after attempting to arrest him for some time.
According to is it down right now, the site went offline around 2am Pacific Time today and hasn’t come back online since. The last time an outage like this occurred, the site had lost its domain name.
Back in September, The Pirate Bay claimed that it ran the site on 21 “raid-proof” virtual machines that meant if authorities raided one location the service would be OK. In this situation, it appears they weren’t quite raid-proof after all.
Other torrent sites including EZTV are also offline at time of writing, although it’s not clear if this relates to the same police raid.
Peter Sunde, co-founder and ex-spokesperson for The Pirate Bay wrote on his personal blog today that “few seem to care [that TPB has been raided]. And I’m one of them.” Sunde says the site was supposed to be closed down on its 10th birthday and expresses his disappointment that nobody took the site further, instead filling it with more and more ads.
Sunde finished by saying “it feels good that it might have closed down forever, just a real shame the way it did that.”
Update: At 12:15 PST, reports emerged that the site was relocated to two new domains, however it’s unknown if these are legitimate sites.
Update 2: Torrentfreak reports that it has learned at least one person was arrested in relation to the site today.
Update 3: The Swedish Rights Alliance says that it made a complaint about The Pirate Bay as it is an “illegal commercial service that earns big sums on posting other people’s films and music” which led to the police raid this morning.
Update 4: Whether by coincidence or not, Pirate Bay co-founder Fredrik Neij’s Stockholm-based web hosting company has also been seemingly taken offline today.
Read next: Dropbox's Carousel can now automatically free up space for photos on your device