Milan court shooting: suspect arrested after killing 'up to three' including judge
• Up to three people including judge killed in Milan court shooting • Witness and attorney also reportedly among victims • Gunman arrested in nearby city of Vimercate: minister • Alleged shooter was defendent in bankruptcy case • Shooting took place in Palace of Justice
We are closing our live coverage of the incident there, but you can read a full wrap of the day's events from Milan here:
A fourth victim has died of gunshot wounds in hospital, Andrea Vogt reports from Milan:
Gardiello, dressed in a jacket and yellow tie, killed his lawyer first.
He opened fire inside a courtroom on the third floor, after Alberto Claris Appiani, 37, originally from Elba, announced he would no longer represent him.
He then reportedly turned the gun on the prosecutor Gaetano Ruta, but missed him.
He then shot others who were present in the hearing - Giorgio Erba, 60, who later died of his injuries, and his nephew Davide Limongelli.
Erba died of a gunshot wound to the chest, while Limongelli was hospitalised for gunshot wound to the thigh.
Gardiello, 57, then went down to the second floor of the courthouse and targeted bankruptcy Judge Fernando Ciampi.
Ciampi, 75, a veteran judge who has been in Italy’s judicial system as a magistrate since 1967.
"He was very severe, but he knew what he was doing. He was good," said Enrico Zucchello, 44, a lawyer who works every day inside the courthouse.
A fourth victim is said to have had a heart attack during the incident.
More images have emerged of the police operation to detain the gunman in Milan:
Valerio Maraniello, who once acted as a lawyer for the shooter, told AFP his ex-client was "an aggressive person, a little paranoid."
"He was always convinced people were trying to cheat him. He never listened to advice," he said, adding that he was "not completely surprised" by the deadly attack.
The dead have been named by the Italian media as judge Fernando Ciampi and lawyer Lorenzo Alberto Claris Appiani, both shot on the third floor of the building after Giardiello managed to get a gun past security, writes AFP.
A third person was found dead inside the building after apparently suffering a heart attack, possibly brought on by the shooting, emergency services said.
Two people were injured in the shootout and one is in a serious condition.
Andrea Vogt has more details on the suspect and victims from Italy:
The suspect was on trial for fraudulent bankruptcy for the failure of a call center. Two others also on trial, an uncle and his nephew, were wounded in the shooting. The suspect's lawyer is also believed to have been fatally wounded.
The gunman was captured as he tried to flee on a motorbike, local news sources and Italy's interior minister said, amid reports that three people including an attorney were killed in the incident. AP reports:
Quoting police sources, ANSA said two other people were killed, including an attorney. Calls seeking confirmation from police were not successful.
Interior Minister Angelino Alfano said the suspect was caught by carabinieri police as he tried to leave the scene on a motorcycle.
Witnesses reported barricading themselves inside their offices and taking cover under their desks as police hunted for the gunman. The employees trickled out, women first, followed by the men who had their court ID cards checked.
The suspect has been captured in the nearby city of Vimercate, according to a tweet from Angelino Alfano, Italy's interior minister:
The "presumed assassin" was captured, Mr Alfano said. "Now he's being held in a Carabinieri military police barracks."
The second victim was a court witness, according to local media. Andrea Vogt reports:
Milan media reporting victims include Judge Fernando Ciampi who was reportedly shot dead in his office, as well as a witness, according to the Corriere della Sera.
Italian news agency ANSA quoted the president of the appeals court, Giovanni Canzio, as identifying the slain judge as Fernando Ciampi.
Sky TG24 reported that the gunman was barricaded in an upper-floor room.
The shooting took place in Milan's Palace of Justice.
Entrances to the building are protected by metal detectors.
The courtroom is in the historic centre in Milan, close to the city's cathedral and shopping district.
A lawyer who was inside the courtroom at the time of the shooting has spoken to AFP outside the court:
All of a sudden we heard at least three or four shots.
We tried to find out what was going on. There were suddenly lots of police officers who told us not to leave the room, they shut us in.
After a few minutes we came out. They told us someone in a suit and tie was armed and at large in the court.
Italian media has identified the shooter as Claudio Giardiello.
Reports in publications including La Repubblica and Corriere della Sera said Giardiello was on trial for fraudulent bankruptcy.
The shooter has been named by Corriere della Sera as Claudio Giardiello, who was on trial for fraudulent bankruptcy. He was reportedly dressed in suit and tie and is said to have shot at one of the witnesses as well as two men sitting in the area reserved for the public. The courthouse has been evacuated and police are searching for the man inside the courthouse. Hundreds of courthouse employees are outside the courthouse now. Situation still fluid.
One of those killed in the shooting is a Milan court judge, a top court official told Reuters.
The sound of shots sparked panic, with lawyers fleeing the scene while police officers searched for the gunman, who was thought to be still inside the building, said the chairman of the appeals court, Giovanni Canzio.
Two people have been killed after a man opened fire in a Milan courtroom on Thursday morning, officials said.
The alleged shooter is a defendant in a bankruptcy case in the Italian city and is still on the run, police said.
Emergency services said two people were dead in the shooting incident.
Initial reports said two people had been wounded.