Aaron Hernandez verdict: Guilty of murder
Fall River, Massachusetts (CNN)Former New England Patriots star Aaron Hernandez looked on impassively Wednesday as he was sentenced to life without the possibility of parole, a new low for a young man who once enjoyed a $40 million pro-football contract and now stands convicted in the 2013 murder of onetime friend Odin Lloyd.
Hernandez, 25, appeared to shake his head "no" earlier as jurors in the Massachusetts trial found him guilty of first-degree murder. He was also found guilty of unlawful possession of a firearm and unlawful possession of ammunition.
"They got it wrong," Hernandez said as he was being transported from the courthouse to a state prison, according to a law enforcement source close to the case. "I didn't do it."
At trial, the defense team described Lloyd, a former semi-pro football player, as Hernandez's "bluntmaster" -- his purveyor of marijuana -- and his future brother-in-law. But in victim impact statements, Lloyd's relatives portrayed him as a loving son and protective brother, as a man who rode his bike 10 miles to work and wore the same flip-flops for 12 years.
"Odin was my only son," his mother, Ursula Ward, told the court, without looking at Hernandez. "Odin was the man of the house. Odin was his sisters' keeper. After my daughter Olivia had her daughter, Odin became her keeper, too."
Asked whether Hernandez "gets it" after his murder conviction, Quinn said: "I don't know. I think when you're taken away and they say, 'life in prison without parole' ... there's got to be some response. But I don't know if he got it."
But they agreed that his testimony was crucial. Kraft testified that Hernandez proclaimed his innocence to him and told the team owner that "he hoped that the time of the murder ... came out because I believe he said he was in a club."
"To this day -- we just went through a three-month trial, and this is now two years later -- we still don't know the exact time of Odin's murder," one of the jurors said. "So I don't know how Aaron would have had that information two years ago."
Wallace and Ortiz were longtime friends of Hernandez, who had complete control of them, the prosecution said. In closing arguments, McCauley reminded the jury of testimony about Hernandez and his two friends sunbathing poolside hours after the slaying, drinking smoothies, and Hernandez at times leaving his then 8-month-old child with the two men.
The motive for the killing has never been clearly spelled out, but prosecutors said Lloyd might have done or said something that didn't sit well with Hernandez. They said Hernandez rounded up some friends and orchestrated the killing to settle the score. McCauley said a perceived slight that might seem insignificant to someone, such as disrespect, would easily offend Hernandez.
After concealing the box with her daughter's clothing, Jenkins said she threw it away in "a random dumpster" but could not remember where. Another piece of the state's case was grainy footage from Hernandez's home security system that prosecutors said showed him holding a .45-caliber handgun, the same kind of gun police said was used to kill Lloyd.