Baltimore Police Complete Initial Inquiry Into Death of Freddie Gray
The conclusion of the police investigation came on a day when new protests against the police erupted in Baltimore and the police clashed with demonstrators in Philadelphia.
In contrast to other cities that have been wracked by tension and protests over police confrontations with black men, Baltimore’s mayor, Stephanie Rawlings-Blake, its police commissioner, Anthony W. Batts, and Ms. Mosby are all black, giving a somewhat different tenor to clashes between the power structure and its critics.
In a sometimes defensive appearance on Thursday, Ms. Rawlings-Blake offered a heated rebuttal to criticism that she was not sensitive enough to the city’s poor and had not done enough to rein in police misconduct.
Referring to herself, Ms. Mosby, and the nation’s new attorney general, Loretta E. Lynch, the mayor said Thursday, “If, with the nation watching, three black women at three different levels can’t get justice and healing for this community, you tell me where we’re going to get it in our country.”
The disclosure of the additional stop by the van was the one new piece of information revealed Thursday by Mr. Davis and Mr. Batts, about what happened on April 12, the day Mr. Gray was arrested after running from the police for possession of a switchblade.
They held a brief news conference, took no questions, and offered no details to help gauge the disclosure’s importance. The additional stop does not, in itself, explain how Mr. Gray was hurt, or when, but some officials have speculated that he was injured while in the police van, or that the ride to the station worsened an earlier injury; others have said that video of his arrest appears to show him hurt even before getting into the vehicle.
The Police Department handed over its findings a day ahead of the May 1 deadline Mr. Batts had set. And they arrived after days in which law enforcement and civic leaders sought to tamp down expectations that they would announce major revelations about the death of Mr. Gray, who was black — much less a decision on whether to bring criminal charges. “I think people had expectations that were unrealistic,” Gov. Larry Hogan said in a visit to West Baltimore. “We all want answers, but they’ve got to be patient.”
Ms. Mosby, 35, took office less than four months ago, and finds herself in a national spotlight. She defeated an incumbent last year by vowing to be tougher on violent criminals, while saying she would be more aggressive in taking on police misconduct.
“The results of their investigation is not new to us,” she said. “We have been briefed regularly throughout their process while simultaneously conducting our own independent investigation into the death of Freddie Gray.”
The leader of the police union objected to protesters who he said “have already tried and convicted the officers,” and have greeted the rest of the force with undeserved hostility. “They haven’t been charged, No. 1,” said Gene Ryan, president of the Baltimore Fraternal Order of Police. “No. 2, they still get their day in court. So, how can they request that they be put in jail?”
As for the Police Department, Mr. Batts said: “This does not mean that the investigation is over. If new evidence is found, we will follow it. If new direction is given by the state’s attorney, we will obey it.”
On Thursday, a Washington television station, WJLA, reported that according to unnamed law enforcement sources, “the medical examiner found Gray’s catastrophic injury was caused when he slammed into the back of the police transport van, apparently breaking his neck.”
But Bruce Goldfarb, a spokesman for the state office of the chief medical examiner, said, “We don’t do preliminary findings, and the investigation isn’t concluded.” In addition, officials briefed on the investigations cast doubt on the report.
Police commanders said more than 30 detectives, operating on an unusually swift timetable, had been working on the investigation. That included reviewing every available video that might show anything about what happened to Mr. Gray the day he was arrested, from closed-circuit security camera images to cellphone video, Mr. Davis said.
Officers riding bicycles arrested Mr. Gray in the 1700 block of Presbury Street, in the Sandtown-Winchester neighborhood of northwest Baltimore. They charged him with illegal possession of a switchblade knife, and called a van to take him to the Western District police station.
At some point, Mr. Gray suffered a severe neck injury, which caused his death a week later. The police have acknowledged that he was not put into a seatbelt, contrary to department policy, and that he should have received medical attention sooner. Medical experts say that either a bumpy ride, or just a lack of treatment and uncontrolled swelling, can quickly make a spinal cord injury go from serious to catastrophic.
Officials had previously said that the van had made three stops before reaching the station, including one to put leg restraints on Mr. Gray, who was described as being unruly, and one to pick up another prisoner.
But Mr. Davis said there was another stop, at Fremont Avenue and Mosher Street, less than a mile southeast of where he was arrested. Jung Hwang, owner of a convenience store at that intersection, said the police had come to make a copy of a recording from his security camera.
The Police Department on Thursday raised to 98 the count of officers injured since rioters began throwing rocks and bottles, setting fires and looting Monday afternoon. Captain Kowalczyk said 43 officers had been treated at emergency rooms, including three who remain on medical leave, and 15 who have returned to work but are limited to light duty.
The episode continued to bring demonstrators to the streets, though the third night of a curfew here appeared successful late Thursday.
Rallies also took place in Cincinnati and Philadelphia. In Philadelphia, a multiracial crowd of about 1,000 people gathered in front of City Hall Thursday afternoon to hear speeches in support of the Baltimore protesters. As police helicopters largely drowned out the speeches of organizers, participants held up hand-written signs including “Killer Cops Modern Lynchers” and “Philly is Baltimore.”
One of the participants,Rahman Wortman, 24, a Temple University student, said he was disappointed that earlier protests had not stopped police brutality. “If it was effective, we wouldn’t need events like this,” he said.
The march began quietly but became increasingly volatile as the police and demonstrators jostled one another, plastic bottles were thrown at the police and mounted officers charged toward angry demonstrators.