Tony Robinson case: No charges for officer
(CNN)The Wisconsin police officer who shot and killed a 19-year-old unarmed biracial man won't face criminal charges in the case.
"I conclude that this tragic and unfortunate death was the result of a lawful use of deadly police force and that no charges should be brought against Officer Kenny in the death of Tony Robinson Jr.," Dane County District Attorney Ismael Ozanne said Tuesday.
Robinson was fatally shot by Officer Matt Kenny, who is white, in Madison, Wisconsin, on March 6, setting off days of protests in the city. His death came amid lingering tensions over the killings by police elsewhere of other unarmed African-Americans that seized national attention.
"We believe the district attorney's decision today to exonerate Officer Matthew Kenny was appropriate," Wisconsin Professional Police Association Executive Director Jim Palmer said in a statement. "The exhaustive, independent and transparent investigation into this tragic incident has confirmed that Officer Kenny's actions on the night of March 6 were lawful and in response to a deadly threat, from which Officer Kenny sustained numerous injuries, including a concussion.
"The family feels strongly that protests should not be violent, should be calm," he told reporters. "This is not a situation where people should get hurt or the community should tear itself apart."
"I am concerned that recent violence around our nation is giving some in our communities a justification for fear, hatred and violence," he said. "I am reminded that true and lasting change does not come from violence, but from exercising our voices and our votes."
a blog post responding to Tuesday's announcement "Unrest like we have witnessed elsewhere in our country cannot possibly aid in constructive engagement and only holds us back," Madison Police Chief Mike Koval said in a blog post responding to Tuesday's announcement . "The environment for healing and reconciliation has been forged, owing to the incredible capacity of the Robinson family and their urging of the community to deal with the issues at hand with responsible activism."
As he revealed his decision, Ozanne noted his own background as the first district attorney of color in the state, then detailed the evidence that led him to the conclusion that Kenny should not be charged.
"My decision will not bring Tony Robinson Jr. back," Ozanne told reporters. "My decision will not end the racial disparities that exist in the justice system, in our justice system. My decision is not based on emotion. Rather, this decision is based on the facts as they have been investigated and reported to me."
After that, Kenny said he was afraid Robinson would hit him again or take his gun, and opened fire as the 19-year-old continued to come at him.
"The things that have taken place since my son passed and the things that have been done to my family, to me, they've gone above and beyond to try to make sure they kick me when I'm down," she said Tuesday. "They have done a smear campaign against my child and against me since this all began."
According to the Wisconsin State Journal, Robinson's friends and family members have said he took hallucinogenic mushrooms and was behaving erratically the day he was killed. They reject the idea that Robinson was a threat to Kenny when he was shot, the newspaper reported.
"The fact that Tony was involved in any kind of transgression in the past has nothing to do with this present tragedy," Soglin said.