Texas biker gang shooting: nine dead and 18 wounded at restaurant in Waco
Nine people were killed, 18 injured and at least 100 arrested after a shootout between rival biker gangs at a restaurant in Waco, Texas, according to police.
Patrons and bystanders ran for safety, police said, as officers at the scene also opened fire. Local television station KWTX reported that some customers and employees took shelter in the restaurant’s freezer. All those killed and injured were gang members, police said.
Waco police sergeant W Patrick Swanton described to local reporters what he said was “the most violent crime scene I have ever been involved in” and said there was “blood everywhere”. He added: “None of our innocent civilians were injured today in this mélêe.”
The shootout took place at the Twin Peaks Sports Bar and Grill on Interstate 35 at about midday on Sunday. Swanton told local newspaper the Waco Tribune-Herald eight people died at the scene and one died later in hospital. At least five rival gangs had gathered at Twin Peaks for a meeting that Swanton said followed clashes over turf and recruitment.
Police were present because authorities were aware of the likelihood of trouble between the gangs, Swanton said, but “apparently the management [of the restaurant] wanted them here and so we didn’t have any say-so on whether they could be here or not”.
“What happened here today could have been avoided,” he said. “They [the restaurant management] failed and this is what happened.”
A statement on Sunday night on behalf of Jay Patel, operating partner for the Twin Peaks franchise in Waco, said: “Our management team has had ongoing and positive communications with the police,” and added that the restaurant was cooperating with the investigation.
Swanton, who said there were “still bodies on the scene of the parking lot at Twin Peaks” and “cattered throughout the parking lot of the next adjoining business”, also said: “In 34 years of law enforcement, this is the most violent crime scene I have ever been involved in. There is blood everywhere. We will probably approach the number of 100 weapons.”
Late on Sunday, Swanton addressed Patel’s statement, telling reporters that it was a “fabrication”. He said police officers had “saved lives in keeping this from spilling into a very busy Sunday morning”. “Thank goodness the officers were here,” he said, “and took the action that they needed to take to save numerous lives.”
Those injured suffered stab and gunshot wounds, Swanton said, adding that the fight began with fists and then involved knives and guns. KWTX reported that one hospital, White Hillcrest Medical Center, had been placed on lockdown.
Waco police closed the busy marketplace area around the restaurant. Swanton said three armed gang members had been arrested when they attempted to enter the closed-off crime scene. At least 100 people in total had been detained for questioning by late on Sunday night, Swanton said.
As well as local and state police, the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives said its agents were at the scene.
The McLennan county sheriff, Parnell McNamara, whose office is involved in the investigation, said all nine who were killed were members of the Bandidos or Cossacks gangs.