China jails former security chief Zhou Yongkang for life for bribery, corruption
China's former domestic security chief has been sentenced to life in jail after being found guilty during a closed-door trial of bribery, leaking state secrets and abuse of power, state news agency Xinhua says.
Zhou Yongkang, who was formally charged in April, was tried in the northern city of Tianjin on May 22.
Xinhua said he admitted his guilt and decided not to appeal against the verdict.
Zhou, 72, is the most senior figure to go down in Chinese president Xi Jinping's wide-sweeping war on corruption.
"I accept the prosecution's accusations, and the basic facts are clear; I admit my guilt and am penitent," Xinhua paraphrased Zhou as telling the court.
One source with the direct knowledge of the situation said Zhou, who used to be in charge of the police force, was being guarded by soldiers rather than police officers.
"He was cooperative during interrogations," the source said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
The court said Zhou and a number of associates received more than 2.1 billion yuan ($435 million) in profits from various illegal business activities, Xinhua reported.
Zhou was convicted of taking bribes of about 130 million yuan ($26 million), it said, adding that he would not appeal and the court would confiscate his personal property.
He also passed on five "top-secret documents" to Cao Yongzheng, who is described in reports as a fortune-teller and practitioner of a mysterious Chinese martial art known as Qigong, it said.
Zhou was on the nine-member politburo standing committee the most powerful group of people in China.
He joined the group in 2007 while also heading the central political and legal affairs committee, a sprawling body that oversees law and order policy.
His alleged crimes took place over decades, including when he was deputy general manager of China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC), party boss in south-western Sichuan province, minister of public security and a member of the standing committee, according to the initial indictment.
Zhou rose from comparatively humble origins to prominence in the state-run petroleum industry.
He became a central figure in what analysts termed the "oil faction" — linking politicians with the lucrative sector — and is sometimes described as "China's Dick Cheney".
He was responsible for China's internal security, including police, courts, jails and domestic surveillance.
His tenure was marked by the brutal use of force in response to civil unrest and increased surveillance and repression of anyone perceived as challenging the Communist Party.
During his time on the standing committee, China's security apparatus consumed a budget that exceeded the official figure for military spending.
He has not been seen in public since October 2013.