Cook County judge says 'Amazon-tax law' unconstitutional
An Illinois law aimed at leveling competition between online and offline retailers while collecting more state sales taxes is unconstitutional, a Cook County judge said Wednesday.
The opinion is yet another shot in the highly contentious nationwide battle over who should collect online sales tax and how.
Consumers who live in sales-tax states, such as Illinois, owe state sales tax on their Internet purchases, whether they pay it during virtual checkout or when they file their state income tax returns. But few actually pay unless tax is collected at checkout. That has the effect of making online purchases cheaper than those at bricks-and-mortar retailers.
In March 2011, Illinois passed the Main Street Fairness Act, informally dubbed the Amazon-tax law.
Before the law, online retailers were forced to collect and remit sales taxes on purchases made by Illinois residents only if the online retailer had a "physical presence" in the state. For example, Sears must collect sales tax on virtual checkout at Sears.com because it has a headquarters and retail stores in Illinois. But Amazon.com does not have a physical presence and did not have to collect tax at checkout.
But the law expanded the meaning of physical presence beyond a warehouse, factory or office to include affiliate companies, which typically are deal and coupon website operators that earn commissions for directing shopping traffic to an online store. Affiliates are essentially third-party advertisers for online stores.
To avoid having to collect sales tax upon virtual checkout, some large Internet retailers, including Amazon.com, responded by cutting ties with affiliates in Illinois. That eliminated revenue streams for affiliate marketers. There were an estimated 9,000 affiliate marketers in Illinois, according to the Performance Marketing Association, a trade group that was the plaintiff in the case.
After the law passed, some prominent Illinois-based Internet businesses, such as CouponCabin.com and FatWallet.com, fled to nearby Indiana and Wisconsin rather than be cut off from commissions from Amazon.com,Overstock.comand others.
Cook County Circuit Judge Robert Lopez Cepero said in court Wednesday that the Illinois law violated the commerce clause of the U.S. Constitution, which limits who a state can tax, and that the law conflicted with the federal Internet Tax Freedom Act, which prohibits some types of Internet-related taxes.
The quick decision Wednesday was unexpected, even to officials of the Performance Marketing Association, said Rebecca Madigan, the association's executive director.
"The judge pointed out and agreed with us that the state overreached its boundaries in trying to regulate interstate commerce," Madigan said. "We ? believe it paves the way for Internet marketing affiliates to get back in business in Illinois."
However, the battle has just begun, said David Vite, president of the Illinois Retail Merchants Association, which supports the law. "This is the first step in a very long battle. We have seen local judges be overturned regularly on these kinds of questions," he said.
The Illinois Department of Revenue was the defendant in the case. "We respectfully disagree with the court's ruling and are reviewing our appeal options with the attorney general's office," the revenue department said in a statement. "We need to protect 'brick and mortar' stores from an unlevel playing field, and we need to recoup some of the estimated $153 million that was not paid by online merchants prior to the law being implemented. The law was a bipartisan initiative that passed both houses of the General Assembly with overwhelming support."