Man who threatened Boehner found insane
CINCINNATI — A federal judge on Monday found the Deer Park man who threatened to kill House Speaker John Boehner not guilty by reason of insanity.
Michael Hoyt was in the throes of a two-year battle with mental illness last fall when the former country club bartender told police he was "Jesus Christ" and planned to kill Boehner because he was "evil," Federal Judge Timothy Black ruled.
Hoyt was ordered to remain in jail and undergo further psychiatric testing. He is due back in court Aug. 21, when it could be determined whether Hoyt will be free to go home or sent to a mental health facility.
"Mental illness is a prevalent problem in the community that we need to recognize and respond to with treatment," Black said. "I hope the victim realizes we're trying to balance the (work) of those (government officials) who are trying to help us and the weakest among us."
During the 50-minute trial, Black discussed the results of an evaluation Hoyt was ordered to undergo earlier this year. Hoyt was diagnosed with bi-polar disorder, according to the report. The judge also focused on information that showed Hoyt had taken a "turn for the worse" since he suffered a head injury during an incident at a Deer Park bar in September 2012.
Wearing a black and white prison uniform and sporting an unkempt beard, the 44-year-old Hoyt sat quietly in the downtown courtroom with his shoulders slouched. Attorney Martin Pinales placed his hand on Hoyt's shoulder for most of the trial.
"My client is a sweet young man who has a mental illness," Pinales later told reporters.
Hoyt could have faced up to 10 years in prison had he been convicted on the charge of making a threat against a government official. Soon after announcing the verdict, Black gave Hoyt a pep talk.
"Yes, sir," Hoyt responded, softly, as he stood up from his chair.
"Thank you for standing up," Black said. "I hope you were able to hear some of what I said. You've got a medical condition. You're so much better today, and there's a way forward where with help and medication ... you're going to be able to get well and function productively."
Black added: "But it's going to require your commitment to stick with the medication and stick with the recommendation ... of your therapists. I would ask you do that. Godspeed."
Black said the court could face a big challenge at the August hearing. The court will have to make sure that Hoyt's "release would not create a substantial risk of bodily injury to another person or serious property damage," the judge said.
In October, Hoyt was fired from his bartending job at Wetherington Golf and Country Club in West Chester Township. Boehner, R-West Chester, is a member of the club. About a week before being fired from a job that he had held for at least five years, Hoyt had an apparent mental breakdown, claimed to be Jesus, and told police he wanted to kill Boehner.
Police were called to Hoyt's Deer Park home on Oct. 29, according to court records. He proceeded to tell police of his intentions to kill Boehner, in part, because the House speaker was "responsible for Ebola."
Sometime before being fired, court records say, Hoyt said he had heard "the devil's voice" from radios in his car and at home, and those voices told him that Boehner was "evil." Hoyt sent emails and letters to Boehner's wife and Wetherington members.
In an Oct. 28 email, Hoyt said he was willing to drop the issue if Boehner and another country club member hand-delivered the job termination papers. Hoyt also said in the email that if he "had any intention of hurting Mr. Boehner, I could have poisoned his wine at Wetherington many, many times."