China Corruption Fight Extends to Top Officials in Beijing and Shanghai
Since taking office in 2012, Mr. Xi has embarked on a far-reaching campaign against graft, vowing to take down both “tigers and flies,” or prominent officials and low-level bureaucrats alike. He has gone after party heavyweights, military generals and local politicians.
As growth in China’s economy has slowed in recent months, government investigators have turned their focus to the financial sector.
The inquiry into Mr. Ai, vice mayor since 2007, was disclosed Tuesday, making him the highest-ranking official in Shanghai to be investigated since 2012. This year, a former deputy chief of the Shanghai free-trade zone, Dai Haibo, was also placed under investigation on suspicion of corruption.
In Beijing, Ms. Lu’s colleagues were quick to distance themselves from her case, which was announced Wednesday. Guo Jinlong, the secretary of the Communist Party in Beijing, said at a meeting that party members should learn from the case. According to a notice from the Beijing city government, Mr. Guo said the case “seriously harms the party’s image, authority and capabilities.”
As Mr. Xi approaches the end of his first five-year term as president, he is moving quickly to consolidate power and promote allies, experts said. In 2017, Communist Party officials will meet to determine a slate of crucial personnel appointments.
“The tragedy of the authoritarian regime is that you have leaders in place, but you don’t have your own team in place,” said Fu Hualing, a professor of law at the University of Hong Kong. “You need to spend your entire term to make room for your supporters so you can carry out your policies.”
Mr. Fu said Chinese leaders should focus on putting in place a permanent system to guard against corruption that is shielded from political whims.
“You have removed the fat cats from power and replaced them with skinny cats,” he said. “But are you confident that your boys will behave in the long term, or will they behave like their predecessors?”