Mixed Verdict for Donald Blankenship, Ex-Chief of Massey Energy, After Coal Mine Blast
The prosecution of Mr. Blankenship was one of extraordinary political, legal and emotional significance in West Virginia, a state where many residents have long believed that coal companies and their leaders faced only cursory scrutiny. After they started their deliberations on Nov. 17, jurors twice reported in handwritten notes that they could not agree.
But just after noon on Thursday, it fell to a coal miner’s daughter, Judge Irene C. Berger, to face a crowded courtroom and pronounce a unanimous jury’s findings.
Relatives of the dead miners sat in the front row, their arms sometimes trembling as they bowed their heads in silent prayer. Mr. Blankenship, who appeared impassive in the courtroom, waited between two of his lawyers. Guilty on a version of count one, the judge announced, and not guilty of the second and third counts, which involved accusations of securities fraud and false statements and together carried decades in prison.
“Is this or is it not your verdict?” Judge Berger asked the eight women and four men of the jury. Yes, each replied.
The jury’s verdict came after its members heard descriptions of Mr. Blankenship’s fortune — he was paid nearly $18 million in 2009, the last full year before the explosion at the mine just about everyone called “U.B.B.” — and saw documents that portrayed him as a manager with sophisticated knowledge of his multibillion-dollar corporation. Jurors learned about his demands for production reports from Upper Big Branch every 30 minutes, even on weekends, and they heard him, on audio recordings, chastising and lecturing subordinates.
Perhaps most crucially, they heard dueling interpretations of an array of memos and programs about safety at Massey, a company that had thousands of safety citations and, according to the government, embarked on little more than a safety charade.
Mr. Blankenship’s lawyers, however, said that prosecutors had stretched federal laws and the evidence to their limits in their quest to prosecute Mr. Blankenship, a Republican who has suggested that the case against him was a form of political retaliation.
“Nobody’s blaming the miners,” Mr. Taylor said during his closing argument last month. “But the government wants you to find beyond a reasonable doubt that Don Blankenship is a criminal because this mine got citations.”
On Thursday, as he had for months, Mr. Taylor said that the case should have never been brought. But prosecutors, in interviews during the jury’s deliberations, defended their approach in a wide-ranging inquiry that began soon after the disaster and, ultimately, amassed a varied record.
“If we were going to have a shot at who, if anyone, was responsible for the circumstances that might have contributed to this event, then we would need to investigate this like we investigate criminal cases,” said R. Booth Goodwin II, the United States attorney. “How is it that this happens, and how is it that we have what seemed like a Third World mine disaster in the 21st century here in America?”
Last November, almost three years after the company that bought Massey agreed to a $209 million settlement with the Justice Department, a grand jury indicted Mr. Blankenship. He assembled a roster of lawyers for a defense that cost millions of dollars, while prosecutors weighed how to present a complicated case. Unlike the prosecutors, Mr. Taylor would not agree to discuss how the case unfolded.
There were, for instance, matters of how to explore the details of mining with jurors — prosecutors even considered taking the jury to a simulated mine — and how to explain gaps between the law and common perceptions of it, a particular concern for the conspiracy count.
“The hard part is getting the jury to understand that an unspoken conspiracy is just as much a conspiracy as sitting in a back room writing out a pact in blood,” said Steven R. Ruby, an assistant United States attorney.
In the end, it was just the conspiracy charge that persuaded jurors.
“I think it is a compromise verdict, but you have to remember that the two charges that received acquittals were for conduct quite different than culpability for operating an unsafe coal mine and violating laws that are intended to prevent precisely what occurred,” said Patrick C. McGinley, a West Virginia University law professor who was involved in the state’s investigation of the deaths at Upper Big Branch.
“A century of mine disasters and failing to hold coal company executives responsible is over,” he said.
And here in Charleston, family members of Upper Big Branch miners said they were somewhat vindicated by the verdict.
“Even though Mr. Blankenship may not be convicted of all of these crimes, he is guilty, my friends, and he is not guilty of just being a liar, cheating fraud,” said Judy Jones Petersen, whose brother worked at Upper Big Branch.
She later added, “I just wanted someone to step forward and say, ‘He is guilty. He is guilty.’ ”
Shortly before Dr. Petersen spoke, Mr. Blankenship emerged from the courthouse. Asked for his response to the verdict, he winked. Pressed for a further explanation, he said: “Just a wink. A wink and a nod.”