Oscar Pistorius granted bail to appeal murder conviction with electronic tag
• Oscar Pistorius to appeal guilty conviction • Pistorius cracks a smile after being told he can leave house between 7-12pm • Defence tells court Pistorius "doesn't have the money" to pay 1m rand bail • Pistorius reveals he is studying at London's LSE • What does the Oscar Pistorius murder conviction mean?
Oscar Pistorius has escaped returning to jail as he waits to appeal his murder conviction after telling a judge he needs daily internet access to study for an online law degree, writes Aislinn Laing in Pretoria.
The 28-year-old athlete said he had no income and no assets left after the fatal shooting of girlfriend Reeva Steenkamp on St Valentine’s Day 2013 and is also actively job-seeking from his uncle’s mansion in Pretoria, where he lives under house arrest.
He was granted bail pending an appeal in his case to the Constitutional Court, South Africa’s highest tribunal, after agreeing to pay a reduced surety of R10,000 (£460) and be electronically tagged.
The athlete told the court he should remain at liberty because he has enrolled on a £4,200 law and business degree by correspondence at the University of London and needed “daily access to internet”.
He also argued in an affidavit submitted to Pretoria’s High Court that he would be “severely prejudiced” if he were sent back to Kgosi Mampuru II Prison in Pretoria because of an “anticipated delay” before his case is concluded.
Last week, Kevin Lerena, a professional boxer and friend of the sprinter, said he told him in a telephone conversation of the single cell he stayed in the prison’s hospital wing: “I don’t want to go back to jail. It’s a terrible place, so disgusting you can’t imagine.”
Pistorius killed Steenkamp by firing four times through a locked lavatory door at his Pretoria home. He told his trial at Pretoria’s High Court that he thought his girlfriend was in bed and he was confronting an intruder; the state argued he killed her deliberately after an argument.
The trial judge convicted him of manslaughter last September, saying the state had not proven his case and his account could be “reasonably possibly true”. The following month, she jailed him for five years but he was released on parole and into house arrest after serving just one year.
Last week, South Africa’s Supreme Court of Appeal (SCA) overturned that conviction and replaced it with one of murder, saying the athlete formerly known as Blade Runner for his carbon fibre prosthetics ought to have known he would kill whomever he thought was on the other side of the door.
On Tuesday, his legal team told a bail hearing that it would appeal that ruling to the country’s highest tribunal, the Constitutional Court, on the grounds the five SCA judges had stepped outside their remit by considering matters of fact rather than law.
Pistorius’s sentencing for the upgraded murder conviction, which carries a minimum term of 15 years, will be put on hold until April at least for the constitutional court to rule on whether it will accept the appeal.
If it does, he could remain at liberty until the latter half of the year for a date to be set. If it does not, his sentencing will go ahead.
Arguing to remain on bail and under house arrest at his uncle’s mansion, Pistorius told the court he could no longer pay the original bail fee of R1m because he had no income and no assets, but agreed to pay R10,000 instead.
Gerrie Nel, the prosecutor, called for him to be banned from leaving his uncle’s home, arguing that with no fixed assets in South Africa and only R10,000 in surety, there was little to stop him absconding to Mozambique, where his family has business interests, or to Italy, where he used to train.
Pistorius insisted in his affidavit that he was confident he would be vindicated by the fresh appeal, and in the meantime did not constitute a flight risk.
“The nature and gravity of any punishment which can be imposed on me, play no part in my actions or decisions, as I believe that I will be successful in an appeal to the constitutional court,” he wrote.
“I know that if I attempt to flee, which I will not, that, ultimately, I will be arrested and extradited to the Republic of South Africa. I work in South Africa. I am well known and it would be senseless to even consider to become a fugitive of justice.”
The athlete, who abandoned a University of Pretoria sports science degree to further his athletics career, told the court he was studying and had completed a court-mandated anger management course.
“I have enrolled at the London School of Economics for a BSc business with law degree. I study by way of correspondence and need daily access to the internet for this purpose,” he said.
Shortly after his statement however, LSE contacted journalists to say they did not offer any such Bsc or any courses by correspondence, suggesting the athlete was referring instead to a University of London course for which it provided academic guidance and text books. According to that institution's website, registration for the three to eight-year course closed on November 30 and costs £4,205 for non-graduates.
The judge hearing Pistorius' bail application granted his release, saying he could go out between 7am and 12pm, and afterwards if he had permission from the police. It is thought that he will no longer have to do the community service he was ordered to under his previous conviction and sentence.
The athlete appeared rested and relaxed during the two-hour hearing, even joking with barrister Barry Roux and smiling for the cameras.
After the court adjourned, he was driven by his brother Carl to the department of correctional services headquarters to be fitted with an electronic tag, which the double amputee will wear on his wrist rather than the habitual ankle bracelet.
The athlete avoided the cameras by entering the building through parking normally reserved for departmental directors. When he left, probation officials stopped traffic on the public road to allow the top-of-the-range Audi he was being driven in to leave the building at speed.
A spokesman for the Pistorius family declined to say how he would pay for the degree or afford the legal fees for the constitutional court hearing. Challenging the SCA appeal, his barrister Barry Roux said his client could not afford any more legal proceedings.