As homeless crisis continues, 2 dead at notorious Seattle camp
A Tuesday evening shooting at Seattle’s most notorious homeless camp left two men dead and three people seriously wounded as police searched for those responsible.
Gunfire erupted at the Beacon Hill homeless camp known as “The Jungle” shortly after 7:30 p.m. By the time shooting subsided, one person was dead, another was mortally wounded and at least two shooters had fled.
It wasn’t immediately clear what prompted the shooting. The camp, in woods next to Interstate 5, has seen violence in the past, and police say the victims likely knew their assailants.
The shooting comes as city of Seattle leaders attempt to grapple with a homelessness crisis. Recent efforts have seen police make sweeps through areas popular with homeless campers, and attention has recently fallen on car-dwellers who’ve drawn complaints in several North Seattle neighborhoods.
Statements from police and medical officials indicate that five people were shot shortly after 7:20 p.m. in an area of The Jungle, near the 1500 block of Airport Way South.
Police report two people had died. One died at the camp and another at Harborview Medical Center.
Harborview spokeswoman Susan Gregg said the three surviving shooting victims were rushed into surgery. Those three -- a man and two women -- were in serious condition in intensive care Wednesday morning. Two had been upgraded from critical. 
Gregg said the patients ranged in age from 25 to 45, and had suffered gunshot wounds to their torsos. 
Addressing a Seattle City Council committee Wednesday morning, Seattle Police Chief Kathleen O’Toole said the victims appear to have been shot by people known to them.
“We have no evidence at this point that they were targeted because they were homeless,” O’Toole said. “We believe this is likely an incident that occurred between people who were known to each other.”
Homicide detectives are interviewing witnesses as officers continue to pay close attention to the city’s homeless residents in the wake of the shooting, O’Toole continued. 
Assistant Police Chief Bob Merner said Tuesday night that police have identified two persons of interest in the shooting.
Tactically oriented police units – the department SWAT team and anti-crime teams – swept the area following the shooting. It does not appear any arrests were made.
The shooting comes two months after Seattle Mayor Ed Murray declared a homelessness emergency in the city. In that November announcement, Murray noted what was already apparent to most city residents – tents were popping up everywhere, and the residents weren’t heading anywhere.
"You can't help but wonder -- I can't help but wonder -- did I act too late? That's my reaction. Maybe I should have issued the state of emergency months earlier. We have tried to do the best we can given the circumstances we have, but obviously I'm going to question, was I good enough at my job? It's on me at the end," Murray said.
The city has yet to find resources matching the scale of the homelessness problem in Seattle.
A week ago, Murray opened up 50 parking spaces split between parking lots in Ballard and West Seattle in an effort to create a better space for people living in their cars. The best estimate available puts the number of Seattle car-dwellers above 700.
A new “village” of tiny houses recently opened on Capitol Hill. The 14 homes were welcomed by advocates and residents, but, like the parking lots, they come up short for a city with several thousand people living on the street.
Murray has proposed adding three new tent cities around the city, each serving about 100 people. He’s also argued that the city cold weather shelters should grow as well. Seattle currently provides 1,700 shelter beds, each used by an average of six persons each year.
On Tuesday, Murray announced that he will be asking voters to double the Seattle Housing Levy, which currently draws $145 million in property taxes. About $50 million of the increase, Murray said, would go to “serve our homeless neighbors.”
Tuesday night that duty fell to Seattle police officers and detectives canvasing The Jungle and, presumably, other homeless encampments. Police are asking anyone with any information about the case to call SPD’s Violent Crimes tip line at 206-233-5000.
Seattlepi.com reporter Levi Pulkkinen can be reached at 206-448-8348 or levipulkkinen@seattlepi.com. Follow Levi on Twitter at twitter.com/levipulk.