Police donned fire gear to 'extract victims who were calling from inside'
Police and firefighters from Phoenix and Glendale battled smoke, flames and bullets shortly before dawn Tuesday morning as they tried to rescue victimsfrom a burning house with a shooter inside.
Officers donned breathing gear to enter the burning home to help the victims as gunshots were heard, according to Sgt. Trent Crump, a Phoenix police spokesman.
Firefighters stood on the roof to extinguish the flames gushing from the home.
"It was one of the most fluid active scenes that I have heard in years. I have never heard in three decades of police officers putting on — with the assistance of the fire department — putting on safety gear and breathing apparatus to get up to a house with a charged hose or line so we can try to extract victims who were calling from inside," Crump said.
The first responders' efforts were praised by the Phoenix mayor, the police chief and others. But the outcome was heartbreaking — a mom, dad, two sisters and a brother, the shooter, died in the family house after the son opened fire.
Phoenix Police Sgt. Trent Crump identified those who died as parents Vic Buckner and Kimberly Buckner and daughters Kaitlin and Emma. The shooter was identified as son Alex Buckner, 26.
According to police, this is how the events unfolded at the northwest Phoenix house:
Officers arrived at the house, near 51st Avenue and Cactus Road, shortly before 5 a.m., responding to what they were told was an active-shooter call. One of the female victims was still inside, on the phone with dispatch trying to provide information, when officers noticed that smoke was starting to fill the home as well.
Another victim, an adult male, was spotted in an upstairs window trying to get the officers’ attention.
Police heard shots fired and scrambled for a plan to get people out of the home. They borrowed breathing apparatus and entered the tri-level house from various locations. They took one victim, an older teenage girl, out of a lower bedroom, and used a ladder to break out an upstairs window. The girl was transported to a hospital, where she soon died from her injuries.
Police then found a second victim, who was already dead, in one of the rooms. The smoke at this point became too thick to remain in the home, so officers evacuated.
They were replaced by a special-assignment unit trained in self-contained breathing gear and tactics. A police spokesman said there was a 45-minute lull between the first and second teams, during which time officers reported hearing no gunfire.
It was during this second entry that officers encountered the shooter, in what police say was a “seated position.”
A police spokesman said he did not know if the shooter had attempted to fire a weapon at officers or at himself.
Officers were beginning to sweep the house for other victims when the attic space caught fire, billowing smoke from the home and shooting flames from the ceiling. The Phoenix Fire Department designated the house a flash-over threat and evacuated the remaining officers and the dead suspect.
It was only after fire crews extinguished the rest of the fire that they were able to locate the two additional victims.
A 6-year-old girl also was transported to the hospital but died of her injuries.
Phoenix Police Chief Joseph Yahner said, "We had police officers holding fire hoses, trying to knock down the fire, so that other police officers could do their job. It was just a very unique situation. I really wish it would have turned out better — again, this is tragic. This is a family that is just devastated."
Phoenix Mayor Greg Stanton, who came to the house about 8 a.m. after hearing of the shooting, said the first responders' heroism gave everyone reasons to take heart.
Stanton talked about the "unbelievable tragedy" and "unspeakable violence" that occurred inside the home and praised Phoenix and Glendale police and firefighters for their actions.
“You have police officers who went into an active fire to pull out people to try to save their lives,” he said.
"Their professionalism, their heroism under the worst possible conditions has blown me away today as mayor of this city.
"“Thank you to our incredible heroes.”
Crump said three police officers were being treated for smoke inhalation.
"This was a situation that was very chaotic for an hour or two this morning. We think our guys did a good job, especially with what they had," he said. "They were able to extract some victims, but unfortunately it doesn’t sound like any of them survived. But we’re very pleased with the work of our officers this morning."
Yahner, who also spoke outside the house, said, "This is a unique scene. The coordination between police and fire of different agencies was just outstanding. We did our best to save lives and it was a horrific and tragic event."
Glendale Fire Department sent 16 people, three engine trucks, one ladder truck and a battalion chief to the scene to assist Phoenix fire crews, Glendale Fire Department spokesman Ron Hart said.
Yahner said, "I’m proud of the men and women in the Phoenix Police Department and Fire Department and our law-enforcement colleagues. Everyone did a very good job under very stressful, tragic circumstances."