Former Pitcairn mayor found guilty over child abuse images
Michael Warren, who downloaded more than 1000 images of child abuse while working in child protection, will serve his sentence on the tiny Pacific island
The former mayor of Pitcairn Island has been sentenced to 20-months in prison after he was convicted of possessing more than 1000 images and videos depicting child pornography.
The tiny British territory in the South Pacific, which has a population of around 50 people, gained international notoriety in 2004 when seven of the island’s 12 men were accused of a total of 55 sex crimes, some dating back 40 years.
According to crown prosecutor Kieran Raferty, former mayor Michael Warren - who served as the island’s mayor from 2008 to 2013 - began downloading images of child abuse in 2004.
During the years Warren downloaded the images he was working in child protection on the island - and travelling to New Zealand and the United Kingdom in an official capacity for further training in child protection.
Raferty said Warren’s initial defence was that he had downloaded the images because he wanted to understand child pornography after the 2004 sex abuse cases.
Warren has also been found guilty of engaging in an internet “sex chat” with a person purporting to be a 15-year-schoolgirl, and of possessing a video that showed a bound and gagged naked woman.
Warren will begin serving prison time when New Zealand police officers arrive on the island, which could take up to six months.
It is not known whether he will be detained on the island’s specially-built prison, which was constructed by islanders found guilty of sex crimes with material shipped out from Britain in kit form. If he is kept in the facility, he is likely to be the only inmate, and would effectively be serving his sentence in solitary confinement.
Since the sexual abuse scandals of 2004, Pitcairn has been trying to rehabilitate its community and attract people to the island - which could not survive without immigrants or more children born on the island.