Bill Cosby to stand trial for assault charges, judge rules
Norristown, Pennsylvania (CNN)More than a decade after he was first accused of sexual misconduct, Bill Cosby will go to trial.
A Pennsylvania judge found enough evidence during a hearing Tuesday to proceed with a criminal trial. It's not clear when his trial will start.
Cosby faces three counts of felony aggravated indecent assault from a 2004 case involving Andrea Constand, an employee at his alma mater, Temple University. She was the first of more than 50 women who have accused Cosby of sexual misconduct.
Each charge carries a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison, but the judge has the option to have him serve the sentences concurrently, which means he could serve 10 years in prison if convicted on all charges.
"The evidence presented today was evidence of nothing. They had 12 years to bring an accuser to confront Mr. Cosby. They chose not to," defense attorney Brian McMonagle said.
"There was no evidence of a crime here. And the inconsistencies that plagued this investigation from the beginning continue to plague it now. This case should end immediately."
As he walked into court Tuesday, the 78-year-old comedian and actor, who suffers from vision problems, held onto the arm of his spokesman, Andrew Wyatt. During the hearing, Cosby appeared to listen attentively and occasionally stretched his neck.
In the statement, Constand said Cosby invited her to his home in 2004 and told her to wear comfortable clothes. Constand said she had been grappling with issues in her life, and that Cosby gave her a few pills to "take the edge off."
"After hearing the weak, inconsistent and incredible evidence presented, it is clear why the prosecution did not allow its witness to speak and be confronted by the person she has accused," McMonagle said.
Another detective finished the questioning that day. That evening, Constand was allowed to review her statement. The defense said Constand crossed out or redacted parts of the statement.
For example, when recalling a visit to a casino where Cosby was performing, Constand said Cosby invited her to his room as he was going back.
Constand initially said she went to the room, lay down on the bed with Cosby, and that they were touching. But she later crossed that out, saying the two were merely close.
as new evidence The parties reached a civil settlement in 2006, but the case was reopened as new evidence came to light, including a number of other accusers coming forward and some of Cosby's remarks during a 2005 deposition that were recently unsealed.
more than 50 women Cosby has been accused of sexual misconduct by more than 50 women . But he will never stand trial in the vast majority of cases because the statutes of limitations have passed.
At one point, she told a lawyer she had "no opinion" on whether Cosby's admission to the alleged procurement of Quaaludes for women he wanted to have sex with violated their marriage vows.