Good Samaritans Help Police Subdue Man Being Investigated By Feds « CBS Dallas / Fort Worth
ARLINGTON (CBSDFW.COM) – Arlington police dash-cam video showed suspect Wahib Sadek getting out of his car and approaching officer Richard Morrison.
Arlington resident Andrew Drake witnessed it at the intersection of Green Oaks Boulevard and Waterview.
“I was just two lanes over when I saw the guy get out walking toward the police officer,” said Drake.
Drake said he knew he had to pull over to help.
“I was convinced I was going to see the worst scenario,” said Drake.
Officer Morrison fired his taser to stop Sadek after he was accused of wielding a six to eight-inch knife at a woman waiting at a red light at a nearby intersection that’s close to an elementary school.
Morrison hit Sadek twice with the taser.
“It slowed him down a little bit. But of course, on the video, he comes at me still,” said Morrison
Morrison said it took four shots of the taser to subdue Sadek.
Morrison said he was lucky.
Inside Sadek’s car, officers found the knife and three guns, including an AK-47, and a loaded 45-caliber pistol.
“If there was a weapon in his hand when he came out of the vehicle, there would have been a shoot-out,” said Morrison
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives is tracing those guns.
The FBI is also investigating after police said Sadek claimed he’s affiliated with a terrorist organization.
Drake said the suspect’s behavior became erratic as he, another good Samaritan and the officer placed him in the squad car.
“That’s when he tried to either bite or kiss him (officer Morrison) on the neck, and so the officer grabbed him and had a hold on him and then we shoved him into the car. Then, he began spitting on the windows,” said Drake.
Officer Morrison said he’s thankful that several witnesses came over to help him.
“That’s the best thing about our city, it’s an honor to serve our citizens but it’s an even greater honor when I know that if an officer is in trouble, they are willing to assist us as well,” said Morrison
“I’m not going to sit there and watch a police officer be attacked or assaulted especially when he’s on his own, and I’d do it again any day even if it meant putting my life on the line,” said Drake
Drake said he served in the U.S. Coast Guard for six years, but received a medical discharge because of a back injury. He said if it weren’t for that injury, he’d be a police officer today.
Sadek remains in the Arlington jail on a $60,000 bond.
(©2016 CBS Local Media, a division of CBS Radio Inc. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.)