Turkey coup: Arrest warrants issued for 42 journalists
Istanbul (CNN)Turkish authorities have issued arrest warrants for 42 journalists, state-run news agency Anadolu reported Monday, as a purge on the country's democratic institutions following a failed military coup intensifies.
Turkey has cracked down on agencies and individuals suspected of having ties to cleric Fethullah Gulen , whom President Recep Tayyip Erdogan blames for masterminding the July 15 attempted coup. Gulen, a longtime rival of Erdogan's, lives in self-imposed exile in the United States.
Thousands of supporters from Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's AKP party and the opposition CHP join forces Sunday, July 24, in an anti-coup rally in Istanbul's Taksim Square.
Although the opposition denounced the coup and supported Erdogan, it has voted against his state of emergency declaration. Secularists have said their rejection of the coup does not mean they agree with government measures enacted afterward.
The cross-party event was held in honor of democracy and to protest the attempted coup that took place in the early hours of July 16.
The mood at the demonstration, dubbed the "Republic and Democracy Rally," was celebratory and patriotic and a rare show of unity between government and opposition supporters.
"We are all together in Taksim today," Kemal Kilicdaroglu, leader of the opposition, told supporters. "Today is a day we made history all together,"
Since the attempted coup, Turkey's government has fired or suspended 50,000 people from the country's institutions and security forces.
An official from Erdogan's office said prosecutors had requested the journalists' arrest "to shed light on the coup plot."
"Obviously this isn't related to journalistic activities but possible criminal conduct," the official said.
The warrants were issued after authorities fired or suspended at least 50,000 people from Turkey's institutions and security forces last week. They included judges, teachers, police and journalists.
Turkish satirical magazine LeMan, often compared to France's Charlie Hebdo, said the government had prevented it -- via a court order -- from publishing its edition following the coup, adding it was also facing other threats.
The issue of LeMan that was banned from publication featured a cartoon on the cover of Turkish soldiers facing off against anti-coup protesters, pushed toward each other by giant hands.
2015 gun attacks killed 12 people When the cover was tweeted ahead of publication, protesters gathered at the magazine's offices, saying, "Don't you know what happened to Charlie Hebdo?" -- apparently a reference to the 2015 gun attacks in Paris that killed 12 people
"We should always take political Islamist threats seriously, because they do as they say," Aknar said. "If not today, tomorrow. When there's an opportunity."
in a statement. "The wholesale and arbitrary nature of the attacks on the Turkish media in the past week seems to reflect a desire to exact revenge and bring them into line. It is time the authorities put a stop to this," Bihr said in a statement.
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk One demonstrator held a flag with Turkey's secular founder, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk , superimposed on Turkey's red, crescent moon banner. He "put in place the fundamentals for this democracy to work in the best way," she said.
"We're talking about the coup, not about secularity," another told CNN's Nic Robertson. "It's our business. We can decide it. We can vote for the people who (are) trying to be more autocratic. But now, if there will be a coup, we can't change it."
"We decided that there won't be a guards unit in this compound anymore," he said.
The roundup of suspected coup plotters is not the only government response to the uprising.
suspects can be detained for as long as 30 days Under a new presidential decree following the attempted coup, suspects can be detained for as long as 30 days without charge, and the government can listen in on all conversations they have with their attorneys.