Ryan Lochte and Three Teammates Robbed at Gunpoint
“Their taxi was stopped by individuals posing as armed police officers who demanded the athletes’ money and other personal belongings,” a spokesman for the United States Olympic Committee said. “All four athletes are safe and cooperating with authorities.”
The American swimmers robbed on Sunday had left a party at Club France, a French hospitality house established during the Rio Games in the upscale Lagoa neighborhood, the spokesman said.
Hugo Sppezapria, a spokesman for Club France, confirmed that the swimmers had spent several hours at a party there, which began at 11:30 p.m. Saturday and lasted until 5 a.m.
The party featured electronic house music, he said, and the group had attended to celebrate another swimmer’s birthday. He said the Americans had left around 3 a.m.
Sppezapria distanced the party from the episode, saying that a police car had been stationed outside Club France all night. “It sounds like a rough situation,” he said. “But it didn’t happen here.”
The civil police in the state of Rio said they were investigating. One of the swimmers had spoken with the police, they said, and given a report of the episode. That swimmer, who was not named by the civil police, said he and his teammates were in a taxi when they were stopped and held up. He told the police he did not know precisely where the robbery took place.
The civil police said the other swimmers would be asked to provide separate accounts. The police were also trying to track down the taxi driver.
Bentz, one of the swimmers who was robbed, declined to comment when reached by The New York Times on Sunday. Lochte initially denied reports of the robbery through Olympic officials.
He later told NBC News that one of the men had put a cocked gun to his head.
“We got pulled over, in the taxi, and these guys came out with a badge, a police badge — no lights, no nothing, just a police badge — and they pulled us over,” he said. “They pulled out their guns, they told the other swimmers to get down on the ground — they got down on the ground. I refused — I was like, we didn’t do anything wrong, so — I’m not getting down on the ground. “And then the guy pulled out his gun, he cocked it, put it to my forehead, and he said, ‘Get down,’ and I put my hands up. I was like, whatever. He took our money, he took my wallet — he left my cellphone, he left my credentials.”
“I think they’re all shaken up,” Ileana Lochte, the swimmer’s mother, told USA Today. “They just took their wallets, and basically that was it.”
Bentz and Conger participated in the heats of the 4x200-meter freestyle relay, but not the final. Feigen did the same in the 4x100-meter relay.
Lochte won a gold medal in the 4x200-meter freestyle relay and finished fifth in the 200-meter individual medley, his only individual event. The swimming competition at the Rio Games had concluded Saturday night.
At a news conference on Sunday, another American swimmer, Ryan Murphy, mentioned the security briefings the team had received before the Games. “I think we all trust our security guys, and they’ve done a great job,” he said.
A spokesman for U.S.A. Swimming declined at the news conference to specify what instructions those briefings had provided but noted that they had included tips on transportation in Rio.
Conflicting accounts of the taxi episode had swirled on Sunday morning, after a spokesman for the International Olympic Committee said that reports of the robbery were “absolutely not true,” citing information that had been provided by the United States committee.
After Ileana Lochte’s statements that her son had indeed been robbed, the spokesman for the International Olympic Committee said he had simply passed along information from the American Olympic officials.
Ryan Lochte did not respond Sunday to a request for comment. However, in a post on Instagram, he said, “While it is true that my teammates and I were the victims of a robbery early Sunday morning, what is most important is that we are safe and unharmed.”
David Marsh, Ryan Lochte’s coach, referred inquiries to U.S.A. Swimming, which did not immediately reply to a request for comment.
Brazil’s minister of sport, Leonardo Picciani, seemed to suggest to reporters on Sunday that the swimmers bore some responsibility for venturing out beyond the heavily fortified Olympics zone.
“Security in the Games has been absolutely efficient,” Picciani was quoted as saying by the newspaper Estadão. “The delegations have not had problems. Those who have bought tickets have not had problems.
“Certainly no athletes have had problems in their places of accommodation, their training facilities and the athletes’ village.”