Washington state mall shooting leaves 5 dead as police search for Hispanic gunman
Authorities are looking for the active shooter who reportedly shouted a woman's name repeatedly before he opened fire and killed five people during a deadly shooting at a mall north of Seattle on Friday evening.
Four women and one man are confirmed dead after the shooting at the Cascade Mall in Burlington, about 65 miles north of Seattle, the Washington State Patrol said.
Victims have not been identified, however police said their ages ranged from teenager to elderly. 
The gunman - who was described as Hispanic, in his early 20s and wearing all black - walked into Macy's and opened fire in the the makeup department of the store about 7pm local time. 
There have also been unconfirmed reports the suspect shouted a woman's name multiple times just moments before opening fire, according to FOX-Q13.
During a press conference on Saturday morning, authorities said the man was seen entering the mall without a gun about 10 minutes before he started shooting in the Macy's.
At the press conference, mayor Steve Sexton said the 'long arm of the law' will be used to catch the shooter, who he described as a 'son of a b***h'.
'Our community comes together in times of tragedy,' Sexton said.
'Our support goes with them (law enforcement), to help them... bring the son of a b***h who did this to our community to justice.'
Officials released stills from video surveillance of a young-looking suspect holding what appears to be a rifle.
In two of them the man can be seen appearing to not have anything in his hands, while other images show him carrying something - which could be the rifle.
FBI investigators said there are no signs to suggest the shooting was terrorism.  
It comes after Sgt. Mark Francis asked people to 'stay indoors' and to 'stay secure' at a press conference overnight.
Francis said the gunman left the scene before police arrived. The rifle the suspect appears to be carrying looks similar to a Marlin Model 60 or Ruger 10/22.
Authorities believe there is only one shooter and said the motive was unknown.  
The mall had been evacuated by 8.30pm local time and emergency medical personnel were cleared to enter and attend to any injuries.
The station also reported that a nearby high school football game and neighboring businesses were evacuated as a precaution. 
Police received calls around 6.58pm local time that shots were fired at the mall, Trooper Rick Johnson told CNN. 
'Right now we can't assume anything,' he said.
'So they're still interviewing witnesses and trying to get a good idea of exactly what action to take next. 
'We're just asking people to, obviously, stay away from the area. Stay inside and obviously report anything suspicious that they may see.'
Gov. Jay Inslee said tragedy has struck in Washington state in Burlington.
The governor said in a statement that many questions remain but state patrol and local law enforcement are on the scene working swiftly to locate the shooter and clear the area.
'Trudi and I send our condolences to the families of the victims and prayers for anyone injured,' Inslee said.
'We urge residents to heed all safety and detour warnings. 
'Stay close to your friends and loved ones as we await more information and, hopefully, news of the suspect's capture.' 
Video from the scene showed a heavy police force swarming the mall on Friday evening.
Streets surrounding the mall and access roads to entrances to the facility had been closed off by police. 
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and Explosives said Friday night it was deploying to Burlington, Washington. 
The FBI also said it is assisting local authorities in the investigation into the deadly mall shooting.  
An employee at a restaurant near the deadly mall shooting said they 'immediately locked the doors' when they heard of the mayhem unfolding on Friday night.
Stephanie Bose, an assistant general manager at Johnny Carino's Italian restaurant near Cascade Mall in Burlington, Washington, told The Associated Press the shooting happened inside the Macy's department store. 
Her restaurant is just outside the Macy's. 
A boyfriend of one of Bose's employees came into the restaurant after trying to go to the mall. 
She said he saw people screaming and police blocking the door with assault rifles.
'He was trying to go to the mall and people were screaming,' she said. 'It was frantic.'
She said he could see police at the doors with assault rifles and said they were no longer guarding the doors as of 9.30pm local time.  
After police evacuated the building, buses were transporting survivors to His Place Church in Burlington, Francis said.
Francis also said those who have cars in the parking lot can pick them up sometime tomorrow.
The Cascade Mall is an enclosed shopping mall in Burlington, Washington that opened in 1990, according to the mall's website. 
It features J.C. Penney, TJ Maxx, and Macy's stores, among other stores, restaurants and a movie theater. 
The shooting comes less than a week after a man stabbed nine people at a mall in central Minnesota before being shot dead.