Carjacking suspect rams police car, APD says
ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — A carjacking suspect speeding through city streets in an attempt to elude deputies early Friday morning crashed into a police officer on his way home from his shift, according to a spokesman for the Albuquerque Police Department.
Officer Fred Duran said the officer was taken to the hospital and has several broken bones and cuts, and another officer was treated for smoke inhalation.
A deputy sustained minor injuries in a separate crash during the pursuit, said Felicia Romero, a spokeswoman for the sheriff’s department.
Following the crash deputies took five suspects into custody and four were taken to the hospital to be treated for minor injuries, Romero said. She released a statement about the incident Friday evening but said authorities will not be identifying the suspects who were taken into custody. She did not say why.
Romero said the chase started shortly after 3 a.m. when a woman called deputies to her South Valley home, saying she had been carjacked at gunpoint by five people. Deputies spotted the stolen car nearby a short time later.
Romero said a deputy tried to pull over the car for a traffic stop, but the driver sped away. The deputy then crashed his car during the chase.
“The county vehicle may have lost control due to the pursuit and hit a barrier,” Romero said.
The deputy was taken to the hospital with minor injuries and then released.
Around 4 a.m. deputies asked APD for help with the pursuit, Duran said. He said officers were in the process of providing backup when the suspects raced through a red light at Atrisco and St. Joseph’s NW, crashing into an off-duty officer who had just finished his shift and was driving a marked patrol unit.
“The suspect T-boned the officer’s vehicle causing it to spin out of control and pin the officer inside,” Duran said. “Both agencies were able to get to the officer and deputies on scene quickly and render aid to all involved.”
Duran said three of the people in the carjacked vehicle had felony warrants. He said they had ties to the group of people arrested in the murder of 18-year-old Aliyah Garcia, but he didn’t say how they were tied to the fatal shooting. Garcia, an innocent bystander, was shot and killed on May 26 and three people, including 16-year-old twin boys, were arrested in her murder last week.
“These are also the same subjects being investigated for many other violent crimes which have occurred across Albuquerque and Bernalillo County within the past couple months,” Duran said.