Lebanon man charged with setting church fire, stabbing pair
LEBANON - A local man is charged with multiple stabbings and arsons, including the fire that claimed the historic First Baptist Church last Wednesday.Anthony K. Boisvert, 27, was taken into custody Sunday night about 9:10 p.m. after leading police on a foot chase. He is charged with two counts of 1st degree assault and three counts of arson, all felonies. "He is being held pending those charges and on a detainer by probation/parole," police said.Boisvert was quickly identified as a person of interest in the church fire, which was reported about 11:20 p.m. on Dec. 29, and another just after midnight on Dec. 29 at 68 Mascoma St., where firefighters found a smoldering sofa."Through investigation, the Lebanon Police Department developed information that both fires were deliberately set and began pursuing a person of interest," according to a statement.About 9:10 p.m. on Sunday, police received a 911 call reporting two people had been stabbed at Boulder's Condominium Complex at 20 Wolf Road. The victims were a 52-year-old man and a 66-year-old female, both with multiple stab wounds, according to police. They were transported to Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center for treatment of wounds described as non-life threatening.Both victims identified Boisvert and said he had fled on foot after the attack.According to police, a widespread search was launched with the help of K-9 "Max" and handler Officer Jeremy Perkins."Additional personnel were called in to assist and the Tactical Containment Team was called in and put on standby. At approximately 10:14 p.m. Boisvert was located on foot in front of a Tannery Lane address by Sgt. Jeff Perkins," police said. "He was taken into custody without further incident."The third arson Boisvert is charged with took place nearly a year ago. During the course of the current investigation, police said they developed evidence Boisvert was responsible for setting a fire Jan. 16, 2016, at 174 Hanover St. Extension. That building was abandoned at the time and a total loss.Boisvert will be arraigned Tuesday in Lebanon circuit court.