2 Killed In Crash Following New Haven Carjacking
Two men suspected of carjacking a New Haven man early Monday were killed when they crashed the stolen SUV into the side of a synagogue while trying to elude New Haven police. The force of the crash left extensive damage to the synagogue.
Police said Andrew Bolden-Velez, 20, and Tommy Clayton Brown, 23, approached the victim near Blake and Fitch streets about 12:15 a.m. and claimed to have a handgun. The men took the victim's 2005 Toyota Highlander after he handed over his cellphone and wallet. The victim was not injured.
A little more than an hour later a New Haven officer spotted the stolen SUV at Whalley and Winthrop avenues. The officer called for backup and when backup arrived tried to pull the SUV over, police said. Rather than stop, the SUV driver fled. "Minutes later, officers found the stolen car" crashed into the synagogue, New Haven Officer David Hartman said.
Police said they believe the carjackers are the men who died in the crash.
New Haven police and New Haven State's Attorney Patrick Griffin asked state police to take over the investigation of the crash and what led to it.
It's not clear whether the New Haven officers were chasing the SUV, and police declined to clarify that point Monday.
The synagogue's immediate past president, Andrew Hirshfeld, said damage to the building was extensive and could cost more than $100,000 to repair.
The crash left an "SUV-sized hole" in the synagogue, Hirshfield said. He said a firefighter who responded to the crash told him that he thought the vehicle was going about 100 mph before becoming airborne.　
"A number of windows were broken and there was damage to exterior and interior masonry," Hirshfield said. Crews were able to board up the hole and clear debris, he said.
Services planned for Sunday evening and the rest of the week will go on as planned in a smaller chapel that was not affected by the crash, he said.
Most of the damage was contained to the side of the building that houses a social hall and the sanctuary, where Saturday morning services are held. Hirshfield said synagogue officials will meet with the fire marshal and the building inspector to determine when those parts of the building are secure enough to reopen.
The congregation consists of about 270 individuals and families. As synagogue leaders assessed the damage, they thought of the two men who died in the crash.
"First and foremost, we are thinking of the victims of this terrible tragedy and their families,'' Hirshfeld said.
Anybody who witnessed the crash or the moments just before the crash is asked to call Trooper Mark Pereira at 860-848-6579.