Attorneys: Sandusky's adopted son says he's also a victim
Jerry Sandusky Matt Sandusky, one of six adopted children of Jerry Sandusky , said through his attorney Thursday that he was sexually abused by the former Penn State assistant football coach, adding that he had been prepared to testify against him in a high-profile child rape case.
"At Matt's request, we immediately arranged a meeting between him and the prosecutors and investigators," attorneys Andrew Shubin and Justine Andronici said in a statement. "This has been an extremely painful experience for Matt, and he has asked us to convey his request that the media respect his privacy."
Prosecutors dropped one of the original 52 counts earlier this week because the statute on which that charge was based wasn't in effect on the date of the alleged incident. His accuser said it occurred in 1995 or 1996, but the unlawful contact with a minor statute didn't apply until 1997.
In a portion of the interview that was not part of the original November broadcast, Sandusky told Costas that he "didn't go around seeking out every young person for sexual needs that I've helped." There are likely "many young people who would come forward and say that my methods and what I had done for them made a very positive impact on their life," Sandusky said.
On Wednesday, the defense called Dr. Jonathan Dranov, an acquaintance of McQueary's, who told jurors that the former assistant coach told him he heard "sexual sounds" and saw the boy in the shower when an arm reached around him but, did not actually see a sexual encounter. Sandusky then emerged from the shower area, he said.
That account is different from what McQueary described in his testimony. He said that he witnessed Sandusky pressing against the boy in the shower and that it seemed obvious that he had been raping him.
"Matt went into the shower, and then me and Jerry came in ... he started pumping his hand full of soap, like he was going to throw it. Matt got out ... he went to another shower [area]."
"He would visit our house occasionally, but he was never one to get very attached to anyone. He would stand off in the corner somewhere and watch as I would be wrestling with the other kids. He became an instant challenge for me," Sandusky wrote. "I didn't want to see him go through life by himself at such a young age. I didn't want to lose him to whatever other fates might have awaited him, so I kept trying and trying to pull him in."