Pedro Hernandez Gets 25 Years to Life in Murder of Etan Patz
But Justice Maxwell Wiley said prosecutors had presented “an extremely convincing case of the defendant’s guilt.” As he delivered his sentence, the judge said that Mr. Hernandez, who has three children, must have understood the pain he had caused the Patz family.
“The defendant kept a terrible secret for 33 years,” the judge said. “His silence caused the Patz family indescribable anguish and served to compound their grief.”
The case against Mr. Hernandez, 56, turned almost entirely on videotaped confessions he made to the police and a prosecutor, statements that his lawyers argued were fictions invented by a mentally ill man of diminished intellectual capacity under intense pressure from detectives. Etan’s body has never been found, and no scientific evidence linked Mr. Hernandez to the crime.
But a jury in February ultimately found Mr. Hernandez’s statements compelling and determined that his account meshed with the facts surrounding Etan’s disappearance.
Etan, a 6-year-old boy, vanished on May 25, 1979, while walking to a school bus stop near his parents’ loft in the SoHo neighborhood. It was the first time Etan’s parents had allowed him to go to the bus stop alone. Etan, a first grader, was carrying a tote bag full of Matchbox cars and a dollar to buy a drink. He never made it to school.
The case sent a wave of fear through New York City and reverberated with parents across the country who had to rethink where or whether to let their children venture out alone. New Yorkers from that era still remember the search: police helicopters hovering over Lower Manhattan, volunteers shouting Etan’s name in the street, the ubiquitous posters with an image of the sandy-haired boy.
As the years dragged on without an arrest, the Patz family worked with parents of other missing children to raise awareness about child abductions. (Etan was one of the first missing children to be pictured on a milk carton.)
Their efforts led to changes in the way law enforcement authorities track such cases and helped prompt the creation of the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.
Mr. Hernandez’s conviction was a major victory for the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., who reopened the long-dormant case in 2010 at the request of the Patz family, a decision that created a wave of publicity that eventually led to Mr. Hernandez’s arrest.
“Etan was never forgotten,” Mr. Vance said on Tuesday in an interview before Mr. Hernandez’s sentencing. “We refused to let him disappear into history because we were committed to taking another hard look at this case, and that hard look paid off.”
Mr. Hernandez, a disabled factory worker living in a small New Jersey town near Philadelphia, did not become a suspect until May 2012, when his brother-in-law called the police to share his suspicion that he could be responsible. The brother-in-law had seen news reports that the police were digging up a basement in SoHo, searching for Etan’s body, as part of the renewed investigation.
In 1979, Mr. Hernandez was a high school dropout working as a clerk in a bodega at West Broadway and Prince Street, near Etan’s bus stop.
After a long day of interrogation in May 2012, he told detectives in a videotaped interview that he had met Etan outside the bodega and lured him into the basement with the promise of soda. There, he said, he choked the boy. He later repeated the story to a prosecutor during a longer interview, which was also recorded.
“I just couldn’t let go,” Mr. Hernandez said in one interview. “I felt like something just took over me.”
Mr. Hernandez said he put Etan inside a plastic bag and then inside a box and left him a block away in an alleyway with some trash. He said the child was still alive when he abandoned him. He also denied that he had sexually abused Etan.
Mr. Hernandez’s lawyers presented evidence that he had a low IQ as well as schizotypal personality disorder, which caused him to mingle fact and fiction. His daughter testified that he sometimes hallucinated about demons and an angelic woman dressed in white.
Mr. Fishbein told the jury that Mr. Hernandez’s weak personality cracked under questioning from the detectives: He convinced himself he was guilty.
The prosecution team — Joan Illuzzi, Joel J. Seidemann and James Vinocur — introduced witnesses who said that Mr. Hernandez had made a similar confession to people at a prayer retreat shortly after Etan disappeared. In addition, his former wife and a childhood friend testified that Mr. Hernandez had told them in the early 1980s that he had killed a boy in New York City, although he gave different details.
In the end, the jurors accepted Mr. Hernandez’s words as credible. One juror said that Mr. Hernandez might have a personality disorder but that none of the experts who had testified convinced the juror that the disorder could make a man confess to something he had invented.
“We think he could tell right from wrong,” the juror, Michael Castellon, said. “He could tell fantasy from reality.”
At a news conference outside the courthouse, Mr. Patz said the sentencing brought an end to the uncertainty over Etan’s fate, which he and his wife thought would never come.
“There were so many false leads, so many blind alleys, so many years went by — we didn’t know if it would ever happen,” he said. “Now I know what the face of evil looks like, and he’s finally convicted.”
Breaking with normal practice, all three prosecutors addressed the judge before the sentencing, portraying Mr. Hernandez as a deceitful man with a history of cocaine abuse and domestic violence who had tried to avoid the consequences of his act and had feigned mental illness after he was arrested.
“He single-handedly caused many families to fear their neighbors and their parks and their playgrounds,” Ms. Illuzzi said. “He is the stuff that nightmares are made of.”