Ohio gender reveal party: A joyful occasion turns deadly
An expectant mother would be sharing, and possibly learning for herself, the gender of her unborn child.
After the "gender reveal" party was over, a dozen or so people, including children, had reportedly settled in to watch a "Spider-Man" movie
Police near Cincinnati say two gunmen in hoodies opened fire with handguns, killing a woman and wounded eight others, including three children.
"We don't know who the suspects are or why they did this," said Mark Denney, chief of police in Colerain Township, on Sunday evening. "We're not sure if (the suspects) were allowed in or they forced entry at this point."
A gender reveal party often involves the expectant parents and their gathered guests learning the soon-to-arrive baby's gender at the same time. It includes a dramatic moment when pink or blue is revealed to all gathered -- by opening a box that's full of balloons in one of the colors, for instance, or slicing a cake to reveal blue or pink coloring inside.
WLWT A family member told CNN affiliate WLWT that a pregnant woman was shot in the leg and lost her baby. The woman has been treated and released from the hospital, the station reported. Denney couldn't confirm that detail. It was not clear whether she was the guest of honor.
Police also didn't know how many people were in the home for the party or the possible relationship between the suspect and the victims, Denney said.
James Love, spokesman for the Colerain Township Police Department, told HLN's Erica Hill Monday that investigators are following every lead they get. "This situation seems to have come out of the blue," Love said.
"We as police and the community has been recently coming together, trying to unite ourselves, trying to create a community sense, once again trying to put up good defenses," he said. "Lights, cameras and everything else to try to cut down on what has become a problem in this neighborhood."
"I just seen two people walk by, I looked outside, next thing I know they just ran in and just start shooting," the man says. He tells the operator he thinks he has been shot in the stomach and that he's bleeding.
"There is little kids hurt and everything," she says. "I was sitting in my car, they just ran in and started shooting. There's a pregnant girl here ... oh my God."
At the request of the operator the woman yells at people in the house to find out how many people have been shot, but is unable to establish the number. She says she saw the gunmen run away.
"Ma'am, all I know is, I don't know what's going on, all I know is she's a neighbor. I was at home minding my business and I just heard someone in distress banging on my door and a young lady was bleeding and she said she'd been shot and so had someone else and I just tried to come out and see what was going on," she says.
"But we have no information that makes us believe there is any specific threat to our community," the police chief said.
"Our hearts are heavy with what we've seen and experienced in our community," Love said.