Kim Wall: What we know about macabre submarine death case
Swedish journalist Kim Wall, 30, disappeared during the night of 10 August.
She was last seen embarking on a trip off the Copenhagen coast in a homemade submarine built by Danish inventor Peter Madsen.
Her mutilated torso was found by a passing cyclist on 21 August. Her head, legs and clothing were found in weighted-down bags by police divers on 6 October.
Mr Madsen initially said she died after being accidently hit on the head by the submarine's heavy hatch. He denied charges of murder and mutilating a corpse.
He later said she died from carbon monoxide poisoning inside the submarine while he was up on deck, and admitted to dismembering her body, according to police.
The unfolding details of Mr Madsen's case are being closely followed in Scandinavia.
A respected freelance journalist, Ms Wall was researching a feature about Peter Madsen, an inventor who built his private 40-tonne submarine, UC3 Nautilus, through crowdfunding in 2008.
She had previously reported from North Korea, the South Pacific, Uganda and Haiti, writing for the New York Times, Guardian, Vice and the South China Morning Post.
She met Mr Madsen at around 19:00 local time on Thursday 10 August at Refshaleoen, a harbour area in Copenhagen, and she boarded the Nautilus. The last picture of the pair in the sub's conning tower was taken at 20:30 by a man on a cruise ship, a short time before sunset.
Ms Wall did not return and was reported missing by her boyfriend at 02:30 on Friday.
The sub was not equipped with satellite tracking so after the alarm was raised in the early hours of Friday, rescue services searched for the vessel for hours.
It was not until 10:30 on 11 August that the first sighting of the vessel was confirmed from a lighthouse in the Oresund, a strait between Sweden and Denmark.
A merchant ship later reported coming within 30m (98ft) of the unlit sub to the north-west of the Oresund bridge at about midnight on 10 August. Police say at that point, the submarine crossed the channel from Denmark towards Sweden in the southern part of the Oresund.
Contact with Mr Madsen was finally established. But half an hour after the first reported sighting, the submarine sank and Mr Madsen was taken to safety by rescue services.
After analysing the wreck, Copenhagen police said on 14 August that "the sinking of the submarine was allegedly a consequence of a deliberate act".
What happened to the Swedish journalist on the submarine is unclear and it was 13 days before she was confirmed dead.
But a number of macabre facts have emerged.
Copenhagen police announced on 21 August that a torso had been found on the shore of Klydesoen, to the south of Copenhagen.
The arms, legs and head had been "removed as a result of deliberate cutting", Copenhagen police chief Jens Moller Jensen said. DNA tests later confirmed it was Ms Wall.
A post-mortem found knife wounds to her ribcage and genitals, which were believed to have been caused "around or shortly after her death".
More than a month later, on 6 October, police divers found the rest of her remains about 1km (0.6 miles) from where her torso had been discovered, in Koge Bay.
Mr Moller Jensen said they were in bags that had been weighted down with car pipes and metal pieces.
A post-mortem found no evidence of fractures to Ms Wall's skull, which appeared to contradict Mr Madsen's first assertion that her head was smashed by a hatch.
A cause of death has not yet been established.
Mr Madsen denies charges of murder and sexual assault without intercourse. He is also charged with mutilating a body.
Initially the inventor, well known in Denmark for his submarine and rocket activities, said he had dropped Ms Wall off after dark at about 22:30 on 10 August at the Halvandet restaurant, on the northern tip of Refshaleoen, close to where they had met earlier.
Restaurant owner Bo Petersen said the area was well covered by CCTV and he handed the video footage to police.
We do not know what was on the video but police said after a judicial hearing on 12 August that Peter Madsen had given them a new account of events.
That account finally emerged on 21 August when police said he told them there had been a "terrible accident" on board and he had buried her body at sea.
His lawyer Betina Hald Engmark said at the time that her client was relieved to have been able to shed more light on what had happened but it was not an admission of wrongdoing.
According to Mr Madsen's initial court statements, Ms Wall died after a 70kg (154lb) hatch fell on her head and he "buried" her at sea somewhere in Koge Bay, about 50km (30 miles) south of Copenhagen.
But on 30 October, police said the inventor had changed his story and told them she died of carbon monoxide poisoning. He also admitted to dismembering her body, having previously denied this.
At a pre-trial hearing on 3 October, the court was told footage of women being decapitated alive had been on a hard drive believed to belong to Mr Madsen - but he insisted the content was not his.