ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The wife of disgraced Chinese politician Bo Xilai, charged with the poisoning murder of a British businessman, has gone on trial today.
Gu Kailai potentially faces the death penalty if she is found guilty of the murder of Neil Haywood.
Her trial, which began today in south-eastern Anhui province city of Hefei, has become more than a simple criminal matter.
Gu is the daughter of a revolutionary hero, the wife of a man once considered a potential future leader of China, and an accomplished lawyer in her own right.
The trial is mixed up in a wider political struggle for control of the Communist Party in China and, as such, the very direction the economic giant will take.
Mr Bo has been sacked from all his posts and is being held in an unknown location awaiting an internal discipline hearing.
The charismatic politician had represented the great hope for the so-called Neo-Maoist faction of the Communist Party, with its emphasis on a return to state-sponsored solutions to the country's woes.
Supporters of the pair see the trial as political and designed to neutralise them.
"We've thought from the very beginning that this case has been a trap - a conspiracy to get Bo Xilai," supporter Mao Jianhui said outside court.
"They want to use Bo Xilai's wife's to smash him. And I just don't believe Gu Kailai would have killed Neil Haywood."
Xinhua wire service, which is effectively a part of the government, has reported that the evidence against Gu is "irrefutable", which means she is likely to be found guilty or, according to some, she may have already pleaded guilty.
Details of the trial are scarce, so the alleged motive for the killing has not been revealed, although Xinhua has also reported that she will argue that her actions were taken to protect her son from Haywood, a former associate of the couple.
While most analysts expect Gu to be convicted, she may escape the death penalty.
If a political deal can be struck with Bo's faction inside the Communist Party, she may be spared death in return for his political rivals being promoted.
Today's proceedings are happening behind closed doors and little may be known about the matter even after the court hearing ends.