Red Bull heir arrested in deadly Thai hit-and-run
A Thai police officer examines a damaged Ferrari in the garage of a home of Chaleo Yoovidhaya, the creator of the Red Bull energy drink Monday, Sept. 3, 2012 in Bangkok, Thailand. Vorayuth Yoovidhya, a grandson of Chaleo Yoovidhaya, is suspected of driving the car that struck and killed a policeman and then dragged the officer's body down a Bangkok street in an early-morning, hit-and-run accident, police said Monday. (AP Photo) THAILAND OUT
BANGKOK (AP) — A grandson of the creator of the Red Bull energy drink has been arrested for driving a Ferrari that struck a police officer and dragged his dead body down a Bangkok street in an early-morning hit-and-run, police said.
Police took Vorayuth Yoovidhya, 27, for questioning after tracing oil streaks for several blocks to his family's gated estate in a wealthy neighborhood of the Thai capital, officials said Monday.
He was facing charges of causing death by reckless driving and escaping arrest but was released on 500,000 baht ($15,900) bail.
Vorayuth admitted he drove the charcoal gray sports car but said the police officer's motorcycle abruptly cut in front of his vehicle, said police Maj. Gen. Anuchai Lekbamroong.
Bangkok's top police official, Lt. Gen. Comronwit Toopgrajank, said he took charge of the investigation after the local police superintendent tried to cover up the crime by turning in a bogus suspect. Comronwit personally led a team of officers who searched the compound of late Red Bull founder Chaleo Yoovidhya, one of Thailand's wealthiest men before he passed away this year, and confiscated a Ferrari with a badly damaged front bumper and broken windshield.
The victim, Sgt. Maj. Wichean Glanprasert, 47, was killed during a motorcycle patrol before dawn. Thai media reported that the car dragged the officer and his motorcycle for several dozen meters (feet) as it sped through the residential neighborhood.
Comronwit said he suspended the police superintendent for attempting to subvert the investigation.
"A policeman is dead. I can't let this stand. If I let this case get away, I'd rather quit," he told reporters. "I don't care how powerful they are. If I can't get the actual man in this case, I will resign."
Vorayuth did not speak to the media but the family lawyer said the family will take responsibility for the damages.
The Yoovidhya family was ranked the fourth richest in Thailand this year by Forbes magazine with a net worth of $5.4 billion. Red Bull creator Chaleo Yoovidhya died in his 80s in March, leaving his heirs a wide range of businesses, including shares in the globally popular energy drink brand, hospitals and real estate.
The family also co-owns the sole authorized importer of Ferrari cars in Thailand.