Teen arrested in killing of Jessica Ridgeway, 10-year-old Colorado girl
Updated at 8 p.m. ET: Police in Westminster, Colo., say they have made an arrest in the dismemberment killing of 10-year-old Jessica Ridgeway.
Police said the suspect is Austin Reed Sigg, a 17-year-old Westminster resident.
Police received a call late Tuesday evening that led them to a home near the Ketner Lake Open Space in Westminster, a Denver suburb, according to police.
Jessica was abducted on her way to school on Oct. 5. Her dismembered body was found Oct. 10 in a nearby field. 
"This morning the Ridgeway family was notified of this arrest," Westminster Police Chief Lee Birk said. "We hope and pray this arrest gives them some measure of closure in dealing with their horrible loss and tragedy."
Reached by phone Wednesday, the teen's mother told The Associated Press he surrendered to authorities. "I made the phone call, and he turned himself in. That's all I have to say," the mother told the AP. She broke down in tears and hung up.
Sources close to the investigation told CBS4 Denver that Sigg told his mother that he was responsible for the murder, and that she then called police. When police came to their home, he confessed to them and detailed what had happened, CBS4 reported. He allegedly told police that human remains were in a crawl space under their house. 
Police said authorities will also file charges against Sigg in connection with a May 28 attempted abduction of a female jogger at Ketner Lake. The lake is located near Witt Elementary School in Westminster where Jessica was headed on the day she vanished, police said.
In the May 28 case, a 22-year-old woman told police she fought off a stranger who grabbed her from behind and put a rag over her mouth. She told police the rag smelled of chemicals.
Police have no explained the connection between the two cases.
A former classmate, Austin Caisse, 17, described the suspect as “brilliant,” and told the Post he was into Japanese culture, anime, and shared an interest in collecting knives.
Rachel Bradley, another classmate, told The Associated Press that Sigg was interested in mortuary science. Sigg had enrolled at Arapahoe Community College, which has a mortuary science program.
Sigg is being held at a juvenile detention facility in Lakewood, Colo. Sigg is scheduled to appear at 8 a.m. in court on Thursday morning where he expected to be charged with two counts of murder in the first degree and kidnapping in the second degree, the Denver Post reported.
Follow US news from NBCNews.com on Twitter and Facebook