BBC in chaos as abuse victim says Lord McAlpine was not my attacker
Steve Messham, whose claims prompted David Cameron to open new inquiries into the north Wales child sex abuse scandal, said he had wrongly named Lord McAlpine as his attacker.
The Conservative grandee, a party treasurer under Baroness Thatcher, was not identified in the Newsnight programme eight days ago.
But yesterday his lawyers accused the current affairs programme of “taking the coward’s way out” by encouraging people to seek out the accused politician’s name on the internet.
Breaking his silence for the first time since the scandal erupted, Lord McAlpine condemned the “wholly false and seriously defamatory” claims against him. His solicitors suggested that they would sue Newsnight, which was previously heavily criticised after it dropped an investigation into Jimmy Savile’s decades of child abuse.
Rob Wilson, a Conservative MP, said the Nov 2 broadcast alleging that a senior Thatcher-era Tory was a paedophile had triggered a “wave of innuendo and smears”.
He added: “This brings into question whether their report was either fair or responsible. It is my view that this report was at best ill-advised and at worst incendiary, and could have damaged the reputation of an innocent man.”
The BBC “unreservedly” apologised last night for broadcasting the child sex abuse allegations.
In a statement the BBC said of its 2 November Newsnight programme: “We broadcast Mr Messham’s claim but did not identify the individual concerned. Mr Messham has tonight made a statement that makes clear he wrongly identified his abuser and has apologised.
“We also apologise unreservedly for having broadcast this report.”
The BBC said director general George Entwistle had designated a senior news executive to supervise last night’s edition of Newsnight.
BBC Scotland director Ken MacQuarrie will write an urgent report for Mr Entwistle covering what happened on the programme’s investigation into the north Wales children’s home scandal.
In the meantime there will be an immediate pause in all Newsnight investigations to assess editorial robustness and supervision.
The BBC is also suspending all co-productions with the Bureau of Investigative Journalism which worked with Newsnight on the investigation.
The apology was was read out in full at the start of last night’s Newsnight programme and the first section of the show was given over to the controversy.
Presenter Eddie Mair ended the programme by saying: “Newsnight will be back on Monday, probably.”
The latest BBC furore raises questions about whether Newsnight rushed into running a highly sensitive child abuse story in an attempt to rebuild its credibility after the damaging controversy over the scrapped Savile investigation. Several commentators pointed out the bitter irony of the programme’s failure to identify a genuine paedophile before it targeted an innocent man.
Andrew Neil, the broadcaster, said the very future of Newsnight was now in doubt.
Lord McAlpine has released a strongly-worded statement addressing the “slurs” against him
Lord McAlpine’s name circulated widely online after Mr Messham, a former resident of the Bryn Estyn care home in Wrexham, told the programme that he had been repeatedly abused by a high-ranking Tory politician. However, evidence emerged yesterday suggesting that the peer had been mistaken for another member of the McAlpine family.
Mr Messham confirmed last night that he had been wrong and issued a statement in which he offered his “sincere and humble apologies” to Lord McAlpine. He also suggested that journalists working for Newsnight had not shown him a photograph of the Tory peer to confirm his identity. He said: “After seeing a picture in the past hour of the individual concerned, this [is] not the person I identified by a photograph presented to me by the police in the early 1990s, who told me the man in the photograph was Lord McAlpine.”
Lord McAlpine’s lawyers said they would take legal action against “all media” who had defamed his reputation.
They singled out Newsnight and ITV1’s This Morning, which was criticised after a list of supposed paedophiles was inadvertently shown to viewers as the presenter Phillip Schofield handed it to Mr Cameron.
Andrew Reid, of RMPI LLP, the solicitors who are representing Lord McAlpine, said the two “respected” programmes had between them informed most of the country about “something that simply is a complete lie”.
“What I think is so wrong is that Newsnight trailed this and encouraged people that some major revelation was going to come about, and that they actually were going to name this individual, but then they took what I think is the coward’s way out,” he told Radio 4’s PM.
“They ran the programme, trailed it and then told everyone where to go and look for the name. In my view that’s just creating the defamation. They have done a very, very good job of severely damaging Lord McAlpine’s reputation.”
Lord McAlpine released a strongly-worded statement yesterday addressing the “slurs” against him.
He said he had visited Wrexham only once, and that was in the company of an agent from Conservative Central Office.
“I have never been to the children’s home in Wrexham, nor have I ever visited any children’s home, reform school or any other institution of a similar nature,” he said. “I have never stayed in a hotel in or near Wrexham, I did not own a Rolls-Royce, have never had a 'Gold card’ or 'Harrods card’ and never wear aftershave, all of which have been alleged.
“I did not sexually abuse Mr Messham or any other residents of the children’s home in Wrexham.”
Keith Gregory, a local councillor who was also a victim of abuse at Bryn Estyn, said he believed a different member of the McAlpine family may have been mistaken for Lord McAlpine. Several people suggested that Mr Messham may have been referring to the late Jimmie McAlpine, a former chairman of the building firm Alfred McAlpine Ltd, who lived in Chester, near Wrexham. But Malcolm King, a Labour councillor who helped to expose the cover-up of abuse in north Wales, described Jimmie to The Daily Telegraph as loving “eating, drinking, ladies, cricket and golf” and said he had “no knowledge of him doing anything wrong”.
The Waterhouse inquiry into the north Wales abuse recorded that, according to Mr Messham’s statement to the police, “X [the letter used to hide the identity of the McAlpine family member] had several different motor cars and would wait for him at the bottom of Bryn Estyn Lane.”
Jimmie McAlpine had one of the largest private collections of cars in Britain. His widow, Cynthia, 71, described her former husband as a “real gentleman” and said there was “absolutely no way” the allegations were true.
Mr Wilson wrote to Lord Patten, the chairman of the BBC Trust, asking him to investigate the Newsnight’s report and questioned whether the politician was given a right of reply.
The BBC said in a statement: “Newsnight broadcast an investigation into alleged failures in a child abuse inquiry. It worked with the Bureau of Investigative Journalism to give a voice to concerns raised by an abuse victim.
“It was in the public interest to air these. We did not name any public figure for legal reasons. It is now for the inquiries announced by the Home Secretary to dig deeper into Mr Messham’s concerns.”
Almost 50 recordings of a Jimmy Savile BBC radio show in which he can apparently be heard behaving inappropriately with young girls have been passed to police.
The audio clips, from the 1970s show Savile’s Travels, were discovered by an archivist in Finland. The BBC has been unable to verify the authenticity of the recordings, three of which have been made available online.
A comment left by a member of the public on the BBC website in the days after Savile’s death has also been referred to police.