Rob Ford case: Justice Charles Hackland known for careful decisions in high-profile cases
There is a reason Justice Charles Hackland is assigned to high-profile, politically charged cases: colleagues and lawyers say Hackland is a careful, principled judge not swayed by political interests. On Monday, Hackland ruled that Toronto mayor Rob Ford breached Ontario’s conflict of interest law and ordered him removed from office. Hackland put the ruling on hold for two weeks, and Ford plans to appeal. “These kinds of cases are not only challenging legal cases but there’s a political dimension to them; you always are aware that people are watching, (and will be) reading very carefully what you write — it’s important to get it right,” said Douglas Cunningham, who presided over the Mississauga Inquiry and retired as Associate Chief Justice of the Superior Court in September. “He’s really a very fine trial judge, very highly regarded by his colleagues and by the bar, and you can be assured that he gave this decision a great deal of thought.” The Ottawa-based Hackland has ruled on many closely watched cases, including a decision to toss a conspiracy and defamation lawsuit launched by ousted federal cabinet minister Helena Guergis; a ruling against residents of an Ottawa neighbourhood who didn’t want a group home for battered women built in their neighbourhood; and a ruling related to a controversial development plan in Ottawa. In 2011, Hackland dismissed the legal challenge from a group opposed to the City of Ottawa’s plans to team up with the private sector to redevelop Lansdowne Park.
Friends of Lansdowne tried to stop the project by arguing that the city acted in bad faith, didn’t follow proper procurement procedures, and gave unlawful bonuses in approving the plan. In a highly anticipated 31-page decision, Hackland dismissed the arguments and ruled in the city’s favour. Friends of Lansdowne appealed to the Ontario Court of Appeal. The appeal court upheld Hackland’s decision. “It was a well-reasoned decision, it wasn’t a flippant response to a public interest group or something,” said Ottawa defence lawyer Mark Ertel. “The party who loses is always disappointed in the judge, right, but if it’s a good judge, even if you’re disappointed, you’ll understand the reasons why he came to his decision.” Ertel said he’d be “surprised” if Hackland’s decisions aren’t routinely upheld at the appeal level. (Guergis filed her appeal in August of this year.)
“In most disputes both sides are happy to get him, because they know they’re going to get a good hearing, and he’s going to be prepared, and he’s going to be decisive, and if his decision is wrong, it will be easy to figure out what it is, and appeal it,” he said. James Foord, president of the Defence Counsel Association of Ottawa, said Hackland has “that judicial quality of courage and the ability to do the right thing.” One Ottawa lawyer noted Hackland doesn’t shrink from high-profile cases — “I think he rather enjoys them,” he said. The 61-year-old Hackland studied law at the University of Ottawa and Oxford University, and then articled at the Supreme Court of Canada. Before being appointed a judge, he was well known in Ottawa as a senior partner at Gowling LaFleur Henderson, where he specialized in employment and administrative law, and also medical cases. He was known for having a calm and unflappable demeanour in emotionally charged cases. As a judge, Cunningham remembers Hackland as understated, well-prepared and persuasive in court. “You just knew when Chuck Hackland was on a case, it was going to be a good experience,” Cunningham said. “I would simply say his quality is quiet persuasiveness.” Hackland was appointed to the Ontario Superior Court of Justice in 2003 and promoted to Regional Senior Judge for the east region in 2008. “He became the chief judge here in a very short time after he was appointed; that doesn’t happen by accident,” Ertel said. Shortly after he was appointed a judge in 2003, Ertel had Hackland for a bail review. “Obviously you’re always concerned that a judge who doesn’t have a lot of criminal experience is sitting on a criminal case,” he said. “Whatever concerns I had were gone in the first 10 minutes. He was obviously on top of it, he’d obviously researched the law before he came.”