Colorado prison chief's death probe extends to Texas police chase
The chase and crash occurred in north Texas, about 700 miles from where Clements was killed Tuesday night. It began around 11 a.m. CT (noon ET) in Montague County, where the driver of a black Cadillac shot at a law enforcement officer who had pulled him over in a traffic stop, said Wise County, Texas, Sheriff David Walker.
Two bullets struck the Montague County deputy, who was wearing a bulletproof vest, in the chest and another grazed his head before he managed to call in help, said the sheriff. He is in serious condition at a Dallas-Fort Worth area hospital.
This incident was followed by a high-speed chase that ended around 30 miles away in Decatur, Texas. That's where city police tried to pull him over, and the Cadillac's driver fled and started shooting at officers. The suspect shot one patrol vehicle and that of Decatur police Chief Rex Hoskins, whose car was parked in the median.
"I would say he was running about 100 mph, and he had his left arm out the window and he was just shooting," Hoskins said.
Soon after that, the man turned his Cadillac onto another road and slammed into an 18-wheel truck, according to Walker. Even with the front of his car crushed, the suspect -- who has not been publicly identified -- got out and resumed shooting.
Colorado media and national wire services identified the man killed in the Texas chase and shooting as Evan Ebel, a 28-year-old parolee in the Denver metropolitan area. On Thursday night, the El Paso County Sheriff's Office issued a statement mentioning Evan Spencer Ebel had been named in a Denver Post report citing unnamed federal and state authorities, then sharply criticized such an anonymous disclosure as "disappointing" and saying it "undermines an active investigation and can have a negative impact on any future prosecution." CNN has not been able to independently confirm the identity of the man killed in Texas.
The Cadillac had two different Colorado license plates -- one on the front and the other on the back -- said Hoskins. A law enforcement official said Thursday that authorities are "are taking a strong look" at whether Thursday's incident and Clements' shooting are linked.
The Texas incident comes the same day that Colorado investigators said they were looking closely at one criminal of the thousands that Clements' oversaw in the state's prison system -- a Saudi national named Homaidan al-Turki.
El Paso County, Colorado, Undersheriff Paula Presley El Paso County, Colorado, Undersheriff Paula Presley on Thursday acknowledged the media speculation over al-Turki, who was convicted of sexually assaulting his housemaid at his Aurora, Colorado, home seven years ago. Earlier this month, Clements denied al-Turki's request to serve the remainder of his Colorado prison sentence in Saudi Arabia, records show.
Investigators, she said, are still trying to determine whether "there may have been some motivation or legitimate threat" related to al-Turki's case, adding that "we have not identified that specifically as a threat."
Al-Turki, now at the Limon Correctional Facility, was sentenced to 20 years to life in prison after being convicted on a dozen counts of sexual contact, theft, extortion and false imprisonment in 2006, a state document shows. Prosecutors said he enslaved his Indonesian maid for several years.
Clements had been chief of Colorado's prison system for a little over two years. He took the job in January 2011 after working for 31 years as part of Missouri's Department of Corrections.
Meanwhile, the mourning continues for Clements. His funeral will be held Sunday, Gov. John Hickenlooper's office said, and he'll be remembered at a public memorial service in Colorado Springs the next day.