US tourist: Truckers gang-rape US tourist in Manali
early on Tuesday. She was also robbed of her money,
Manali cellphone The California resident, who is married, was travelling alone in India and had reached Manali on Monday. According to her FIR, she had gone to Vashishth village, famous for its hot water springs, 2 km from Manali, to meet her friends. She spent around three hours with them in a private guesthouse and left for Manali at 1.15am. She saw a truck slowing down on the way and sought a lift. But, instead of dropping her at her hotel, the three men in the truck took the vehicle towards the Manali-Rohtang Pass road and took turns to rape her inside the truck between Bahang and Palchan villages. The woman said she was repeatedly raped between 1am to 3am by the three accused, who later dumped her at Manali bus stand and sped away at 3.30am. Kullu SP V K Dhawan said a medical examination confirmed rape and cases under relevant sections have been registered against the accused. Three men have been arrested in connection with the assault, Himachal police chief B Kamal Kumar said. The American tourist had arrived in Manali from Dharamsala at 3pm on Monday and put up at a private guesthouse in Old Manali area. She said before she was thrown out of the truck, the rapists robbed of her valuables, including an IPhone , a camera, $30, Rs 5,000 and around 1500 Thai baht. She told the police that the accused were in the age group of 18 to 25 years. In March, a Swiss tourist was gang-raped while on a camping trip in a forest in Madhya Pradesh. In the same month, a British woman jumped out of her hotel balcony in Agra to escape assault. Another 21-year-old Irish woman working as a volunteer with a West Bengal NGO was raped over the last weekend. "We have informed the American embassy officials and a massive manhunt has been launched to nab the accused, who are still at large" Dhawan said. Peter Vrooman, spokesman for the US embassy in New Delhi, told agencies on email that the embassy staffs were in contact with the state authorities for more details.