Silvio Berlusconi tax fraud appeal rejected
The three-times prime minister was sentenced in October to four years in prison after being found guilty of tax fraud relating to TV rights bought by one of his companies, Mediaset.
He was also banned from holding public office for five years.
Both penalties were suspended pending an appeal launched by his lawyers.
His lawyers had also tried to have the conviction overturned altogether on the grounds that Mr Berlusconi should not have had to attend hearings in 2010 because he had prime ministerial duties to attend to.
That argument was rejected by the Constitutional Court, which ruled that Mr Berlusconi had been allowed to attend court on days which did not clash with his official engagements.
The media baron said the Constitutional Court's ruling "goes against common sense" but pledged not to use the defeat as a pretext for making trouble for the coalition government that his party is a part of.
Mr Berlusconi, 76, lost the first of two appeals against the tax fraud conviction in May.
The second and final level of appeal will be heard by the Supreme Court later this year and could result in a definitive conviction.
The Mediaset case is just one of several legal entanglements that Mr Berlusconi faces.
On Monday a court in Milan is expected to announce its verdict in a trial in which the former prime minister is accused of abuse of office and paying for sex with an allegedly underage prostitute, an exotic dancer known as Ruby the Heart Stealer.
Prosecutors have called for Mr Berlusconi to be sent to jail for six years on the charges.
They also called for the billionaire businessman, who is a senator in the Italian parliament, to be banned from holding public office for life.
Mr Berlusconi is accused of paying for sex with Karima El Mahroug, a Moroccan-born nightclub dancer, whom prosecutors claim was working as a prostitute when she attended his "bunga bunga" sex parties.
The gatherings were held in 2010 at his villa in Arcore, a town on the fringes of Milan.
He is also accused of putting pressure on police in Milan to have her released from detention on a theft charge, citing the spurious justification that she was the grand-daughter of Hosni Mubarak, the then president of Egypt.
Mr Berlusconi denies both charges. Miss El Mahroug says she has never been a prostitute and never slept with him.
Even if Mr Berlusconi is convicted, he will have recourse to two levels of appeal which could see the case drag on for years.
But a conviction would be embarrassing for his conservative People of Freedom party, which is part of a coalition led by Enrico Letta, the centre-Left prime minister.