14-year-old accused of killing beloved Danvers, Massachusetts, teacher
"It's just surreal how quickly someone can go, and how much we take for granted everyday," said Danvers High School student Chris Weimert, describing Ritzer as "the nicest teacher you could ever have. ... I can't believe it."
Authorities had been looking for the student, Philip Chism, first, after he was reported missing -- with police sending out messages via Twitter and Facebook on Tuesday evening, noting he'd been last seen around 6:30 p.m. and asking for the public's help in finding him.
Superintendent Lisa Dana All seven schools in the North Shore town closed Wednesday, as investigators did their work and students and residents mourned the loss of Ritzer. Everything will reopen Thursday except the high school, but counselors and grief specialists will be available there for two hours during the day, said Superintendent Lisa Dana . Classes throughout the town are set to resume Friday, she said.
This friend and others got their first hint something was awry when Chism didn't show up for soccer practice. The team ended up setting out to look for their teammate, after seeing texts that he was missing.
"I'd say he's less 'polite and friendly' than you thought," wrote one Facebook commenter. "Everybody has to keep their eyes open. It's no longer safe to say that you can take everybody at face value."
"She believed children have much to offer and often do not realize how special they are as individuals," the university said. "In her application to Salem State she said she was dedicated to 'helping students in times of need.'"
"Everyone that knew and loved Colleen knew of her passion for teaching and how she mentored each and every one of her students," the family said in the statement.
In the halls, she was guaranteed to offer a warm smile. In class, she could be counted on to give an appreciated pat on the back. Even once the final bell sounded, she could always be counted on to offer teaching, guidance and support.
"She was always the teacher (who would) go the extra mile for students, always the teacher to be there for students after school," said Kyle Cahill.