Man arrested for bombing Communist Party HQ
A 41-year-old ex-convict has been arrested on suspicion of masterminding an audacious bomb attack that targeted a Communist Party headquarters in northern China on the eve of a key political summit.
The man, named as Feng Zhijun, was arrested in the early hours of Friday morning and "has confessed his crime of setting off fatal explosions" in the city of Taiyuan on Wednesday, state news agency Xinhua announced.
The bombing came just days before senior Chinese leaders gather in Beijing on November 9 for the so-called Third Plenum, a potentially historic meeting at which president Xi Jinping will unveil his road-map for the country's economy.
In a brief dispatch, Xinhua said police had found "home-made explosive devices [and] large amounts of criminal evidence" at the suspect's home and had also "seized the vehicle he used in the crime."
The interrogation of Mr Feng, a convicted thief from Taiyuan's Xinghualing district, was ongoing, the agency added.
At around 7.40am on Wednesday at least six improvised explosive devices went off outside the Communist Party's 20-storey provincial headquarters in Taiyuan, killing one and injuring at least eight people.
The building is at the heart of Taiyuan, a wealthy industrial and mining hub that is the capital of Shanxi province and is around 250 miles southwest of Beijing.
"They went off one after another, with a 20-second interval between them: bang, bang, bang," one eyewitness told The Telegraph.
One local man, who gave his name only as Mr Ma, said the building was the scene of regular protests often linked to the growing chasm between haves and have-nots in this mining boomtown.
State media said forensic teams had found circuit boards and metal ball bearings among the debris and claimed the bombs had been hidden inside flowerbeds.
The attack came nine days after an SUV slammed into crowds in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, killing three its occupants as well as two bystanders.
Beijing blamed that incident on Islamic extremists from the western province of Xinjiang and labelled it an "organised and premeditated" terrorist attack.
So far there has been no official word on what motives lay behind the Taiyuan bombings. But Chinese officials have avoided calling it a terrorist incident and the country's heavily-controlled media has dedicated scant space to the bombings