Amanda Knox guilty of the gruesome murder of British student Meredith Kercher
AMERICAN Amanda Knox has been found guilty of the gruesome murder of a British student found stabbed to death after a third trial.
The Italian court handed down its verdict while Knox watched proceedings from her hometown of Seattle in the United States where she returned after a previous acquittal.
She immediately released a statement declaring she was "frightened and saddened by the verdict".
"Having been found innocent before, I expected better from the Italian justice system," it said.
AMANDA KNOX: "I'LL ONLY GO KICKING AND SCREAMING"
Her Italian boyfriend at the time of Meredith Kercher's killing, Raffaele Sollecito, was also found guilty.
He had been in the Florence court for an earlier hearing but was not present for the actual verdict as is his right under Italian law.
The two judges and eight jurors spent hours locked in deliberations before announcing their verdict.
They sentenced Knox to 28-and-a-half years in prison and Sollecito to 25 years.
It is unlikely Italy will seek Knox's extradition until a verdict is finalised, a process that can take a year.
However, Sollecito, who like Knox spent four years in jail, risks immediate arrest.
Speaking outside the court, Knox's lawyer, Luciano Ghirga, said she will launch an appeal against the decision. But he said the telephone line "went dead" as he told his client of the verdict.
"For those that, like me, are convinced that Amanda is innocent, it is a very difficult time. We have to respect the verdict but we will challenge them," he said.
"We're very sad at the moment. We will definitely try everything. This is not the final word."
Knox was thought to be awaiting the ruling at her mother's home in Seattle. After the decision a person believed to be Knox emerged from the house covered by a coat and was driven away in a car.
News_Image_File: Frightened ... A woman believed to be Amanda Knox is hidden under a jacket while being escorted from her mother's home in Seattle after news of the court verdict.
When asked how Knox was doing, her mother, Edda Mellas, said: "She's upset. How would you be?''
A lawyer acting for Sollecito told waiting reporters after the verdict that the court had given credit to rumours and elected to ignore the findings of an expert's report.
She said her client had been prepared for any outcome.
WATCH: AMANDA KNOX IN HER OWN WORDS
"He is totally astonished why the court keeps changing mind in this way. The court gives credit to rumours. This is not a surprise. They (Knox and Sollecito) have always been considered the murderers," Giulia Bongiorno said.
News_Image_File: Legal team ... Raffaele Sollecito's lawyers Luca Maori and Giulia Bongiorno and Amanda Knox's lawyer Carlo Della Vedova before the verdict was delivered.
Kercher's brother Lyle, 34, who was in the court for today's verdict, said he would not be able to forgive those responsible for his sister's death.
"I think you'd have to be a very strong-willed - arguably religious - person to find that forgiveness. I think it is so easily forgot what happened to Meredith," he told Sky News UK.
News_Image_File: Guilty ... Raffaele Sollecito leaves the retrial in Florence earlier this week.
"No matter what the verdict, it was never going to be a case of celebrating anything. That's probably the best we could have hoped for."
He added: "When I read reports even now, I find myself skimming past the paragraphs that refer to what actually happened to her because it is so horrific. I think anybody would just need to read in detail or know what happened to her to then question themselves - could they ever forgive someone who did that to their sister or daughter?"
Exchange student Kercher was found dead in the house she shared with Knox on November 2, 2007 in the medieval university town of Perugia in central Italy.
The subsequent murder trial saw the case and Knox - once dubbed 'foxy Knoxy' in the media - make headlines around the world.
After initially being convicted, Knox and Sollecito were sensationally cleared of murder in 2011.
An independent forensic report ordered by the appeals court found much of the DNA evidence used to originally convict them was unreliable.
News_Image_File: Family ... Stephanie Kercher (R) and Lyle Kercher (L), the sister and brother of late Meredith Kercher, react after the verdict.
However, an Italian court ordered a fresh trial in March last year after the duo's appeal verdict was overturned.
Knox, 26, decided not to return to Italy for the current trial.
She told the New York Times: "I would be putting myself in the hands of people who very clearly want me in prison for something that I didn't do."
Knox, who is finishing a degree in creative writing at the University of Washington, added: "I never thought that I would be convicted and then look what happened.''
Kercher's family were in Italy for the ruling however and are expected to give a full reaction to the verdict tomorrow.
Earlier though, Lyle Kercher had said: "We are not going to get closure today, so there won't be any celebration on our part, but it's hopefully a step towards reaching a conclusion.
"To lose someone you love so dearly is hard enough, especially in the way she died, but that has been compounded by the fact that it has gone on for six years and three months.''
Rudy Guede, a drug dealer, is currently serving a 16-year sentence over Kercher's death - though the courts have said he did not act alone.
News_Rich_Media: Lyle and Stephanie Kercher hope for the truth to come out and justice to be served for their sister Meredith in the retrial of Amanda Knox and Raffaele Sollecito. Rough Cut (no reporter narration).