NYPD arrests 4 suspected heroin dealers in Hoffman death investigation
New York City cops investigating the death of actor Philip Seymour Hoffman arrested four suspected heroin dealers Tuesday night. 
An NYPD spokesman confirmed to Fox News that officers raided three apartments at 302 Mott Street, in the East Village neighborhood of Manhattan and said that charges were pending. The New York Post reported that officers had received a tip that the dealer who sold Hoffman heroin was at that address. 
Law enforcement sources told the Post that about 350 glassine envelopes with what appeared to be heroin inside were found during the raid. However, the Post also reported that the bags did not have the "Ace of Spades" stamp found on the glassines in Hoffman's apartment, and none of the four confessed to dealing to the actor. 
The Post identified those arrested as Robert Vineberg, 57, Thomas Kushman, 48, Max Rosenblum, 22, and Juliana Luchkiw, also 22. Vineburg and Kushman were charged with felony drug possession, while Rosenblum and Luchkiw were charged with misdemeanor drug possession. 
Hoffman, 46, was found dead Sunday morning on the bathroom floor of his West Village apartment with a hypodermic needle in his arm. A source close to the investigation told Fox News earlier this week that the star's death is being treated as an accidental overdose. 
Police sources also told Fox News they found considerable evidence of drug use in Hoffman's apartment, including 50 glassines -- small plastic bags -- some of which were empty, and many of which still contained drugs, used and unused hypodermic needles, and multiple prescription drugs.
A police official told the Associated Press that the heroin recovered at Hoffman's apartment tested negative for the powerful additive fentanyl, a potent synthetic morphine which is added to intensify the high and has been linked to 22 suspected overdose deaths in western Pennsylvania.
The Post reported earlier Tuesday that Hoffman withdrew $1,200 in six installments from an ATM at a grocery store near his apartment at around 8 p.m. Saturday. Investigators believe that the Oscar-winner bought heroin and cocaine from two drug dealers shortly after.  
The Associated Press contributed to this report. 
Click for more from the New York Post