Household Worker Trips Up Britain’s Immigration Minister
LONDON — The British immigration minister has resigned after revealing that his house cleaner of six years was living in the country illegally.
Apologizing for the “embarrassment,” the minister, Mark Harper, stepped down on Saturday after submitting a resignation letter to Prime Minister David Cameron.
Mr. Harper, who had been leading a crackdown on illegal immigration in Britain, was an important part of a “go home” campaign, which included posters pasted on vans across the country encouraging illegal immigrants to leave the country. One commentator in The Telegraph suggested that Mr. Harper, as the public face of the campaign, should have “gone home and checked that his cleaner was squeaky clean and eligible to work in the U.K.”
Immigration is an increasingly fractious issue in Britain. In 2010, Mr. Cameron pledged to reduce the number of new immigrants “by tens of thousands” by 2015, from the 200,000 a year expected under current trends. He is facing pressure from his Conservative Party as well as from the U.K. Independence Party, which is anti-immigrant and anti-European Union. The Independence Party is expected to gain traction in European parliamentary elections this year.
Mr. Harper said he checked his cleaner’s papers and passport when he hired her in 2007 and was satisfied that they were in order. He said he considered reviewing them again in 2010, when he was made a minister, and again in 2012, when he was made immigration minister, but did not. It was not until the fall of 2013, when he was pushing an immigration bill through Parliament, that he determined that he had to verify the woman’s status, he said in his resignation letter. He said that despite an extensive search, he could not find his copies of the documents, and last month requested the documents from her. When his office sought to verify them, he said, he learned that she was in the country illegally.
“Although I complied with the law at all times, I consider that as immigration minister, who is taking legislation through Parliament which will toughen up our immigration laws, I should hold myself to a higher standard than expected of others,” he wrote.