School Stabbing Spree: 20 Hurt in Pittsburgh-Area Bloodbath
A doctor at one hospital, UPMC Presbyterian, said the attack appeared to have been carried out with a long knife.
A 17-year-old boy was on life support at that hospital after the knife pierced his liver, his diaphragm and several major blood vessels. It missed his heart by millimeters, a doctor told reporters.
The boy was on life support Wednesday afternoon and will need blood transfusions and additional surgery, but doctors said they were optimistic that he would survive.
In all, 21 people were taken to the hospital, at least four critically. The 21 injured included the 19 students, the security guard and a second adult who had what hospital officials described as a “medical condition” during the attack.
Seven teenagers and an adult were taken to Forbes Regional Hospital, Dr. Chris Kauffman, the trauma director there, told NBC News. The seven were stabbed in the chest, back and abdomen, he said. He characterized some of the injuries as life-threatening but said everyone was expected to live.
At least three students were in surgery. Others were undergoing CT scans and X-rays and could require surgery later, Kauffman said.
He described the knife wounds he saw as several inches deep and “impressively large holes in each of the patients that I saw. More than an inch.”
Asked how close a call it was for the victims, he said: “Very close. Minutes.”
One girl may have saved the life of one of the stabbed by applying pressure to his wounds, hospital officials said. The girl was not hurt.
“She displayed an amazing amount of composure to help that friend, who was having significant bleeding,” said Dr. Mark Rubino, a surgeon at Forbes hospital.
Stevens told WPXI, the NBC affiliate in Pittsburgh, that the first call for help from the school came at 7:13 a.m. The situation was under control by 7:30 to 7:40, he said.
Someone pulled a fire alarm in the chaos. A school principal was “the lead” to taking the suspect into custody, the police chief said, before the security guard applied handcuffs.