Hernandez indicted in 2012 double-murder
Aaron Hernandez spent parts of his NFL off-seasons working out, studying game film and committing three murders, authorities charged.
The former New England Patriots star was indicted Thursday for gunning down two men in a Boston drive-by on July 16, 2012. Prosecutors say Hernandez, 24, used a .38-caliber Smith & Wesson to blast two men at a traffic light.
The shooting followed a “chance encounter” at the Cure Lounge, officials said. Several shots were fired into Daniel de Abreu’s BMW, killing the 29-year-old man. Safiro Furtado, 28, was also killed. A third man in the car was wounded but survived.
The new indictment brings the body count for Hernandez to three. He was already facing a murder charge for the shooting of a man during the 2013 off-season.
“For us, this case was not about Aaron Hernandez. This case was about two victims, who were stalked, ambushed and senselessly murdered on the streets of the city they called home,” Suffolk County District Attorney Daniel Conley said at a press conference.
“I remember going to the scene that morning. It was a terrible tragedy,” Evans said of the 2012 shooting.
Furtado was shot in the head, while de Abreu was hit in the chest. Witnesses reported seeing a white Audi SUV fleeing the scene of the 12:30 a.m. bloodbath.
As the trail for the killer went cold, Hernandez reported a week later to the Patriots’ training camp to begin a stellar 2012-2013 season in which he caught 51 passes for 483 yards and five touchdowns.
Six weeks after the murders of de Abreu and Furtado, Hernandez signed a five-year contract extension worth up to $40 million.
“I have a lot more to give back and all I can do is play my heart out for them, make the right decisions, and live life as a Patriot,” the tight end told reporters at the time.
In the off-season of 2013, Hernandez’s bloodlust got the best of him, prosecutors said. This time, Odin Lloyd was the target of Hernandez’s murderous wrath, prosecutors said.
While partying at a Boston nightclub last June, Hernandez became enraged at seeing Lloyd, 27, talking to people at the club that he “had troubles with,” prosecutors said.
Hernandez and two accomplices — Ernest Wallace and Carlos Ortiz, who have both been charged with murder — drove Lloyd to an isolated industrial park, where Hernandez shot him five times with a .45-caliber handgun, authorities said. Before he was killed, Lloyd texted his sister to let her know he was with Hernandez.
Police quickly zeroed in on Hernandez, whose rented Nissan Altima was caught by video surveillance cameras leaving the murder scene. Security cameras at Hernandez’s home in North Attleborough, Mass., also captured him carrying a pistol as he arrived at the house shortly after Lloyd was killed, police said.
While the murder weapon was never found, .45-caliber shell casings discovered in the Altima matched slugs removed from Lloyd.
After Hernandez’s arrest on June 28, cops got a tip linking the football player to the double homicide in Boston’s South End.
“From last June forward, there were a number of significant developments in the investigation,” Conley said.
Cops found the white Audi SUV seen fleeing the drive-by shooting in the garage of a Bristol, Conn., home owned by Hernandez’s cousin. Cops also seized the gun used to kill de Abreu and Furtato from a man connected to Hernandez.
“We never, ever gave up our effort on solving these two murders,” Evans said Thursday.
Relatives of de Abreu and Furtado have already filed a wrongful death suit against Hernandez demanding $6 million in damages.
“This is a very hard time for all of us,” Furtado's cousin, Susan Vicente, told the Boston Globe Thursday. “Right now, I can't even talk.”