France charges siege gunman's brother as an accomplice
The brother of a gunman killed in a siege in southwestern France has been charged with complicity in seven murders and two attempted murders and taken into custody, the Paris prosecutor's office said Sunday.
Abdelkader Merah is also being charged with conspiracy to prepare acts of terrorism and group theft, the prosecutor's office told CNN. He was arrested Tuesday night as police closed in on his brother Mohammed and faced a anti-terror judge on Sunday.
Mohammed Merah, 23, was killed Thursday at the end of a 32-hour siege of the apartment in the city of Toulouse where he was holed up. He was wanted in the killings of three French paratroopers, a rabbi and three children ages 4, 5, and 7. Two other people were seriously wounded in shootings blamed on him.
Most of the impacts were on the arms and legs, Elisabeth Allannic said. There were two deadly wounds on the front left temple and crossing his abdomen, she said.
Police union leader Christophe Crepin told French TV news channel i-tele Saturday that Abdelkader Merah and his girlfriend were moved early Saturday from Toulouse to the headquarters of the DCRI, the French counter intelligence agency, in Levallois-Perret, near Paris.
Police tracked Mohammed Merah down via his mother's computer IP address, which was apparently used to respond to an ad posted by the first shooting victim, officials said.
The interior ministry said Saturday it had lifted the scarlet state of alert, the country's highest security alert level, which was put in place in the Toulouse region following the third shooting on Monday targeting a school.
France's prime minister defended the police and intelligence services Friday over their handling of the case, saying they had done well to find Mohammed Merah so quickly.
Questions have been raised as to why Mohammed Merah -- a petty criminal who was placed under surveillance by French authorities after visiting Pakistan and Afghanistan -- was not being more closely watched.
He claimed to have attended an al Qaeda training camp, according to Paris prosecutor Francois Molins, and was on the U.S. no-fly list for that reason, a U.S. intelligence official said.
Toulouse lawyer Eric Mouton, acting for a woman named only as Aicha, to protect her identity, told CNN she filed a complaint against Mohammed Merah in June 2010 over alarming behavior Merah displayed toward her children and herself.
Aicha claimed that Mohammed Merah had beaten up her daughter, 19 at the time, and had threatened her. He also held her son, 15, against his will in a room for several hours, forcing him to watch extremely violent videos, Mouton said. Mohammed Merah denied that claim, the lawyer added.
At the time of his death, the case was still open and had not yet gone to trial because of a backlog of cases at the Toulouse public prosecutor's office, Mouton said.
In that attack, Imad Ibn Ziaten, a paratrooper of North African origin, arranged to meet a man in Toulouse who wanted to buy a scooter Ziaten had advertised online, the interior minister said. The victim said in the ad that he was in the military.