Roger Rogerson arrested over alleged murder of Jamie Gao
Police have arrested disgraced ex-detective Roger Rogerson at his home in Sydney's south-west, over the alleged murder of Sydney student Jamie Gao.
Shortly before 11am, about 10 officers arrived at the premises and went inside.
A short time later, he was escorted from the Padstow Heights home in handcuffs.
Mr Rogerson's solicitor, Paul Kenny, said he was disgusted his client had been arrested in his home after arrangements had been made for the 73-year-old to hand himself in at midday
"What has occurred in Mr Rogerson's house is a complete disgrace," he said.
"He was treated like a dog."
He said he had been in talks for more than 24 hours with two investigating officers from the Robbery and Serious Crime squad.
Mr Rogerson was handcuffed and taken to Bankstown police station where he is expected to be questioned about the alleged murder of Mr Gao.
Mr Kenny said he would be lodging a formal complaint against the actions of police to the NSW Police Commissioner Andrew Scipione and the Premier, Mike Baird.
"The police came to the door, started smashing on the door," he said.
"The a number of them came into Mr Rogerson's office room where we were having a legal conference making arrangements to go to the city."
It is understood the prior arrangement had been to meet with police at the Sydney Police Centre, in Surry Hills.
Mr Kenny said he wanted to meet with Mr Scipione or Deputy Police Commissioner Nick Kaldas on Tuesday to raise his concerns about the arrest.
"It was completely unnecessary, everything was being done in a professional manner with the arrangements with the police,"
"Everything was going along very smoothly and they've taken it up on themselves to burst into his home.
"It was very distressing ... the way they spoke to Mr Rogerson was most unnecessary. He's been an experienced ex-policeman, he's an older gentleman as you know, he's 73 years old."
Speaking to Fairfax Media after the arrest, Mr Kenny said he had been having a legal conference with Mr Rogerson and his wife Anne, when police banged loudly on the front door.
"Someone yelled 'lock the house down'," Mr Kenny said.
Mr Kenny said four detectives proceeded to barge past Mrs Rogerson, who was distressed and crying as they handcuffed her husband, who was sitting in their small home office.
Mr Kenny said that Mr Rogerson had arrived back at his Padstow house in the early hours of the morning.
"They have totally betrayed our trust," Mr Kenny told the Heraldof the police not honouring the arrangement that had been made to hand his client in at midday.
"He can't even walk, let alone flee," he said of the 73-year-old former detective, who has a bad hip and walks with the aid of a cane.
The NSW Police responded to Mr Kenny's allegations about the arrest saying arrangements the solicitor proposed for Mr Rogerson to hand himself in were not acceptable.
"NSW Police were not satisfied with the arrangements being proposed and took an operational decision to arrest a 73-year-old man at his Padstow home in relation to the alleged murder of a 20-year-old Sydney man," a police statement said.