African Elephant Numbers Plummet 30 Percent, Great Elephant Census Finds
The census was funded by Microsoft founder Paul G. Allen and took just under three years to complete. Led by the nonprofit Elephants Without Borders, which is based in Botswana, the survey involved a team of 90 scientists, six NGOs, and two advisory partners: the Kenya-based conservation organization Save the Elephants and the African Elephant Specialist Group, made up of experts who focus on the conservation and management of African elephants.
Later this month elephants will be high on the agenda at the triennial meeting in Johannesburg, South Africa, of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), the body that regulates international trade in certain threatened animal species. With poaching at such dire levels, the conference may be pivotal in setting a new direction for elephants.
The Great Elephant Census is the most advanced and thorough assessment of elephant numbers ever. It was carried out by spotters in low-flying planes who peered out of either side of their planes to count the elephants below. Crisscrossing vast swaths of sub-Saharan Africa, they racked up a combined flying distance of 285,000 miles—the equivalent distance to the moon and a quarter of the way back.
Previous pan-African elephant surveys have been fairly crude. In 1969 Iain Douglas-Hamilton, a veteran conservationist and founder of Save the Elephants, undertook the earliest attempt at a continent-wide census using aerial counts and questionnaires. That survey estimated 1.3 million elephants, a disputed figure in conservation circles. A decade later experts suggested that the figure was about 600,000, highlighting a poaching crisis. Since then the exact trajectory of elephant numbers has been in question.
“For too long now, we’ve said that we don’t have precise, reliable estimates—that they’re speculative, they’re guess work,” says Mike Chase, the principal researcher for the census and the founder of Elephants Without Borders. The time for pleading ignorance about elephant numbers is over, he says. “We’re now armed with the most robust and accurate scientific data in history to give these animals a second chance.”
Paula Kahumbu, a Kenyan elephant ecologist and CEO of WildlifeDirect, a Nairobi-based conservation organization, believes that by providing an independent and scientifically robust assessment of elephants, the census will carry huge weight at the CITES conference. “Proposals will be considered on the basis of scientific fact,” Kahumbu says. “It’s vital that we have accurate data to inform policy.”
The countries with the greatest declines were Tanzania and Mozambique, with a combined loss of 73,000 elephants to poaching in just five years. Another shocking discovery was made in northern Cameroon, where survey teams could count no more than 148 elephants—along with many carcasses—revealing a tiny regional population in immediate danger of extinction.
Zambia recorded 20,839 elephants, an 11 percent decline during the past decade. But a regional population in the southwestern corner of the country has been terribly affected by poaching: The spotters tallied just 48 elephants in Sioma Ngwezi National Park, down from 900 in 2004. At the current poaching rate, this local population also faces imminent extirpation.
What’s abundantly clear, Chase says, “is that the elephant poaching crisis has moved from East and central Africa and is now on our doorstep in southern Africa. You just need to look at southwest Zambia and southeast Angola, which have the worst rates of elephant poaching on the entire continent. And when elephants are removed from those systems, poachers will look to the stronghold of northern Botswana.”
This year, two countries—Zimbabwe and Namibia—have put forwardproposals to CITES to begin a legal and regulated trade in ivory. In reaction, 26 African nations with elephant populations, supported by other countries and numerous NGOs, have submitted a proposal tohalt any trade in elephants and their products.
“No nation is an island,” says Phyllis Lee, of the University of Stirling, one of the authors of the proposal. Elephants don’t stick to political borders, she says, and some populations are shared by three or four countries at a time. Decisions made about elephants in one country can have huge repercussions on poaching in other countries.
Whatever comes of the wildlife trade meeting in Johannesburg this month, for the first time CITES and African countries that have elephants will have concrete information to determine the future conservation and management of elephants.
As Chase puts it, “We now have the first baseline for assessing whether we’re going to be successful, or if we’re going to fail the African elephant.”