Asteroid collided with another before exploding over Russia with '30 times force of atomic bomb': scientists
An asteroid that exploded last year over Chelyabinsk, Russia, leaving more than 1,000 people injured by flying glass and debris, collided with another asteroid before hitting Earth, new research shows.
Analysis of a mineral called jadeite that was embedded in fragments recovered after the explosion shows the asteroid's parent body struck a larger asteroid at a relative speed of 4,800 kilometres per hour.
"This impact might have separated the Chelyabinsk asteroid from its parent body and delivered it to the Earth," lead researcher Shin Ozawa, with the University of Tohoku in Japan, wrote in a paper published this week in the journal Scientific Reports.
The discovery is expected to give scientists more insight into how an asteroid may end up on a collision course with Earth. Scientists suspect the collision happened about 290 million years ago.
Most of the 20-metre-wide asteroid that blazed over Chelyabinsk in south-western Siberia on February 15 last year was incinerated in a bright fireball, the result of frictional heating as it dropped through the atmosphere at 67,600 kilometres per hour. But many small fragments survived.
The asteroid was traveling almost 60 times the speed of sound and exploded about 30 kilometres above ground with a force nearly 30 times as powerful as the atomic bomb dropped by the United States on Hiroshima, Japan, in 1945 in World War II.
The blast over Chelyabinsk caused shock waves that destroyed buildings and shattered windows.
Analysis of recovered Chelyabinsk meteorites revealed an unusual form of jadeite entombed inside glassy materials known as shock veins, which form after rock crashes, melts and re-solidifies.
Jadeite, which is one of the minerals in the gemstone jade, forms only under extreme pressure and high temperature.
The form of jadeite found in the Chelyabinsk meteorites indicates the asteroid's parent body hit another asteroid that was at least 150 metres in diameter.
Scientists are still analysing fragments of the asteroid and calculating its precise path towards Earth.
Mr Ozawa described the Chelyabinsk meteorite as "a unique sample".
"It is a near-Earth object that actually hit the Earth, and its trajectory was well-recorded," he said.
The Chelyabinsk asteroid caused the second-most powerful explosion in recorded history.
In 1908, a suspected asteroid exploded with a force about 1,000 times more powerful than the Hiroshima atomic bomb, levelling 80 million trees over 2,000 square kilometres near Russia's Podkamennaya Tunguska River in Siberia.
The first possible meteorites from the so-called Tunguska event were recovered just last year. Results have not yet been published.