Effect of early tranexamic acid administration on mortality, hysterectomy, and other morbidities in women with post-partum haemorrhage (WOMAN): an international, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
The administration of tranexamic acid to women with post-partum haemorrhage reduces deaths due to bleeding and laparotomy to control bleeding with no evidence of any adverse effects or complications. When given soon after delivery, tranexamic acid reduces death due to bleeding by nearly one third.
Our study had several strengths but also some limitations. The randomisation method ensured that participating doctors had no foreknowledge of the treatment allocation. Baseline prognostic factors were well balanced and results adjusted for baseline risk were similar to the unadjusted analyses. Because almost all randomly assigned patients were followed up there is little potential for bias. We originally planned to enrol 15 000 women to assess the effect of tranexamic acid on a composite primary endpoint of death from all-causes or hysterectomy within 42 days of giving birth. However, during the trial it became apparent that the decision to conduct a hysterectomy was often made at the same time as the decision to enrol a women into the trial. Although we excluded hysterectomies done before randomisation, we could not exclude those in which the decision to conduct a hysterectomy was made at the same time as the decision to randomise or before the trial treatment had been received. We predicted that this would dilute the effect of tranexamic acid on the risk of hysterectomy. There would also be dilution from hysterectomies done several days after birth for reasons other than to prevent life-threatening bleeding. With these concerns in mind, we increased the sample size from 15 000 to 20 000 patients in the hope that the trial would have enough power to detect a reduction in post-partum haemorrhage death.17x17Shakur, H, Roberts, I, Edwards, P, Elbourne, D, Alfirevic, Z, and Ronsmans, C. The effect of tranexamic acid on the risk of death and hysterectomy in women with post-partum haemorrhage: statistical analysis plan for the WOMAN trial. Trials. 2016; 17: 249 Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (11) | Google ScholarSee all References
There was a statistically significant reduction in death due to bleeding with tranexamic acid with no significant increase or decrease in any other cause of death. Because more than one quarter of deaths were not due to bleeding, the reduction in all-cause mortality with tranexamic acid, which is a weighted average of its effect on bleeding and non-bleeding deaths, was not statistically significant. Indeed, considering that one quarter of deaths after post-partum haemorrhage are not bleeding related, it would require trials many times larger than ours to show a statistically significant reduction in all-cause mortality.18x18Prieto-Merino, D, Smeeth, L, Staa, TP, and Roberts, I. Dangers of non-specific composite outcome measures in clinical trials. BMJ. 2013; 347: f6782 Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (14) | Google ScholarSee all References Nevertheless, because the relative contributions of bleeding and non-bleeding (eg, sepsis) deaths to all-cause mortality will vary by region or between hospitals, the effect on all-cause mortality is not generalisable. For example, tranexamic acid will have a larger effect on all-cause mortality in hospitals where sepsis death is rare than in hospitals where sepsis death is common. The effect of tranexamic acid on death due to bleeding is the generalisable measure.
Although tranexamic acid did not prevent hysterectomy, it substantially reduced the number of laparotomies to control bleeding. While hysterectomy might be a last resort to control bleeding in high-income settings, in Africa and Asia where many women are anaemic and blood supplies are limited,19x19Tort, J, Rozenberg, P, Traore, M, Fournier, P, and Dumont, A. Factors associated with postpartum hemorrhage maternal death in referral hospitals in Senegal and Mali: a cross-sectional epidemiological survey. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2015; 15: 235 Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (10) | Google ScholarSee all References 20x20Oladapo, OT, Adetoro, OO, Ekele, BA et al. When getting there is not enough: a nationwide cross-sectional study of 998 maternal deaths and 1451 near-misses in public tertiary hospitals in a low-income country. BJOG. 2016; 123: 928–938 Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (44) | Google ScholarSee all References 21x21Shah, N, Hossain, N, Shoaib, R, Hussain, A, Gillani, R, and Khan, NH. Socio-demographic characteristics and the three delays of maternal mortality. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2009; 19: 95–98 PubMed | Google ScholarSee all References hysterectomy is often an early intervention to prevent death from exsanguination. Furthermore, there would probably have been a delay between randomisation and the administration of the trial treatment, so that even though the decision to randomise might have preceded the decision to do a hysterectomy, in some cases the trial treatment would not have been received when the hysterectomy decision was made. On the other hand, laparotomies which often involve re-operation to control bleeding following caesarean section, are more commonly done after other interventions including the trial treatment have been given. This might have allowed sufficient time for tranexamic acid to affect the risk of laparotomy. Randomised trials in elective surgery also show large reductions in the need for re-operation to control bleeding with tranexamic acid.22x22Myles, PS, Smith, JA, Forbes, A et al. Tranexamic acid in patients undergoing coronary-artery surgery. N Engl J Med. 2017; 376: 136–148 Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (46) | Google ScholarSee all References
The dilution of the effect of tranexamic acid arising from interventions that were initiated prior to receipt of the trial treatment is likely to apply to other surgical interventions and blood transfusion. Considering that there may only be a few hours from onset of primary post-partum haemorrhage to maternal death, it is not surprising that other interventions were given concurrently with the trial treatment. Given the urgency, clinicians cannot wait and see if the trial treatment has an effect before giving other treatments, not least because half of the women received placebo. The only outcome that invariably follows randomisation is death. This may explain why in this trial, and in the CRASH-2 trial of tranexamic acid in significant traumatic bleeding, there was a reduction in death due to bleeding with tranexamic acid despite no reduction in transfusion.9x9CRASH-2 Collaborators. Effects of tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events, and blood transfusion in trauma patients with significant haemorrhage (CRASH-2): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2010; 376: 23–32 Summary | Full Text | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (1229) | Google ScholarSee all References
The WOMAN trial began before the results of the CRASH-2 trial of tranexamic acid in bleeding trauma patients were available. The CRASH-2 trial recruited 20 211 adults with traumatic bleeding and showed that tranexamic acid reduces death due to bleeding and all-cause mortality with no increase in vascular occlusive events. There was strong evidence of a time to treatment interaction. In patients treated within 3 h of injury, tranexamic acid reduced death due to bleeding by around one third, but when given after 3 h, it seemed to increase the risk.9x9CRASH-2 Collaborators. Effects of tranexamic acid on death, vascular occlusive events, and blood transfusion in trauma patients with significant haemorrhage (CRASH-2): a randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2010; 376: 23–32 Summary | Full Text | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (1229) | Google ScholarSee all References 10x10CRASH-2 Collaborators. The importance of early treatment with tranexamic acid in bleeding trauma patients: an exploratory analysis of the CRASH-2 randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2011; 377: 1096–1101 Summary | Full Text | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (468) | Google ScholarSee all References Early activation of fibrinolysis is common after trauma and is associated with increased mortality.11x11Sawamura, A, Hayakawa, M, Gando, S et al. Disseminated intravascular coagulation with a fibrinolytic phenotype at an early phase of trauma predicts mortality. Thromb Res. 2009; 124: 608–613 Summary | Full Text | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (92) | Google ScholarSee all References Because similar temporal changes in fibrinolysis have been observed after childbirth,23x23Ducloy-Bouthors, AS, Duhamel, A, Kipnis, E et al. Postpartum haemorrhage related early increase in D-dimers is inhibited by tranexamic acid: haemostasis parameters of a randomized controlled open labelled trial. Br J Anaesth. 2016; 116: 641–648 Summary | Full Text | Full Text PDF | PubMed | Scopus (10) | Google ScholarSee all References we expected that early treatment with tranexamic acid would also be more effective after post-partum haemorrhage and planned to set the WOMAN trial results in the context of all available clinical data on the time to treatment interaction. Bearing in mind that even a large trial such as ours would have limited power to detect a time to treatment interaction for death due to bleeding, setting the trial results in the context of the totality of the available evidence seemed to be the most sensible approach. Although there are on-going trials of tranexamic acid in life threatening bleeding, the CRASH-2 trial is the only trial to date that provides such evidence.24x24Dewan, Y, Komolafe, EO, Mejia-Mantilla, JH, Perel, P, Roberts, I, and Shakur, H. CRASH-3 - tranexamic acid for the treatment of significant traumatic brain injury: study protocol for an international randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Trials. 2012; 13: 87 Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (68) | Google ScholarSee all References 25x25Roberts, I, Coats, T, Edwards, P et al. HALT-IT--tranexamic acid for the treatment of gastrointestinal bleeding: study protocol for a randomised controlled trial. Trials. 2014; 15: 450 Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (27) | Google ScholarSee all References Figure 5Figure 5 shows the results of the WOMAN trial in the context of the CRASH-2 results. There is a strong suggestion that early treatment is most effective and late treatment is unlikely to be beneficial.
On the basis of clinical trials of tranexamic acid in surgery and trauma, WHO guidelines recommended tranexamic acid in post-partum haemorrhage if uterotonics fail to stop the bleeding or if it is thought that the bleeding may be due to trauma.1x1WHO. WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum haemorrhage. World Health Organisation, Geneva; 2012 Google ScholarSee all References Our results suggest that if tranexamic acid is used in the treatment of post-partum haemorrhage it should be given soon after the onset of post-partum haemorrhage alongside uterotonics. First, our findings show that a significant proportion of mothers die within hours of post-partum haemorrhage onset. In such circumstances, waiting to see if uterotonics fail to stop the bleeding could put some mothers' lives at risk. We found no evidence of adverse effects with tranexamic acid and it has also been shown to be safe and effective in trauma and surgery. Second, our data suggest that early administration is most effective. Treatment within 3 h of birth significantly reduced death due to bleeding and the need for laparotomy to control bleeding, an observation consistent with results of trials of tranexamic acid in traumatic bleeding. Although we did not see a monotonic decrease in the risk of death due to bleeding with decreasing time to treatment, as seen in trauma, this is more likely to reflect the imprecision of the estimates rather than the underlying biological relationship. We did observe such a monotonic decrease in the risk of laparotomy to control bleeding as time to treatment decreased. Finally, the temporal changes in fibrinolytic activation after childbirth are similar to those in trauma with an early (within one hour) increase in levels of tissue plasminogen activator.14x14Kruithof, EK, Tran-Thang, C, Gudinchet, A et al. Fibrinolysis in pregnancy: a study of plasminogen activator inhibitors. Blood. 1987; 69: 460–466 PubMed | Google ScholarSee all References However, in the light of our results, further research into the timecourse of the changes in coagulation and fibrinolysis after childbirth are needed.
In the WOMAN trial, tranexamic acid was given by intravenous injection. However, in low-income and middle-income countries, many deaths from post-partum bleeding occur at home or settings where intravenous injections might not be feasible. Therefore, bioavailability of tranexamic acid after non-intravenous routes of administration needs to be assessed.