Cat allergies cure 'will be available within 5 years' after scientists work out what triggers a reaction
If you find yourself sniffing, sneezing and rubbing itchy red eyes whenever there’s a cat roaming nearby, here’s news that might make you purr.
Scientists claim they may finally have come up with a cure for the UK’s  most common pet allergy, thanks to a breakthrough discovery.
Researchers have worked out how felines can trigger allergic reactions in one in ten of us, ranging from irritating rashes to dangerous asthma attacks.
Until now, the only way to treat the problem has been to take anti-histamines to calm symptoms or get a round of injections to build up a level of tolerance to the allergen.
But a team from Cambridge University discovered that it is a protein in feline dandruff, known as dander, that combines with a chemical in the human body – sparking the adverse reaction.
With drugs to inhibit the process already under development, they claim a pill or inhaler could be on the market within five years.
Lead author Dr Clare Bryant, from the university’s department of veterinary medicine, said: ‘When cats lick themselves they spread saliva, hormones and skin cells on to their coat. 
‘When the hair falls out, it is proteins in this dandruff stuck on their fur that people are allergic to. How cat dander causes such a severe allergic reaction in some people has long been a mystery.
‘This is the first time we have discovered the process that leads to the allergic reaction. It opens up a whole new type of drug to treat it.’
The research, set to be published in the Journal of Immunology, suggests a drug could block the effects of cat dander. And scientists hope the treatment could also help those allergic to dogs. Dr Bryant added: ‘As drugs have already been developed to inhibit the receptor, we are hopeful that our research will lead to new treatments for cat and possibly dog allergy sufferers.
‘With just a puff of an inhaler which contains the drug, a person would be okay to interact with cats without an adverse reaction.’
Malayka Rahman, research analyst at Asthma UK, said: ‘Research uncovering how proteins in cat dander trigger an allergic asthma reaction is an important part of the process of developing new and improved treatments and reducing the risk of asthma attacks.’
And Maureen Jenkins, director of clinical services at Allergy UK, said: ‘This research is a big step forward.
‘Cat allergen is particularly difficult to avoid as it is a “sticky” molecule that is carried into every building on people’s shoes and clothes.
‘It can also still be found in a home, on the walls and on the ceiling or fittings, even a few years after a cat has ceased to live there.
‘This new information identifying the specific receptor interaction in the immune system could pave the way for treatments for those with persistent disease triggered by cat allergen and, in the future, potentially dog and house dust mite allergen.’