Four years in the Pirate Bay: director Simon Klose on why file-sharing is still political
Filmmaker Simon Klose has spent the last four years following the founders of The Pirate Bay through its legal struggles, technical issues, and ongoing battle with some of the most powerful corporations on Earth. On Friday, he’s releasing his documentary on the subject, TPB-AFK, distributed free under a Creative Commons license. The Verge caught up with Klose to talk about file-sharing, Kim Dotcom, and the decision to give away his movie for free.
"In the long run, the internet will stay free."
You’ve been working on this film for four years, starting with the Pirate Bay trial in 2009. How have people’s attitudes towards piracy changed in that time?
It’s funny, a lot of Swedish reporters are already asking me, is it time to do a film about the rise and fall of the piracy movement? This debate was really furious in 2007, ‘08, ‘09, climaxing with the Pirate Bay trial in 2009, and now it’s cooled off a little. I think some of the reason is that there are more legal options today. But at the same time, a couple of years later there's something like 60 pirate parties around the world. One of the reasons that the Swedish Pirate Party became so powerful in 2009 was that the Pirate Bay was convicted in such a draconian way. So when bad things happen to the Pirate Bay, good things happen to Sweden. That has been the logic.
Do you think the pirate parties are winning in the long term?
I'm an optimist by birth. The worry is that very few, very big companies will take control of the entire internet and close it down and make it like cable TV, but I don't think that will happen. I think that in the long run, the internet will stay free. Even though pirate parties aren’t that visible in the debates anymore, there is a general knowledge about piracy, surveillance, file-sharing that there wasn’t before. So it's good that pirate parties are out there. I don't vote for them myself but it's good that they're out there creating debate and raising awareness of these new problems.
What's your take on Kim Dotcom's Mega? Is it the next step in the Pirate Bay fight?
Well, I don't know the guy and I haven't totally followed the story, but it strikes me that Kim Dotcom has always been a businessman. He seems to have been driven by financial motivations largely and the Pirate Bay guys don't seem to have been motivated by the same things.
"The ability to share culture is out of sync with the right to share culture."
A lot of the movie is a call to reform the international copyright system. How would you like to see this happen?
Well, copyright was created as an incentive for musicians and artists to create. To get this limited monopoly and make money off their cultural works. It was meant as an incentive to create more, and I support that idea.
But I think that the way copyright is being used today is mostly really large corporations that sit on these large swaths of rights and they are using this copyright to protect those rights, not to create more music. So copyright does need to be reformed. The basic dilemma is that the ability to share with culture is out of sync with the right to share culture. We need to find new tools, new ways for artists to share their stuff and still make money. And one of those tools is Creative Commons, which I'm using for my own film, which actually makes it easier for my film to spread and will make it easier for me to make money.
"I want to prove that it can be a viable business idea to give away a film for free."
So making the film Creative Commons is partly a business move?
Sure. I'm not saying that the future for every filmmaker is to give out their film for free and ask for donations. But every film needs their own strategy, and for a Pirate Bay film to go out with the normal copyright and say, "this film will not be for free," I think that would be a stupid strategy. Any businessman would realize that. It would be perceived by the core audience, by the fans, by the online community as inauthentic. And that filmmaker would make less money than somebody who gave it away for free and tried to make an example of how this powerful distribution system we know as the internet could be. So yeah, I think it's a business move. But then again I also believe in this, and I want to prove that it can be a viable business idea to give away a film for free.
"Why should our government be pressured into this?"
The Pirate Bay had legal struggles in Sweden, but in many ways, this seems like an international issue because so much of the pressure is coming from American content industry. Is copyright something that needs to be addressed internationally?
It all ties together, right? Copyright is part of this huge legal framework, and it's really complicated. When it came out that it the MPAA, via the White House, had pressured the Swedish government to take measures against this Swedish pirate site, The Pirate Bay, a lot of Swedes were really upset. We felt that this is Sweden and we have our laws here and why should our government be pressured into this? The content industry is driving these laws all over the world and bullying governments into stronger, more restrictive copyright laws all over the world. It's problematic because a lot of the politicians just buy the stuff that the content industry is saying. It's like, when the Green Party came up against the oil industry in the 70s, they really had to teach politicians not to take these people at their word. Politicians should be aware that these are extremely wealthy, profit-driven organizations and they are not necessarily always thinking about society's best interests.
Do you think sites like the Pirate Bay have to be run by outlaws, or will we get to a point where these services are legal?
I don't know. Some people see the Pirate Bay as digital civil disobedience. This power shift has given three young dudes the power to run one of the internet's largest sites for a decade, having some of the wealthiest corporations and governments against them. The sort of power shift where that's possible, it's really interesting. How can you run the 70th biggest site on the internet when you're hunted by every government in the western world? That sort of power shift that the internet has enabled… that has to be there before there can be any legal change. Once we can see a society where something like the Pirate Bay can exist, only then can we take on those legal battles and try to change these systems.