Netflix Throttling Video Streams for (Most) Mobile Users
If you use Netflix on a mobile device, you're probably burning through your monthly data plan just to watch your favorite shows—unless you only use the app when connected to your home or work Wi-Fi networks. And while you'll still eat up a lot of data with your Netflix binging on Verizon or AT&T's networks, the question of just how much, and what kind of stream quality you're getting, has been at the heart of a fairly big controversy over the past week.
Last week, T-Mobile accused Verizon and AT&T of throttling its customers' Netflix streaming and therefore reducing the streaming quality—since T-Mobile, after all, has added Netflix to its "Binge On" service, which allows you to stream as much programming as you want at a 480p resolution.
"Did you know that when you watch Netflix on T-Mobile you get it at 480p? And the duopoly is actually delivering your Netflix content at 360p. I'll bet you didn't know that. Go check; it's true," said T-Mobile CEO John Legere in a video posted last week.
Verizon and AT&T denied doing any throttling of their own. A Verizon spokesman told FierceWireless that T-Mobile's claims were "dopey," and an AT&T spokesman said that "customers on 4G LTE can get much higher resolution than T-Mobile's optimized 480p limit."
Netflix has since come out with a bit of a mea culpa of its own: It's to blame for the throttling claims, because it's doing exactly that for most mobile networks.
"We believe restrictive data caps are bad for consumers and the Internet in general, creating a dilemma for those who increasingly rely on their mobile devices for entertainment, work and more. So in an effort to protect our members from overage charges when they exceed mobile data caps, our default bitrate for viewing over mobile networks has been capped globally at 600 kilobits per second. It's about striking a balance that ensures a good streaming experience while avoiding unplanned fines from mobile providers," reads a recent blog post from Netflix.
It's not doing any throttling for T-Mobile or Sprint users because "historically those two companies have had more consumer-friendly policies," a spokesperson told The Wall Street Journal. In other words, the carriers will limit the speeds at which a person can connect, rather than charge them excessive fees, when they exceed their data caps or use way too much "unlimited" data.
Going forward, Netflix will be introducing a new data saver feature that will allow subscribers to customize the video quality (and bandwidth used) for their mobile streaming. They'll be able to get more streaming at a lower quality if they don't have big data plans, or higher-quality content if they have a data plan that can handle it.
"Our research and testing indicates that many members worry about exceeding their mobile data cap, and don't need the same resolution on their mobile phone as on a large screen TV to enjoy shows and movies. However, we recognize some members may be less sensitive to data caps or subscribe to mobile data plans from carriers that don't levy penalties for exceeding caps. As we develop new technologies, we want to give all our members the choice to adjust their data consumption settings based on their video preferences and sensitivity to their ISPs data overage charges," reads Netflix' blog post.