WA cyclone: Alerts issued for Pilbara and Kimberley as Stan moves towards coast
A tropical low off Western Australia's north-west coast has intensified into a tropical cyclone amid warnings it is likely to be upgraded to a category three before it makes landfall near Port Hedland.
Cyclone Stan was about 195 kilometres north-north-west of Port Hedland and 320 kilometres north-north-east of Karratha at 5:00am (AWST), and it was moving slowly south.
The category two cyclone is expected to be upgraded to category three when it makes landfall near Port Hedland late on Saturday morning.
Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) regional director Mike Bergin said significant winds and heavy rainfall associated with the system was likely to develop over the Pilbara and far western Kimberley, and extend further inland as the system continues to track southwards.
"We will see destructive winds developing during [on Saturday] up to 150, maybe 170 kilometres an hour near the centre," Mr Bergin said.
"We will see close to the centre a dangerous storm tide and also we will see quite significant rainfall.
"Already we have minor flooding in some of the rivers in the Pilbara and it is likely we will see those rivers moving toward more significant flood levels during Saturday and continuing into Sunday."
Tides between Pardoo and Karratha are likely to rise above the normal high tide mark, with very rough seas and flooding of low-lying coastal areas east of the crossing point.
Stan is the first cyclone of the Australian season.
Parts of WA's north-west coast were expected to be placed on red alert by the Department of Fire and Emergency Services (DFES) from Friday night.
A yellow alert has already been issued by DFES for coastal communities between Pardoo and Mardie, including Port Hedland, South Hedland and Karratha, with people urged to get ready to shelter.
A blue alert is in place for communities from Bidyadanga to Pardoo, and from Mardie to Pannawonica, with residents urged to prepare for cyclonic weather and organise emergency supplies, including water.
DFES said the Great Northern Highway would be closed between Port Hedland and the Roebuck Roadhouse near Broome from 3:00pm on Friday as a precaution.
The Department for Child Protection and Family Support has opened an emergency evacuation centre at South Hedland for residents forced to leave their homes.
The evacuation point is at the JD Hardie Centre on Cottier Drive at South Hedland.
The Port of Port Hedland has officially closed, with the last outbound vessel departing the shipping channel on Friday morning.
The Port of Dampier officially closed at 6:00pm Friday, while the Pilbara Port Authority is continuing to monitor conditions at the Port of Ashburton.
It said the ports would reopen once the cyclone had crossed the coast.