This Friday, Delhi braces for worst flood since 1978
NEW DELHI: If heavy rain threw Commonwealth Games work out of gear, there is worse to come -- starting Friday, the capital could witness its worst flood in 22 years, with the Hathnikund barrage on the Yamuna releasing more than 6 lakh cusec water on September 8. The all-time record dates back to 1978 when more than 7 lakh cusec water released at the barrage swamped Delhi. Chief secretary Rakesh Mehta said a flood alert would be declared soon. Government officials, meanwhile, confirmed that a warning had already been sounded in low-lying areas such as Usmanpur, Garhi Mandu, Batla House and its extension and residents have been asked to move out. "Most of the areas that are prone to flooding were evacuated when the Yamuna rose in August-end. Residents from these areas are already staying in camps. However, we will keep a strict watch to ensure nobody goes back to the affected areas," said DPS Tomar, chief engineer (irrigation and flood control). "The district collector (east) has also been informed to carry out evacuations since it will get difficult to rescue people in a flood situation." According to the Central Water Commission, due to heavy rain in the hilly catchment areas, the quantity of water being released at Hathnikund went up from 29,262 cusec at 2am on Wednesday to 6,07,076 cusec at 3pm. "The same amount was being released till 4pm. After that, the release went down only slightly to 5,66,728 cusec at 6pm. We are expecting that the level at the Old Delhi Railway Bridge will cross the danger mark of 204.83m around 6pm on September 6 and then touch a high of 206.9m by Friday evening," said an official. The last time the city saw such massive flooding in 1978, the water level had gone up to 207.49m. Officials said that due to the huge volume of water released, the level could easily rise further and possibly even breach that all-time high. "Even though the amount of water being released has come down, the quantity is so high that the level of water will only stabilize. We cannot foresee a fall in levels anytime soon," added the official. By 8pm on Wednesday, water levels at Kalanor, barely two hours away from Hathnikund, had gone up to 268.02m and was only rising further. "The situation seems quite grim right now and the way the levels are rising, it won't be surprising if Delhi faces its worst floods ever," said a CWC official.