Bangladesh factory fire kills at least 25, injures dozens
A fire at a food and cigarette packaging factory in Bangladesh has killed at least 25 people and injured dozens, emergency and government officials say, with fears the toll could rise.
The cause of the fire in the Tongi industrial zone about 20 kilometres north of the capital, Dhaka, was not immediately known, but officials said a boiler explosion probably triggered the blaze, around 8:00am (local time), as workers prepared to swap shifts.
"We cannot confirm if people are inside, but our priority is to rescue them if there is anyone," Mohammad Akhtaruzzaman, a fire official at the site, told the Reuters news agency by telephone, adding that the blaze was now under control.
"There were about 100 people inside when the fire broke out," Mohammad Nayan, a worker assisting with rescue efforts, told reporters.
More than 20 firefighting teams battled to douse the flames, which also caused the partial collapse of the four-storey Tampaco Foils building, officials said.
Parvez Mia, a doctor at the Tongi government hospital, told the AFP news agency at least 70 people had been injured.
"Most of them had burn injuries. We sent the critically injured victims to the hospitals in Dhaka," he said.
"Several of them are very critical," he added.
"I almost became unconscious, but I forced myself to go out with the help of my mobile phone's flashlight."
Machine operator Rubel Hossain was two minutes away from entering the factory when the blast occurred.
"I heard a huge explosion and saw smoke and fire coming out of the factory," he said.
"I am simultaneously feeling lucky and heartbroken," he said.
Fires and other accidents are common in the factories that make up the $27-billion garment industry in Bangladesh, the world's second-biggest apparel exporter after China.
In November 2012, at least 111 workers were killed when a devastating fire engulfed a nine-storey garment factory in the Ashulia industrial area, outside Dhaka
The accident was followed by an even bigger tragedy six months later when 1,138 people died after another clothing factory complex collapsed, trapping over 3,000 workers.
Western brands subsequently upgraded safety standards and inspections for suppliers, dramatically reducing incidents of fire and other accidents at export-orientated factories.
But thousands of local factories supplying the domestic market have done little to address safety concerns.