1940 census: Ronald Reagan's life as $5,000-a-year actor revealed
Newly-released records from the 1940 U.S. census have revealed insights into the country's high-profile residents of the decade.
Files on presidents Ronald Reagan and Franklin Delano Roosevelt, reclusive writer J.D. Salinger and silent film star Myrna Loy are among the 132million released, exactly 72 years after the government probe into their family and working lives.
And, much like today, movie stars are shown to have earned far more than the average American's $956 annual wage. 
National Archives website shows that then-actor Ronald Reagan, and his wife, actress Jane Wyman, reported incomes of more than $5,000 a year and noted that their Los Angeles home was worth $200,000.
The couple, co-stars in the movie 'Brother Rat', reported paying
As ABC News reports, just two doors down live a champion bridge player, Sydney Rusinow, who later married a woman from another building, Viola Richard - an actress who appeared in films with slapstick comics Englishman Stan Laurel and American Oliver Hardy.
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt is also listed, with his occupation noted as 'President of the U.S.A.' He entered his address as 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, where he lived with his wife, personal secretary, cousin, governess and four servants, according to the records.
The data also gives a glimpse into the life of reclusive writer J.D. Salinger - who lived at 1133 Park Avenue in Manhattan, several years before he moved into seclusion in New Hampshire.
After taking an evening writing class at Columbia University, according to the archive, the then-21-year old Jerome David Salinger, published his first story, 'The Young Folks', in the spring of 1940. He later became best known for his controversial novel The Catcher in the Rye, published in 1951.
Silent film actress Myrna Loy, who successfully transitioned into 'talkies' with her role as Nora Charles in the Thin Man movies, is shown as having lived with her first husband, producer Arthur Hornblow, Jr., at the time of the census.
White House resident: President Franklin D. Roosevelt is among the records. He notes his profession as 'President of the U.S.A' and records his address as 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue
Husband and wife each earned a salary of more than $5,000 annually, and lived in a $200,000 home. The couple employed two servants, each paid $960 a year. But while the census offers fascinating insight into a lost world, there are also privacy concerns over releasing the personal information of its living participants - more than 21 million people. Among the living are celebrities Clint Eastwood and Morgan Freeman, as well as as Verla Morris, who was working as a keypunch operator in Fairfield, Illinois, when the census was taken. 'I don't remember them taking my census,' Morris, who lives in Chandler, Arizona and turns 100 this year, told The Associated Press. Morris, who has been researching her family history since 1969 and has written six books on her findings, said the records were key as people often do not want to give out personal information. 'Lots of times I just have to wait until maybe they die,' she said. 'Then I'll have all their information.'
Morris was one of the 132,163,569 people whose information was collected by 120,000 census takers - or enumerators - in 1940.
Information included a person's address, age and education, the names of the adults and children under their roof, whether their home was owned or rented and the value of their home or rent.
Other questions asked around five per cent of people for the birthplace of their parents, the language they spoke in their home as a child, their occupation and which wars they had served in.
Women were asked whether they had been married more than once, their age when they were first married and the number of children they had given birth to - excluding stillborn babies.
But after a 72-year wait, after the government probed more than 132 million citizens about their family and working lives in the U.S. and Puerto Rico, genealogists and family members desperate to know more about their ancestors may have to wait a little longer.
Interest was so high in the 1940 census the website struggled to keep up with the influx of users.
The National Archives website had 22.5 million hits in the first three hours after the records - made available after the data's confidentiality expired - were opened to the public.
But the servers buckled under the pressure, leaving users complaining that they could not access the data, which includes addresses, jobs, house prices and income for the nation's residents.
'It's very sweet of them to put all of these records on line, [but] it would be even nicer of them to make the records visible,' user Val Lough complained to MSNBC.com.
'None of them will download. It would be faster to mail a public records request to the National Archives.'
Blackout: Website users were faced with 'loading' pages for hours after the site's servers could not keep up
One Twitter user, Justin Donaldson, wrote: 'Wow, the entire 1940 US Census is now available online. The bad news is that the servers are so slammed you will need to wait until 2040 to see anything.'
'We are having a server problem,' Susan Cooper, director of public and media communications at the National Archives, told ABC News.
'Because there is such a huge volume, they're having a hard time keeping up... We're a victim of our own success.'
Within the first several hours, the website had 1.9 million unique users and the site's Twitter page reported it was getting 100,000 hits a second. By Monday afternoon, the site had clocked 37 million hits.
'It's frustrating and we share that frustration with the public,' Ms Cooper added. The National Archives said it would put more servers online to handle the traffic.
The 16th federal decennial census, taken on April 1, 1940, documented the strife-ridden decade of the 1930s, ravaged by the Great Depression and on the brink of entering the Second World War.
A snapshot of the records shows professions including frame spinners and rivet heaters. This compares to the 2010 census, where computer programmers and human resource managers were more common.
In 1940, there were 5.1 million farmers while today there are 613,000. Top professions of the time included manufacturing (23 per cent of the population) and agriculture (19 per cent).
The census also shows the swell in the country's population; while just over 132 million took part in 1940, almost 309 million answered questions for the census in 2010.
In 1940, almost 90 per cent of people surveyed were white, 9.8 per cent were black and 0.4 per cent were 'other'. In 2010, 72.4 per cent were white, while 12.5 per cent were black or African American.
Just five per cent of the population in 1940 had college degrees compared to nearly 30 per cent two years ago.
It also shows the shift in the most desirable places to live. In 1940, New York, Pennsylvania and Illinois were the most heavily populated states, compared to California, Texas and New York in 2010.
While the 2010 census had the motto 'ten questions in ten minutes' to encourage people to fill out their form, the 1940 census asked 34 questions with an extra 15 questions for the smaller subset chosen at random.
Although the plethora of information will paint today's Americans a picture of the lives their ancestors lived, they will not be able to search for records by name.
Instead a record can be accessed by addresses. MSNBC.com suggested that this information can be found in old city or telephone directories found in public libraries.
Yet tens of thousands of genealogists, librarians and volunteers are expected to start indexing the records, eventually allowing searches by name.
Ancestry.com and the Mormon Church's FamilySearch.org have also announced plans to provide indexes to their customers as quickly as possible, MSNBC reported.
Jeanne Bloom of the Chicago Genealogical Society, speaking to NPR, said releasing the data was 'a huge event'.
'It's kind of like the Super Bowl for genealogists,' said Bloom, who helps the U.S. Army trace family records.
'I locate living family members of soldiers that were missing in action during World War II, the Korean War, Vietnam [and] whose remains were never recovered, identified and returned to the family.'
But there are concerns that as well as giving insight to families and historians, the census records, rich with personal information, provide an opportunity for identity thieves.
Access to the records will be free and open to anyone on the internet.
Every decade since 1942, the National Archives has made records from past censuses available to the public.
Some privacy advocates, such as the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), have opposed releasing the large amounts of information about people who are still alive.
Jay Stanley, a senior policy analyst at the ACLU, said harm could come from combining the 1940 data with other information.
'Computer technology today allows you to take information from different sources and combine it into a very high resolution image of somebody's life,' he told The Associated Press.
'Each particular piece of information might just be one pixel. But when brought together, they become very intrusive.'
A document obtained from the National Archives by The Associated Press through a Freedom of Information Act request shows that, in 2010, the U.S. Census Bureau raised privacy concerns about the release of the 1940 census.
But Census Bureau spokesman Robert Bernstein dismissed the concerns, pointing out that no birthdates or Social Security numbers would be in the records.
Susan Cooper, a spokeswoman for the National Archives, said archives officials did not know of any complaints from the public about the release.
Robert Gellman, a privacy and information consultant, said he doubted the records would be of much value to crooks, as it is already easy to obtain personal information on the internet.
'There's nobody out there complaining about 70-year-old records being used against them,' he told The AP.
Morris, who was part of the census, said she is not worried about her information being made public.
She added that it was important for people to be able to learn about their ancestors through genealogical research. 'Every family should be interested enough to have a family history,' she said.
See below for video