Dog near Beaudesert believed to be the first of species detected with the Hendra virus
THE deadly Hendra virus has been detected in a dog on a Queensland farm, authorities say.
Premier Anna Bligh said testing showed antibodies for the disease in the animal, although the dog appears healthy. It's thought the dog was on a property where one of the first of the recent cases was detected near Beaudesert in June. "We've had confirmation that a dog on one of the properties that had a horse die of this disease has been confirmed positive," Ms Bligh told reporters in Brisbane today. Queensland and New South Wales officials have been fighting a spate of outbreaks that has seen 14 horses infected with Hendra die or be put down since June 20. Ms Bligh said it had not yet been decided whether the dog would have to be put down, or if it would be studied further. Queensland chief vet Dr Rick Symons said it was the first time outside of a laboratory that an animal other than a flying fox, horse or human, had been confirmed with the virus. "We don't know how the dog contracted the virus or when it happened," he said. "Based on our knowledge to date, it is most likely that the dog caught the virus from an infected horse." The dog returned two negative results for the virus but a different type of test conducted at the Australian Animal Health Laboratory in Victoria had confirmed the presence of Hendra antibodies. "This means that at some point the dog has been exposed to the virus but to our knowledge has shown no signs of illness," Dr Symons said. The case has raised many questions for biosecurity and health officials and researchers. Authorities will now recommend that people keep dogs and cats away from sick horses to reduce the risk of such an infection. The remaining horses and dogs on this property are still being monitored daily and show no signs of illness. Biosecurity Queensland's policy is to test cats and dogs on properties where there are infected horses. Tests on cats and dogs on 11 properties currently under quarantine in Queensland have turned up no other positive results. Queensland's chief health officer Dr Jeannette Young said Queensland Health would speak with the property owners to see who may have had contact with the infected dog. Queensland and NSW officials have been fighting a spate of outbreaks that has led to 14 horses infected with Hendra dying or being put down since June 20. Hendra is usually passed from bats to horses, and then to humans. Of the seven people who have had Hendra since it was detected in 1994, four have died.
Hendra cases currently span from west of Cairns, in north Queensland, to Macksville on the NSW mid-north coast.