How to vote in the Ontario election
The next Premier of Ontario will be decided Thursday, based on ballots cast across the province. But if you’re not quite sure how to exercise your democratic right, here’s a guide.
How can I cast my ballot?
If you’re on the voters list, you will have a registry card that tells you where to vote. Take the card and a piece of identification with your name on it to the polling station. If you have a voting certificate, which is the documentation given to people who are not on the voters list and have requested it ahead of time, you’ll need a piece of identification with your name and address.
A poll official will check your name and cross it off the voters list. You’ll get a folded ballot, head behind a voting screen and mark an X beside the name of the candidate you want to vote for.
What if I didn’t get a registry card? Can I vote?
If you’re eligible to vote (meaning you’re at least 18, Canadian, live in an Ontario electoral district and haven’t already voted) and didn’t receive a notice of registration card, you can still vote. Bring one piece of identification with your name and address to a polling station. You’ll have to fill out and sign a form before your name is added to the voters list.
You can check to see if you’re on the voters list here.
What type of identification do I need to vote?
If your name is on the voters list or you have a certificate to vote, you should bring a piece of identification with your name, as it appears on the list. This could be a birth certificate, passport, citizenship card, health card or Social Insurance Number card.
If your name isn’t on the list, or you need to change some of your personal information, you should bring a piece of identification with your name and address. Such identification includes a driver’s licence, bill or a bank statement.
How do I find my polling station or riding?
You can cast your ballot at a polling station you've been assigned to in your riding. If you’re not sure where that is, you can use a tool on Elections Ontario’s website. Once you enter your address, the page will list the address and hours for each location.
If you want to find out your riding so you can research candidates, you can use another tool on the Elections Ontario website.
You can vote on Thursday between 9 a.m. and 9 p.m. ET.
Who do I vote for?
That’s up to you. If you don’t know who the candidates are, you can find a list here once you know the name of your riding.