ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Queensland Opposition Leader John-Paul Langbroek has resigned, less than two hours after high-profile Brisbane Lord Mayor Campbell Newman confirmed that he was after his job.
Mr Langbroek's decision came after Councillor Newman announced he would run for preselection for a state seat in Brisbane in a bid to take over the leadership of the state's Liberal National Party.
Mr Langbroek's deputy Lawrence Springborg, himself a former leader of the state Opposition, also said he would be standing down.
The pair spoke to reporters in Brisbane after Councillor Newman called a Lang Park press conference to say he would run for LNP preselection in the inner Brisbane seat of Ashgrove, which is currently held by Labor's Environment Minister Kate Jones.
"It's been a great pleasure to have led the LNP, a great honour," Mr Langbroek said.
He said that despite being forced out as leader, he would be doing his utmost to help the LNP campaign over the coming 12 months.
"I want to talk about the future, because the course has been set by others within my party," he said.
"That's the decision that's been made by others. Of course I have concerns about the process.
"I remain absolutely committed to us winning government, proving to Queenslanders that we can be a better alternative.
"I know that we need better, and the LNP can offer that."
Mr Springborg said the course of his future had been set by members of the LNP.
"Some members of our party believe it can be done. Maybe it can be - that is a matter for them," he said. "Good luck to them."
Councillor Newman said he would resign his position as the city's Lord Mayor if his preselection bid was a success. The next state election is due next year.
Councillor Newman has backed his deputy, Graham Quirk, to take City Hall's top job.
If Councillor Newman resigns after next Thursday, the LNP can select a Lord Mayor, rather than going to an election.
Senior MPs Jeff Seeney and Tim Nicholls said they would put themselves forward tonight as the new parliamentary leadership team. There will be a party-room vote tonight.
Mr Seeney said he would be parliamentary leader, and Councillor Newman would be the alternative premier.
He said he would be happy to then stand aside for Councillor Newman when the next election campaign starts.
"My job is to be the leader of the Opposition here in the Parliament," he said.
"To fill that role that I know so well, that I'm comfortable with, that I've done before, to fill that role as a backup for Campbell Newman, who'll be the leader of the LNP election team."
Announcing his intentions at a Brisbane press conference today, Councillor Newman said he had made the decision after a "lot of soul-searching".
Citing high unemployment in Cairns, "growing pains" in Townsville, infrastructure issues affecting coal, food security concerns and high water prices, he said the LNP needed a change at the top to topple the current Government.
And he said that while Mr Langbroek was a "terrific bloke", he was not up to the challenge of bringing down Anna Bligh's Government.
"Clearly to deal with this Labor party machine, that has been all about spin and has let Queensland down in so many ways, we need to mount a huge and effective campaign over the next 12 months," he said.
"I believe that I am the one to lead the team forward. I'm saying today I'm prepared to do the hard yards."
Councillor Newman also said he had been phoned by state MPs offering their support for his leadership tilt.
"I've had expressions of support from the state LNP party room," he said.
"They are frustrated, they want to be heard, they've got policies they want to launch."
The Lord Mayor denied he had been made leadership promises by current members of the LNP.
"I was not promised anything. This is a way forward, [and] it is not straightforward, it is risky," he said.
"There are no guarantees from anybody, no promises from anyone."
Councillor Newman's announcement coincided with Question Time in Queensland Parliament, with the State Government making the most of the situation.
"Run the Opposition office like an emir does in the Middle East," he said.
Treasurer Andrew Fraser says Councillor Newman will face a formidable opponent in Ms Jones.
"We say bring it on - we have a candidate who will wipe the floor with the Lord Mayor, Mr Speaker," he said.
Labor has held the seat of Ashgrove since 1989.
The LNP Member for Mermaid Beach, Ray Stevens, says he is worried there will be a voter backlash.
"I'm very fearful of a natural reaction by many voters, members, supporters, of the LNP to this radical announcement today," he said.
"Quite clearly it puts us back into the divided political party syndrome."
Federal Opposition Leader Tony Abbott would not buy into the leadership issue but says the LNP has been performing well.
"I think that the Coalition should win the next election," he said.
"I think the Coalition has done a good job, and I think matters internal to the Coalition should be decided in Queensland."