Solomon Islands election: Independents win two-thirds of parliamentary seats
Officials from the Solomon Islands Electoral Commission have declared the final results of last week's landmark polls.
The November 19 election was the country's first since an Australian-led peacekeeping operation transitioned to a police-focused mission last year.
Philothea Ruaeho, a spokeswoman for the electoral commission, said the final results for all the constituencies had been declared by the governor-general.
Independent candidates were the biggest winners, securing 32 seats in the 50-seat parliament.
With no dominant political party emerging, the members were expected to travel to the capital, Honiara, to begin negotiations on a coalition government.
The newly-elected MPs will also choose the country's next prime minister.
Gordon Darcy Lilo, who had led the Solomons Island since 2011, lost his seat in the constituency of Gizo-Kolombangara.
Ms Ruaeho told Radio Australia's Pacific Beat that a new voter registration system had contributed to the success of the elections.
"The biometric system has had a great impact on the voting and the turnout as well," she said.
"There was about 80 to 90 per cent turnout and that reflects the number of registered voters that were gathered during the biometric registration."
Meanwhile, the Commonwealth election observer group has congratulated Solomon Islanders on their peaceful participation in the polls.
The head of the group, Sir Mekere Morauta, said the election process was conducted in a peaceful environment and voters appeared generally able to cast their votes freely.
In an interim report, Mr Morauta also praised the biometric voter registration process, saying it raised confidence in the integrity of the electoral roll.
However, he noted that there had been reports that not all eligible voters were able to register on time.
The election is seen as a test of the country's stability after the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands (RAMSI) spent 10 years and $2.6 billion restoring law and order following ethnic violence.