Fey general who ignited a cyber war
''The Chinese must be getting a real thrill out of this,'' said Scott Burchill, a Deakin University specialist in international relations whose earlier diplomatic career ended over his dissent with policy on East Timor. ''They will be sitting back and saying: 'We were always wondering when the cyber war would start, now it's begun among yourselves. We were going to do it.''' There were perceived threats of a more sinister kind. With Palin calling for Assange to be hunted down like al-Qaeda, the former Republican House of Representatives leader Newt Gingrich saying he should be classed as an ''enemy combatant'' and an adviser to the Canadian Prime Minister saying he should be ''assassinated'', Assange's lawyer has earnestly asked Australia's Attorney-General, Robert McClelland, to warn them off. Clinton Fernandes, an associate professor in international relations at the Australian Defence Force Academy, urges Assange to get back to Australia when he can. ''He's physically safest in this country, because any kind of lethal action that would be done by foreign services, especially those that are partners of us in ANZUS, would not be done in this country,'' Fernandes said. ''He's quite liable, if he stays away from Australia, to fall asleep in one jurisdiction and wake up in another, and all the passport and immigration documentation will be in order. But it wouldn't happen if he was here because he's an Australian citizen and Australia is a US partner and there are protocols in place to prevent that kind of snatch-and-grab operation.'' The ironies extended to Sweden, long viewed as a nation of liberalism, sexual permissiveness and political neutrality - and a reliable haven for refugees. Given its off-and-on investigation of Assange for alleged sexual offences against two women there, conspiracy theories are swirling around Gothenberg's chief prosecutor, Marianne Ny. As readers of Stieg Larsson or Henning Mankell novels will know, Swedish prosecutors are at the interface of police and politics, and if political pressure is being exerted on criminal cases it is through them.
Yet so far there is little evidence to support the widespread supposition that the Swedish government is responding to American requests to take Assange out of circulation by any means, or that it is part of a right-wing drive to end Sweden's armed neutrality stance. Ny and the volunteer lawyer for the complainants, Claes Borgstrom, a Social Democrat MP, seem more driven by their involvement in the development of Swedish law on sexual assault, which is already marked by much more nuanced definitions of what is coercion and consent than in most other countries. The emerging case Ny is trying to build against Assange, that he overstepped the degree of consent by Anna Ardin and Sofia Wilen by insisting on sex without a condom and by having sex with one while she was asleep, occurred in wider encounters that all seem to a degree to have been consensual. The two ''victims'' tweeted and blogged about their exciting liaisons with the ultra-cool Assange, then tried to pull them off the web as they decided to make complaints. Ardin in particular seems a woman who can look after herself. She was previously in charge of investigating gender discrimination at the prestigious Uppsala University, and had been expelled from Cuba for supporting Las Damas de Blanco (Women in White), the wives of dissidents jailed in Castro's 2003 crackdown. Ny revived the investigation after a junior prosecutor had decided the facts did not mount up to a case of sexual assault under current law. The British court weighing the Swedish extradition request may well decide that the alleged offence is not mirrored in British law and Assange should not be handed over.
The paradox, meanwhile, is that in Larsson's thrillers his asocial computer-hacking heroine Lisbeth Salander was fighting simultaneously against two enemies: official conspiracies and sexual violence towards women. The two were connected in Larsson's thinking, as probably with many of the information libertarians now grouping around WikiLeaks. A bit like Salander, the white-haired Assange is a character who floats almost ethereally around the world like a virtual presence. Raised by his theatrical, new-age mother - for a while on Queensland's Magnetic Island, so named because Captain Cook found his compasses swinging widely as he sailed by - he spent part of his childhood in a quasi-Hindu cult in the Dandenongs, came of age in Melbourne squats and learnt his skills in early hacking efforts on the primitive internet in the 1980s, before formal study in maths and physics. At 39 Assange owns no property, has no fixed home but a dissolved family, travels with few possessions beyond a backpack of hard drives and discs, and works with little need for food or sleep. ''He's basically without assets that can be seized, has no material needs, and no vulnerabilities,'' said Deakin's Burchill. ''He seems to have worked towards this over a long period of time. He seems to have prepared himself for the onslaught that we've seen in the last few days.'' But, as with the sexual urges that persuaded New Guinea highlanders that the first white men they saw were also human, Assange's relationships with women encountered in his nomadic life seem to be the chink in the armour, perhaps randomly found by a prosecutor working to an agenda that has nothing to do with global power balances, only those in bedrooms. Again like Salander, the Assange defenders have the capacity to wage asymmetrical warfare in his defence, not just in cyber attacks.
This week's trickle of cables about Australia followed a declaration by the Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, that the WikiLeaks activity was ''illegal'' and McClelland's announced study of ways to prosecute Assange or cancel his passport. To some analysts, it looked a classic study in game theory, the predictive applied mathematics of how adversaries and competitors react, which Assange is known to have studied. The search for legal action against Assange and WikiLeaks is, meanwhile, running into problems. Assange has moved far beyond his earlier hacking exploits, recounted under his cover name Splendide Mendax (Nobly Untruthful, a reference from the Roman poet Horace) in the 1997 book Underground, which earned him a conviction and fine in 1992, at the age of 21. ''They are not hackers by any means,'' said Fernandes, who teaches a master's course at the defence academy on the uses of intelligence. ''They have created a system whereby people who wish to blow the whistle can do so. But they have no actual ability to break into anything like that stuff. They're completely outgunned in that sense. Most of the people around the world who have PhDs in mathematics are working for the defence bureaucracies. ''The computing firepower that is deployed against them is immense. We're talking about supercomputers half the size of a football field that sit in a bath of liquid nitrogen because they get so heated so quickly. The algorithms that they have to deploy to defend themselves certainly can't compete with that.'' The US Attorney-General, Eric Holder, has been looking at the 1917 Espionage Act, but admits some problems fitting it to WikiLeaks. He is also studying whether WikiLeaks aided or directed the suspected leaker of the massive trove of secret material, the young army private Bradley Manning, which would enable a conspiracy charge.
Otherwise, WikiLeaks seems to have a valid protection under the US constitution's first amendment protecting freedom of expression. It has been careful to class itself as a media organisation operating on journalistic principles, meaning it is no more guilty of espionage or theft than newspapers that invite whistleblowers to make contact and supply the phone numbers and email addresses to do so. Fernandes thinks WikiLeaks has been so far more successful in attracting this kind of inside material because it offers better technical protection, akin to bank-level software, has a good record of protecting sources, and puts documents out without ''spin'' or commentary - free of the ''five filters'' listed by Chomsky and Edward S. Herman in their 1988 book Manufacturing Consent, a favourite of the counterculture in which Assange moves. (The filters in their ''propaganda model'' were media ownership, advertising pressures, a symbiotic link to sources, outside pressure groups, and a pervasive anti-communist ideology.) The counterculture seems set to provide a milieu in which cyber-activists such as Assange can operate, even if he himself is taken out one way or the other. The grim recession throwing millions out of work across Europe and America will provide many educated and alienated recruits to a self-conscious underground. As the cyber-attacks showed this week, many are prepared to turn from sympathy into activity. Even conventional, established libertarians such as the barrister Geoffrey Robertson and journalist John Pilger are rallying to Assange's defence and it is conceivable a legal counter-offensive could reach the US Supreme Court. Whether WikiLeaks will develop from a loose, semi-underground network of about 400 activists sustained by small businessmen into a coherent political movement is doubtful. Already it is fracturing, as leftist movements tend to do, with a 25-year-old German setting up his own WikiLeaks. Assange's writings over the years reveal eclectic, unsystematic reading with no particular guru or thinker predominating, and often read to Burchill like those of a scientist or mathematician applying his matrix to messy politics.
''It won't change the way international relations are conducted but it will change the way governments preserve their secrets, or attempt to,'' Burchill said. ''After 9/11 so many people shared this kind of information: it was only a matter of time before someone disclosed it. How you run a huge bureaucracy of that kind where information is the basic lifeblood of it and share it around without it falling into the hands of a maverick or someone with other motivations, is something they haven't worked out.''