ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Politicians have been welcomed to Canberra with a traditional Welcome to Country ceremony ahead of a day which will see the official opening of Australia's 43rd Parliament.
Prime Minister Julia Gillard and Opposition Leader Tony Abbott attended the traditional smoking ceremony, which was preceded by a speech from Aboriginal elder Matilda House.
"On the occasion of this opening of the 43rd Parliament I welcome you," she said.
"With this welcome I express the hope of a united, reconciled nation, the oldest living culture joined with the many diverse cultures of a modern successful Australia."
Deputy Governor-General Robert French has officially opened the Parliament and MPs have been sworn in.
Labor's Harry Jenkins will then be formally elected as Speaker of the House of Representatives and later today the Governor-General will address both houses.
The vexed question of which MPs will fill the two deputy speaker roles remains unanswered ahead of a vote on the floor around 5:00pm.
Ms Gillard and Mr Abbott will not face off at the despatch box until tomorrow when the first Question Time will be held.
Today's opening comes five weeks after the federal election failed to deliver a ruling majority for either major party and resulted in weeks of uncertainty as parties negotiated to form a minority government.
The sitting for the new Parliament has been a long time coming for Ms Gillard, who has only managed to keep Labor in power with the help of four crossbench MPs.
A total of five crossbench MPs now hold the balance of power in the Lower House and the Greens will hold the balance of power in the Senate from mid-next year.
Ms Gillard is likely to have a tough time keeping the Government on track, with Opposition Leader Tony Abbott promising to hold Labor "ferociously" to account.
Independent MP Tony Windsor says he is confident the Parliament will last.
"I'd say it's highly unlikely that any of the crossbench members are going to support a frivolous no-confidence motion," he said.
Independent Senator Nick Xenophon says he hopes the Government can run smoothly.
"I'm just hoping that the new paradigm won't turn into the old pantomime," he said.
"It really is a case that I hope it'll work. I think Australians want a stable government."
Greens senator Christine Milne says the new make-up of the Parliament is an opportunity for all Australians.
"You really do have the people brought back to the floor of the House and that's really exciting," she said.
Procedures of the chamber are set for a shake-up with reforms to Question Time and time allocated for private members' business.
But a stoush over who will be deputy speaker and arrangements for pairing during divisions remain unresolved, meaning Ms Gillard and other senior ministers may be heavily restricted from leaving Canberra on other Government business while Parliament is sitting.