Fiscal cliff: US House of Representatives approves deal
As financial markets across the world were due to reopen for the New Year, the deal passed in a late-night vote by 257 to 167. It will now go to the White House to be signed into law by the president.
The bill, which had been the subject of intense negotiations between the two parties for weeks, was unpopular with many Republicans because it raises taxes on the wealthy and puts off automatic $109 billion budget cuts for two months.
Speaking after the bill passed, Barack Obama said he had fulfilled a campaign promise to make the US tax system fairer with the deal to avert the fiscal cliff crisis.
Praising the bill, he said it was "just one step in the broader effort to strengthen the economy."
But, acknowledging the public's anger over the drawn out political wrangling, Mr Obama, who will now fly back to join his family in Hawaii on holiday, urged "a little less drama next time".
"The one thing that I think hopefully in the New Year we'll focus on is seeing if we can put a package like this together with a little bit less drama, a little bit less brinksmanship, not scare the heck out of folks quite as much," he said.
He also warned that he would not bargain with Republicans in Congress or offer spending cuts in return for lifting the government's borrowing limit, known as the debt ceiling, in the coming months.
"While I will negotiate over many things, I will not have another debate with this Congress over whether or not they should pay the bills that they've already racked up through the laws that they passed," the president said.
The legislation passed in the Senate early on New Year's Day, but for many hours its fate hung in the balance.
Earlier in the day, Republican leaders had hinted they would derail its passage through the House, saying there was "universal concern" in the party that the compromise did not balance new taxes with fresh cuts.
But as the hours ticked by there were signs that the Republican revolt was losing strength. Representative Steve LaTourette, an Ohio Republican, said he would support the Senate bill and that his party needed to know "when to hold and when to fold". Party leaders also feared that they would be blamed if the deal, which had passed in the Senate, collapsed.
Had the deal failed to pass in the House, all Americans would have been hit by tax increases and the spending cuts would have kicked in across the government, threatening to throw the US economy into recession.
The bill, which was designed by both parties' Senate leaders and mediated by Joe Biden, the vice president, raises taxes on all households making more than $450,000 (£277,000).
However, it includes few spending cuts and instead delayed major cutbacks to the military budget and domestic programmes until the beginning of March.
Speaking in the House before the vote, House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi urged bipartisan support for the bill, saying it included "permanent tax relief for the middle class."