Paris turned into a sea of shoes as climate change campaigners lay 20,000 pairs in symbolic street protest
Climate change protesters in Paris have found a moving way to get round the city's ban on public gatherings after the terrorist attacks - by laying pairs of shoes in the city's streets.
Campaigners left an astonishing 20,000 pairs of shoes around the city in a symbolic nod to global protests taking place against climate change today before the UN climate change talks held in the French capital on Monday.
The event, organised by non-governmental organisation Avaaz.org, is being held to symbolise the people who had hoped to take part in the gathering.
Amongst the countless pairs of ordinary shoes, there were also reportedly donated pairs from the Pope and fashion designer Vivienne Westwood.
French actress Marion Cotillard also lent the protest a pair of her shoes, emblazoned with a message of support in English.
The acclaimed star is a prominent environmentalist and spokesperson for Greenpeace.
French artist Christo Lemeunier, 68, a volunteer for the shoe protest, said he wasn't surprised by the response.
"Suddenly there is imagination from people."
He said he hoped the Paris climate meeting will agree an end to fossil fuel use by 2050.
Large public gatherings have been banned in the city over security fears since the devastating terrorist attacks two weeks ago.
Several social media commentators have noted that the majority of the shoes are facing towards the Bataclan theatre- where 89 people were murdered by ISIS affiliated terrorists on November 13.
Earlier this week, UN chief Ban Ki-Moon told Canadian news that the attacks shouldn't detract attention from the summit taking place this week.
He said: "There is a concern whether it may overshadow the climate change agreement and I think we have to move on this climate change agreement."
Moon also donated a pair of his shoes to the protest with the moving statement: "As the world gathers in Paris to stand up for climate action, let us stand in the shoes of all victims of terrorism, war and persecution and respond with compasion."
Iain Keith, campaign director, Avaaz.org said the shoes were donated by Parisians over the past week.
"This is a way of symbolically and powerfully joining the climate march and each pair of shoes shows the determination of Parisians to have their voices heard on climate change," he told The Straits Times.