Greece to hold fresh elections as unity talks fail
Greeks to vote again in what many see as referendum on the euro and some blame Alexis Tsipras for causing
Against a backdrop of division, despondency and despair, debt-stricken Greeks head back to the polls next month amid fears the new election will do the very thing it is supposed to stop: hasten the country's economic collapse and exit from the eurozone.
After a week of political high drama after inconclusive elections, feuding party chiefs acknowledged their inability to form a unity government on Tuesday, with several blaming Alexis Tsipras, whose Left Coalition party has taken Greece by storm.
"Unfortunately the country is being led again to elections … under very bad conditions," said the socialist Pasok leader, Evangelos Venizelos, after the breakdown of the last-ditch negotiations at Athens' presidential palace. "For God's sake let's move towards something better, not something worse."
Across Europe there is no illusion that the poll, expected to take place on 10 or 17 June, is a referendum on whether the near insolvent country – kept afloat by EU and IMF rescue loans – stays in the eurozone.
Within hours of the election being announced, the German finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, summed up the predicament Greece now faced. "If Greece – and this is the will of the great majority – wants to stay in the euro, then they have to accept the conditions," he told reporters at a meeting of European finance ministers in Brussels. "Otherwise, it isn't possible. No responsible candidate can hide that from the electorate."
Enter Tsipras, who says the spending cuts and structural reforms outlined in a "memorandum of understanding" Athens signed with its creditors are not only "barbaric", but must be revoked.
Until 6 May, when Syriza – his alliance of far-left socialists, Trotskyists, Maoists and greens – took a surprise second place in the vote, the 38-year-old former communist held little sway over Greece's decision-making apparatus.
But now his opinion accounts. Among the under 50s who have been worst hit by galloping unemployment and deepening poverty – the most visible byproducts of austerity measures many Greeks blame Berlin for imposing – Tsipras is seen as a saviour, the man who tells it as it is.
In the nine days since the country's general election, his ratings have risen further with surveys indicating Syriza would easily emerge on top in a new ballot – another blow to the political establishment whose two main parties, Pasok and New Democracy, were punished by the electorate for pursuing deeply unpopular policies in return for aid.
Although next month's election is also expected to result in a hung parliament with no party securing enough votes to form a government, the radical leftists would likely hold the reins to power. Greece would then be on a collision course with Europe as Tsipras, an unabashed populist, is likely to step up his fiery anti-austerity oratory. It is a toxic mix. And in Athens the panic is almost palpable.
"Tsipras will be handed the opportunity to fulfil the left's dream of taking power democratically," said Brady Keisling, a prominent Athens-based analyst likening the young radical to the late socialist strongman Andreas Papandreou, who also put Greece on a collision course with the international community with his anti-European, anti-Nato rhetoric.
"Papandreou promised to give Greeks things they never had. Tsipras has made a much more dangerous promise, to restore things they recently had and still remember, their old jobs, wages and pensions."
Thirty-one years after the country joined the then EEC and 11 since it signed up to the common currency, anxiety is widespread that Syriza's likely election will mark the turning point in relations between the two.
Tsipras, who was born days after the collapse of military rule in 1974 and is the country's youngest politician, denies that he has peddled false promises. On the eve of the last election he told the Guardian he was not opposed to the euro but the "policies pursued in the name of the euro".
But with EU partners saying in no uncertain terms that cash instalments will stop if Athens fails to adhere to its tough austerity and reform programme, fears are high that Greece is hurtling towards default and with it the collapse of an economy now on its knees.
With coffers running dry, the country barely has enough money to survive until the election, officials in the outgoing government say.
Many worry that ahead of the poll Greeks, who still have vivid memories of a bloody left-right civil war, are going to become increasingly polarised in a climate already electrified by an ever deepening sense of fury and loss.