Viktor Chernomyrdin, titan of post-communist Russia, dies at 72
Pundits divided over legacy of factory worker who rose through the Soviet hierarchy before becoming prime minister
Viktor Chernomyrdin, former prime minister of Russia and a titan of the country's turbulent first decade after the fall of communism, has died at the age of 72.
A big, bluff factory worker who worked his way up through the Soviet hierarchy, he will be best remembered for his legendary saying, "We wanted better, but it turned out like always."
Chernomyrdin started his career as a mechanic in an oil refinery in the southern Urals but went on to head the newly created energy giant Gazprom in 1989, and serve as premier under President Boris Yeltsin from 1992 to 1998. He later spent eight years as Russia's ambassador to Ukraine.
News agencies reported that he died at 4am Moscow time. The cause of death was not announced but some reports said it was a heart attack. Chernomyrdin had been ill for some time and looked increasingly thin in television appearances in recent months.
Russia's president, Dmitry Medvedev, sent condolences to the politician's family on being told of the death this morning.
Commentators were divided over Chernomyrdin's legacy, with some saying he provided a firm hand as the country underwent unprecedented economic changes. Others concluded he was a key figure in the murky dealings of the Yeltsin era, when rival clans fought to carve up power and resources.
"He was a kind of good-hearted baron," said Vladimir Pribylovsky, a political analyst at Moscow's Panorama thinktank. "He didn't have anyone killed but in all he was a negative figure for the country and one of the fathers of Russia's corrupted system of bureaucratic capitalism."
Key public figures disagreed. Anatoly Chubais, the economist and architect of Russia's messy post-Soviet privatisation, said Chernomyrdin had several times saved the country when "everything was hanging by a thread".
Vladimir Milov, a former deputy energy minister, told the Guardian: "He was a very human figure who smoothed the painful process of reform and ensured that Russia pushed forward instead of slipping back into the past."
Among ordinary Russians, Chernomyrdin will stick in the memory as the author of countless mangled sentences and inappropriate jokes. Much like Britain's former deputy prime minister John Prescott, he also had a reputation as a real muzhik, or bloke.
At times that standing could cast him in a bad light. He was widely criticised for shooting a bear and her two cubs which were roused from hibernation especially for the slaughter.
Another low point was the Budyonnovsk hostage crisis in 1995, when Chechen separatists seized a hospital in southern Russia. Humiliatingly, Chernomyrdin was forced to negotiate by telephone with militant leader Shamil Basyaev. He eventually agreed to a ceasefire in Chechnya, while the terrorists were allowed to escape.
Chernomyrdin will be buried at Novodevichy Convent in Moscow on Friday.
"We wanted better, but it turned out like always."
"A government is a strange thing. If you keep changing it, shuffling it, the result will be even worse. I know – that was my work."
Answering the question: "Do you have time to notice beautiful women?" "I have time. But only to notice. Nothing more. Which I regret bitterly."
"I am far from thought."
"My life has passed in an atmosphere of oil and gas."
"We're going to live so well that our children and grandchildren will be jealous."