ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The family of Papua New Guinea's prime minister Sir Michael Somare says the veteran leader is retiring because of ill health.
The 75-year-old underwent heart surgery earlier this year in Singapore and remains in hospital.
Sir Michael's son, Arthur Somare, said Sir Michael remained in intensive care and was "not in a good enough condition" to discuss retirement, so the family took the decision on his behalf.
In a statement on Tuesday, Arthur Somare said complications from his father's heart surgery "further delayed the anticipated time in which Sir Michael was expected to recover and return to Papua New Guinea".
"Therefore, on behalf of [his wife] Lady Veronica, I wish to announce that it is our family's collective desire that Sir Michael be allowed to recover at his own pace and therefore retire," he said.
"In our considered decision to do this we believe PNG should have a level of certainty with regard to political stability and leadership well into the future.
"This has not been an easy decision to take without full and proper consultation with Sir Michael.
"However in the greater public interest and collective good of the country we are of the view that this decision is necessary, and we believe it will also be his desire to do so at this time given the circumstances.
"I have released this statement in full cognoscente that I have little authority to retire him myself that the processes of parliament still needs to be complied to, that the processes of cabinet and that the processes of the party still needs to be complied with.
"But it's the family's concerned decision that the prime minister or Sir Michael rather goes into retirement shortly."
Theresia Kumo, the director of the Sir Michael's media unit, told ABC News Online that reports the prime minister had resigned were incorrect.
She said Sir Michael's family was simply stating their position on his future to the public, and added that Sir Michael is still PNG's leader.
Sir Michael began his political career nearly 50 years ago, when he was appointed as Papua New Guinea's first prime minister when the country gained independence from Australia in 1975.
In April, Sir Michael served a two-week suspension from office after he was found guilty of official misconduct.
He vowed to return to the prime minister's office after the suspension, but instead remained in Singapore on medical leave.
Sir Michael's deputy, Sam Abal, has been acting prime minister since Sir Michael flew to Singapore for the heart surgery in April.
Asked whether Mr Abal would assume the prime ministership full-time, Arthur Somare's spokesman said "the political process will take its course".
Prime Minister Julia Gillard has described Sir Michael as a respected regional statesman.
She says Australia's thoughts are with the Somare family and the people of PNG at this difficult time.
The Coaltion's foreign affairs spokeswoman, Julie Bishop, has described Sir Michael as a towering political figure.
Ms Bishop says she hopes PNG makes a sound transition to new leadership.
"He has been a controversial figure at times, his departure will inevitably lead to generational change," she said.