Japan's cabinet approves changes to its pacifist constitution allowing for 'collective self-defence'
Japan is set to lift a ban on its armed forces fighting overseas in an historic change to its pacifist constitution, the first in 70 years.
The cabinet has approved a limited re-interpretation of the country's constitution to allow its armed forces to help close allies like the United States and Australia if they come under attack.
"No matter what the circumstances, I will protect Japanese people's lives and peaceful existence," prime minister Shinzo Abe told a press conference.
"As the prime minister, I have this grave responsibility.
"With this determination, the cabinet approved the basic policy for national security."
The decision has deeply divided the country and Mr Abe replied to critics who claim the move could see Japan dragged into overseas military conflicts, such as in Afghanistan or Iraq.
It will widen Japan's military options by ending the ban on exercising "collective self-defense" or aiding a friendly country under attack.
Long constrained by its pacifist post-war constitution, Japan's armed forces will become more aligned with the militaries of other advanced nations in terms of its options.
But the government will be wary of sending its military to join multilateral operations such as the 2003 US-led invasion of Iraq.
At his media conference, Mr Abe repeated that stance while stressing Japan had to respond to an increasingly tough security environment.
"There is no change in the general principle that we cannot send troops overseas," he said.
"There is a misunderstanding that Japan will be involved in war in an effort to defend a foreign country, but this is out of the question.
"It will be strictly a defensive measure to defend our people. We will not resort to the use of force in order to defend foreign forces.
"There will be no change at all in our principle not to allow the dispatch of forces abroad."
The move will also mean Japan can have a bigger role in international peace-keeping operations.
It represents the biggest shift since America drafted Japan's constitution at the end of World War II.
The move represent's a major shift in Japan's strategy at a time of increasing tensions in the region, as its dispute with China over islands in the East China Sea continues.
The US and Australia are expected to welcome the move as it means defence co-operation can deepen between the three countries.
But the new policy is angering an increasingly assertive China whose ties with Japan have frayed due to a maritime row, mistrust and the legacy of Japan's past military aggression.
"China opposes the Japanese fabricating the China threat to promote its domestic political agenda," Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Hong Lei told a news conference in Beijing.
"We demand that Japan respect the reasonable security concerns of its Asian neighbours and prudently handle the relevant matter."
The decision will now be taken to the Japanese parliament for expected approval.