'Sorry' Pervez Musharraf launches new Pakistan party
Former Pakistan military ruler Pervez Musharraf has apologised for "negative" actions he took while in power, as he launched his new political party, the All Pakistan Muslim League, in London.
Mr Musharraf said: "I... sincerely apologise to the whole nation" for the "negative repercussions".
But he vowed to galvanise Pakistanis and fight a "jihad against poverty, hunger, illiteracy and backwardness".
Correspondents say there is no real likelihood of him returning soon.
Mr Musharraf also appears to lack the kind of political organisation that could win him an election in Pakistan, they say.
Mr Musharraf unveiled the All Pakistan Muslim League at a gentlemen's club in Whitehall.
He apologised for some of the actions he took when in power.
"I am aware of the fact that there were some decisions which I took which resulted in negative political repercussions, repercussions which had adverse effects on nation building and national political events, and my popularity also, may I say, plummeted in that last year. I take this opportunity to sincerely apologise to the whole nation. Ladies and gentlemen, only God is infallible."
Mr Musharraf said he had learned his lessons and vowed not to repeat them.
The BBC's Caroline Hawley says the launch, in a room of the National Liberal Club lined with leather-bound books, came with security befitting a president - journalists were asked to arrive two hours before Mr Musharraf spoke.
Despite what he and his allies say, Pervez Musharraf remains one of the most unpopular people in Pakistan and is unlikely to be going home any time soon. He is blamed by the masses for most of the country's problems and is top of the hit list of most jihadi groups. Many of his former enemies are now in powerful positions. That is not to say the former military ruler does not have some supporters but they are primarily among the affluent and Westernised urban elite - a miniscule constituency that almost never votes in general elections. He also still has admirers in the military-civilian establishment that effectively runs Pakistan. But they only back candidates with at least half a chance - at the moment, Mr Musharraf has none and needs a miracle to have any hope of changing Pakistan's political landscape.
She says the president spoke in front of his supporters, some former generals in smart business suits, and was interrupted several times with chants of "Pervez Musharraf, step forward, we are with you".
Mr Musharraf attacked the "total despondency and demoralisation and hopelessness which prevails in society today".
He added: "The time has come to redeem our pledge... to ensure the fruits of freedom are shared by all. The time has come for a new social contract to keep the dream of our forefathers alive... to make Pakistan into a progressive Islamic state for others in the third world to emulate."
Mr Musharraf said he wanted a party of national salvation that would "galvanise all Pakistanis regardless of religion, caste or creed".
He added: "It is time to unfurl a Muslim league umbrella for all - this umbrella for all shall be the All Pakistan Muslim League."
Mr Musharraf also said: "I will go back to Pakistan before the next election whatever the dangers."
The former army chief, who now lives in London, earlier told the BBC: "When there is a dysfunctional government and the nation is going down, its economy is going down, there is a clamour, there is a pressure on the military by the people."
He said he was launching the party in London because he risked assassination if he returned to Pakistan. He has survived a number of plots in the past.
Last month, Mr Musharraf told the BBC he would be standing for a seat in the 2013 parliamentary elections. From there he said he hoped to become either prime minister or president.
He made London his base, as a number of Pakistani politicians have done over the years, after his allies lost elections and he was ousted as president in 2008.
If he does go home, he faces legal cases, which he says are politically motivated.
Mr Musharraf seized power in 1999 when, as chief of Pakistan's army, he ousted elected Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif in a coup.