New Greek PM vows to bring in austerity package
Papademos told reporters the chief task of the transitional government was to bring in the controversial bailout package agreed to on October 26 and the austerity measures attached to it.
He said the government's formation would allow Greece to "face the problems in the near future in the best possible way."
The country is "at a critical crossroads," he said, and the choices it makes and policies it implements "will have a crucial importance for the welfare of the Greek people."
Papademos' appointment followed days of negotiations over the make-up of a national unity government needed to restore political stability in Greece, and after several days of turmoil that have unnerved global financial markets.
The European commissioner for economic affairs, Olli Rehn, gave a bleak forecast in Brussels Thursday. "The recovery in Europe has come to a standstill, and stagnation of GDP is now expected in the coming quarters and until well into 2012," he said.
Papademos said Greece's course would not be easy, but that the country's problems would be solved -- and that would happen "sooner, at a lower cost and in a more efficient way, if there is unity, consensus and reasonableness."
Greece's membership of the eurozone, the 17 nations that use the euro as currency, was a sign of financial stability and would aid the country's development, he said.
Papademos said he had accepted the president's mandate to form a unity government because he felt everyone should contribute to the country's recovery. "The task is big, and the responsibility I assume is even bigger," he said.
"We have long stressed the need for a broad political consensus around measures to lift Greece out of this deep economic crisis," European Council president Herman Van Rompuy and European Commission president Jose Manuel Barroso said in a joint statement.
The transitional government will have an "extremely intense" workload and must act quickly to reassure Europe it was implementing reforms and driving down debt, the pair said.
"We reiterate that our European Institutions will continue to do everything within their power to help Greece. But Greece must also do everything within its power to help itself," they said.
A native of Athens, Papademos studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the 1970s, earning undergraduate and graduate degrees before receiving a Ph.D in economics, the news agency said. He taught at Columbia University from 1975 to 1984 and the University of Athens from 1988 to 1993, the news agency said.
In a televised address to the nation Wednesday, Papandreou said that a government of national unity would do whatever was necessary to bring Greece out of its economic crisis.
Greece wants the international community to see that it knows how to be united in the face of difficulty, he added. "A new season is opening," he said, wishing the new government success.
"If we do not act, and act together, we could enter a downward spiral of uncertainty, financial instability, and a collapse in global demand. Ultimately, we could face a lost decade of low growth and high unemployment," Lagarde said.