Sarah Ferguson faces bankruptcy after running up debts of millions
Queen said to be concerned Duchess of York could become first royal to be declared legally bankrupt in court
The Duchess of York is doing "everything she can" to avoid bankruptcy as she struggles to manage debts running into millions of pounds, it was revealed today.
Sarah Ferguson has paid off all her personal debts, her spokesman said, and her business debts – some of which are disputed – were "being managed", although voluntary bankruptcy was still an option.
Ferguson's money woes became public after a newspaper claimed her personal and business debts had risen to almost £5m, prompting fears in the royal family that bankruptcy was now her best option.
However, her spokesman said the figure was exaggerated. Sources said later that the Duchess owed around £2m. Ferguson's spokesman said she was reluctant to declare herself bankrupt. "There is a number of options open to the duchess, of which bankruptcy is one. But it would be premature to say she is going into bankruptcy as the situation is being managed," she said.
The Queen was "deeply concerned" about Ferguson's debts, according to the Sunday Telegraph, and had discussed them with David Cameron recently at one of his weekly audiences. The newspaper said Prince Andrew, Ferguson's ex-husband, was masterminding a "rescue plan" to avoid the embarrassment of filing for bankruptcy. No senior member of the royal family has been declared bankrupt.
Ferguson went public with her financial problems in May, after being caught in a cash-for-access scandal.
She was filmed accepting money from a News Of The World reporter posing as a business tycoon, in exchange for an introduction to Andrew. In an interview later with US chat show queen Oprah Winfrey, the ex-royal admitted she was "substantially" in debt and was considering filing for bankruptcy.
She declined to say exactly how much she owed, nor would she confirm that she received only £15,000 a year from her divorce settlement. The Sunday Telegraph said that more than half of Ferguson's debts related to money owed in the US, primarily for lawyers' fees.
Since divorcing in 1996, Ferguson has written children's books, made television documentaries and acted as a spokeswoman for Weight Watchers in America. Hartmoor, the US company that dealt with her media, publishing and licensing work, folded last year with debts of £650,000.
One debt expert said today that Ferguson would benefit from bankruptcy, even if it proved an embarrassing experience.
Richard Sorksy, a senior counsellor with the UK Insolvency Helpline, said: "It's a simple civil court procedure costing around £500 which will enable her to walk away from every single penny of her debt. If your assets are of a lesser value than your debts and if your income is not great enough to meet your expenses, it's generally a good option."
However, he added: "In Sarah Ferguson's case, it's a matter of the higher you climb, the harder you fall; it could be publicly humiliating if every dirty detail of her debt were to be made available in the high court."