$50 Billion Awarded in Breakup of Yukos
But Mr. Khodorkovsky fell out of favor with Mr. Putin, who is said to have bridled at the chairman’s rumored political ambitions and aggressive lobbying on business matters. In October 2003, agents arrested Mr. Khodorkovsky at a Siberian airport. He served 10 years in jail on charges of embezzlement and tax fraud before being pardoned by Mr. Putin late last year.
After its owner’s arrest, Yukos’s fortunes took a similar dive and the company was sold off. The key asset ended up with Rosneft, turning the state-controlled oil company from an also-ran into a rival to Gazprom, Russia’s other energy giant.
On Monday, the tribunal did say that Yukos played an aggressive game on taxes and “could have faced some legitimate claims” and that there was a “shamlike nature” to some of its operations. But ultimately it ruled that the “state apparatus decided to take advantage of that vulnerability” to “bankrupt Yukos and appropriate its assets while at the same time removing Mr. Khodorkovsky from the political arena.”
Shareholders viewed the ruling, made on July 18 and unveiled on Monday, as a victory.
“The findings were predictable for any unbiased observer,” Mr. Khodorkovsky said in an emailed statement. “From beginning to end, the Yukos case has been an instance of unabashed plundering of a successful company by a mafia with links to the state.”
Mr. Osborne, a British tax lawyer who runs GML, said on Monday that he expected Russia to apply to courts in the Netherlands to have the awards set aside. He also indicated that GML would be open to a settlement. “We accept there is a benefit to being paid straight away.”
Emmanuel Gaillard, the Shearman & Sterling partner who headed the shareholders’ legal team, expressed optimism that if Russia did not pay, it would be possible to round up $50 billion of assets “if we pierce the veil of Rosneft and Gazprom.” In other words, the shareholders could go after refineries, pipelines and other properties of Russia’s state energy companies abroad.
Rosneft said on Monday that it “was not a party to and did not participate in the arbitrations and is not bound by the published rulings. Rosneft believes that all of its purchases of former Yukos assets and all other actions taken by it with respect to Yukos were entirely lawful and proper.”
It is unlikely Mr. Khodorkovsky will benefit financially from the verdict. He says he handed over his stake to a partner, Leonid B. Nevzlin, in 2005; Mr. Nevzlin owns about 70 percent of GML. The other key beneficiaries include former business associates of Mr. Khodorkovsky — Platon Lebedev, Vasily S. Shakhnovsky, Mikhail B. Brudno and Vladimir M. Dubov — who own 7.5 percent each, and the pension fund for about 30,000 former Yukos employees.