Christine Lagarde Won’t Be Investigated for Now
PARIS — A French court on Friday gave Christine Lagarde, the new managing director of the International Monetary Fund, her second reprieve in a month from a potential investigation into whether she abused her authority as France’s finance minister before taking her new job. But the court left open the possibility of future legal proceedings against her.
As Ms. Lagarde prepared to hold her first I.M.F. board meeting on Friday to consider another $3 billion in emergency financing for Greece, the French Court of Justice, which oversees the actions of ministers in office, said it would delay until Aug. 4 a decision on whether to look into her handling in 2007 of a court case involving a French tycoon.
It was the second time in a month that the court had postponed a ruling. A court official said one of the judges had recused himself, Reuters reported. The delay means another month of legal uncertainty hangs over Ms. Lagarde.
“It’s a bit surprising,” said Christopher Mesnooh, a partner in international business law at Field Fisher Waterhouse in Paris. “Given the high-profile conditions under which she replaced her predecessor at the I.M.F., one might have thought the court would have wanted to provide legal certainty today, to allow Madam Lagarde to commence her functions with a clear mind.”
Ms. Lagarde ushered in a new era at the I.M.F. on Tuesday as the first woman to hold the post of managing director, one of the top positions in international finance. She met at the fund’s headquarters in Washington with employees still ruffled by the resignation of her predecessor, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, after he was charged with the sexual assault of a hotel maid in New York. Her contract contains a section on conduct and ethics that requires her to “strive to avoid even the appearance of impropriety.”
At issue in the French court case is whether Ms. Lagarde abused her authority as finance minister in one of France’s longest-running legal dramas.