Peugeot Citroen slashes jobs in France
FRENCH auto group PSA Peugeot Citroen says it will cut 8000 jobs in its domestic operations as a sharp downturn in the European market has led to a loss in the first quarter.
PSA, France's biggest carmaker and second in Europe to Germany's Volkswagen, said on Thursday it expected the European market to shrink 8.0 per cent this year and had to adjust its business in the face of a worsening outlook.
For the period 2007-12, the market is down 23 per cent, it said, compounding problems which left its plants operating at just 76 per cent of capacity in the first half of this year, down from 86 per cent a year earlier.
PSA said the problem was even worse in the small car segment, which accounts for 42 per cent of its sales "and where most of the competing models are made in low-cost countries".
As a result, the auto division is expected to report an operating loss of some 700 million euros ($A840 million) for first half 2012, producing overall a net loss for the period.
PSA said in a statement that it would cease production at its Aulnay site near Paris which employs 3000, with the 1400 jobs going at its Rennes plant.
In addition, some 3600 jobs will be cut across the corporate structure, as the company continues "reducing costs and improving its operating efficiency".
"I am fully aware of the seriousness of today's announcements, as well as of the shock and emotions they will arouse," chairman Philippe Varin said in the statement.
"The depth and persistence of the crisis impacting our business in Europe have now made this reorganisation project indispensable in order to align our production capacity with foreseeable market trends," Varin said.
The measures should allow the company "get back on track" and secure its future as well as auto production in France, he added.
PSA, trying to cut the overcapacity that is blighting the whole European industry, announced earlier this year a tie-up with US giant General Motors in an effort to cut costs.