Texas Instruments to buy National Semiconductor
US semiconductor company Texas Instruments said on Tuesday it will buy rival National Semiconductor for $6.5bn (£4bn), in a move that will consolidate the analogue sector, whose chips are used in mobile phones, cars and industrial systems.
The price is a 78% premium on National Semiconductor's $3.4bn market capitalisation on Monday, and roughly four times its revenues. But analysts thought the deal was positive for Texas Instruments, which has 10 times the value and profits, and should be able to benefit from economies of scale.
The deal, one of the biggest in the industry for years, was described by Citigroup as a "much-needed consolidation" in the highly fragmented analog sector which underscores the need for scale, an evolving theme in the analogue semiconductor industry.
"We suspect other analog companies will be forced to consider complementary portfolios, combined sales forces, and eventually 300mm capacity," Citigroup analyst Glen Yeung said.
TI and NatSemi, as they are known, are two of the oldest companies in the chip business, founded in 1930 (though the name dates to 1951) and 1959 respectively. Analogue chips are used to connect to real-world data such as sound, temperature, light or battery levels, and either regulate them directly through other electronic systems, or used to translate levels into digital 0s and 1s so that other, digital processing chips can use them. Apple's iPod touch MP3 player and Motorola's Xoom tablet computer use Texas Instruments' power control analog chips, according to IHS iSuppli, which analyses supply chains. The average mobile can have 30 analogue power management chips. "Digital chip makers like Intel used to disdain analog, but it's the way you get information in and out of these mobile devices," Kim Caughey Forrest, an analyst at Fort Pitt said.
The acquisition will extend TI's lead in the vast but fragmented market for analog chips, while NatSemi, with a strong portfolio of power management microchips for industrial uses as well as for mobile phones, may be open to a deal because it lacks stronger long-term growth prospects.
"It will improve TI's position in power management chips – that's where National has particular strength," Morningstar analyst Brian Colello said.
Some analysts thought TI might be hoping to seal a deal and thwart rival bidders. But TI said it was "comfortable" with the price, and both companies said they could achieve $100m in cost savings annually by sharing sales forces and capacity.
"Texas Instruments has been a pretty prudent company. There is either some kind of buried patent [owned by NatSemi] that is unbelievably attractive to them, or there were other bidders and they felt pressured to get it," said Caughey Forrest.
The worldwide semiconductor market saw spending on equipment grow rapidly last year, more than doubling according to data released by the research company Gartner on Tuesday morning. That indicates that chip businesses see rapid growth ahead.