Strikers whistle as Qantas cuts 100 flights a week
QANTAS baggage handlers and ground crew have begun their latest round of industrial action, causing delays and cancellations for passengers across the country. Join us for live updates throughout the day (all times AEDT)
That's a wrap on today's rolling coverage of the latest round of strikes. Check out all the details below as another day of travel chaos unfolded.
5.15pm Former Playboy bunny Kendra Wilkinson, who arrived at Sydney Airport during this morning's strike, has told news.com.au's Alison Stephenson she was delighted to have raised morale:
That's awesome. I wish I could have stayed with them. I felt bad for them but I’m glad I brought some joy to their lives during some hard times. I was like ‘oh oh what’s going to go on’ so when we exited the airport they were all there but I think I made them happy for a couple of minutes.
2.20pmThe Flight Centre warns passengers travelling on domestic flights in Australia will pay more as the grounding of Qantas flights creates a shortage of cheap seats,the Herald Sunreports. The travel agent today said cheaper seats on affected Qantas routes would become harder to find as customers flocked to Jetstar and Virgin to book flights. Customers may find that only business class or premium fares were available when they went to book their flight as early birds snapped up the cheapest seats. 1.20pm The Australian and International Pilots Association (AIPA) says it suspects the decision by Qantas to ground aircraft was a ploy, AAP reports. AIPA vice president Captain Richard Woodward said the airline was expected to receive an equivalent number of new aircraft this year.
1.07pm ALAEA federal secretary Steve Purvinas said planes were grounded because they had ongoing problems, not because of strike action, The Australian reported.
12.49pmDespite the announcement it would ground five planes and cut up to 100 domestic flights, Qantas was making waves on the Australian sharemarket with its shares advancing to half a cent to $1.56 at midday. Monitor the latest market movements on our business page.
12.32pmRead the full statement of Qantas CEO Alan Joyce, beginning with an apology to the airline's customers, here.
12.25pm Qantas estimates a total of 60,000 passengers will have been affected by strikes, since union action began, by the end of this week. The airline released a statement confirming further strikes tomorrow would affect 7,600 passengers at Sydney Airport. The planned strike, between 4-8pm, will disrupt the plans of some Wallabies fans travelling to the Rugby World Cup for Australia's semi-final against New Zealand.
12.17pm Untrained office workers are replacing Qantas baggage handlers at Sydney Airport, The Daily Telegraph reports. TWU spokesman Mick Pieri said passengers wouldn't be disrupted if Qantas came to the table and negotiated properly.
12.10pmThe union wants a 10 per cent pay rise over two years, the ABC reports.
12.05pmQantas boss urges the union to bring "realistic claims" to the table.
11.35amThe arrival of former Playboy bunny Kendra Wilkinson helped lift the spirits of striking Customs staff after stepping off a flight at Sydney Airport this morning.
The new mum flew in to promote her new TV reality show Kendra, which focuses on her life after leaving the Playboy Mansion and getting engaged to football star Hank Baskett.
11.10amQantas says it will ground five of its aircraft and cut up to 100 domestic flights a week because of the impact of ongoing industrial action.
Here is what chief executive Alan Joyce has to say:
Qantas says the cuts to flights will mainly impact services to and from Adelaide, Sydney, Brisbane and Melbourne.
11am Despite the rolling strikes, Qantas shares rose 1.5 cents to $1.57 after the Australian share market opened this morning, AAPreports. 9.50am Qantas said it was unclear what the financial impact of the industrial action would be but it expected to update the market in due course. "It's just too early for us to say what the financial cost it's having on the business at this stage,'' a Qantas spokesman told AAP.
9.33am To make matters worse, residents are being warned to stay indoors after a major blaze at a factory complex near Melbourne Airport has sent plumes of smoke across the area.
The Metropolitan Fire Brigade has sent 11 fire trucks and about 50 fire fighters to the blaze at Assembly Drive, Tullamarine, which began just before 8am (AEDT).
8.45am The Transport Workers Union has warned unionists are prepared to wage a year-long campaign of strikes against Qantas, The Australian reports.
TWU national secretary Tony Sheldon said industrial action would persist until the airline backed down on its strategy to slash labour costs and move jobs offshore.
What do you think of the strikes? Do you support the union or are you angry at the disruption? Leave a comment below or email us at news@news.com.au
QANTAS baggage handlers and ground crew have begun their latest round of industrial action, causing delays and cancellations for passengers across the country.
Qantas cancelled at least 14 domestic flights this morning and rescheduled around another 30 because of the action.
Passengers travelling on international flights at Melbourne airport were being warned to arrive early today as Customs officers go on strike for eight hours.
Customs officers will be off the job until 11am, followed by another four-hour stoppage from 9pm.
The move will add significant delays to the processing of passengers travelling on international flights both in and out of the airport.
Melbourne airport spokesman Matt Francis said last night that passengers should expect delays getting through Customs today.
"This will affect arriving and departing passengers on what is one of the busiest days of the week for international travel," he said.
"We are strongly encouraging international travellers tomorrow to follow the advice from Customs, which is to arrive at the airport early, and go straight to Customs."
It comes after talks on a new pay deal for Customs officers broke down yesterday and follows a three-hour strike last month.
Qantas baggage handlers and ground crew from the Transport Workers Union also began their strike today at 7am. It will last for two hours before second strike at 4pm in a further headache for business people and holiday-makers.
The TWU action will still affect more than 6800 passengers across the country, with 14 flights cancelled and another 38 delayed by up to an hour.
Qantas also faces industrial action from aircraft engineers, who will stop work for four hours in Sydney tomorrow, and from the pilots union.