Reject Potash takeover, Wall says
OTTAWA—It’s not about money — it’s about Canada’ future, Saskatchewan Premier Brad Wall said Thursday as he escalated his call for Ottawa to reject a foreign takeover of a giant potash company. “It could be Canada’s century but we’re going to have to take some courageous decisions,” he told the Starshortly after officially rejecting a $38.6 billion (U.S.) bid for PotashCorp of Saskatchewan by Australia’s BHP Billiton Ltd.
Wall said allowing a foreign company to gain control of a vital natural resource like potash affects the long-term strategic interests of Canada. “The world wants food security and energy security and we have the answers to those questions in Canada,” he said. But Canadians need to protect those resources, Wall commented.
Saskatoon-based PotashCorp is the world’s largest producer of potash, a key fertilizer ingredient. Wall, a right-of-centre ally of Stephen Harper, said he has spoken with the Prime Minister about the takeover and accepts Ottawa’s word that there has been no decision yet on whether to allow it. “This is very, very significant for Saskatchewan, and they (the federal Conservatives) have said they are going to listen to us and take it into consideration.” But he said Harper was wrong Wednesday when in an apparent attempt to play down the issue, the Prime Minister said it’s only about an Australian-controlled company trying to buy an American-controlled corporation. “It isn’t true, of course,” Wall said, adding that 49 per cent of Potash Corp.’s shares are held in Canada, with 38 per cent in the U.S. and the rest distributed around the world.
The federal government, which vets foreign acquisitions to see if they are of “net benefit” to this country, has until Nov. 3 to approve the takeover. Blocking it would run against the Conservatives’ free-market creed but Wall’s staunch opposition is complicating the decision for Harper, who is also under pressure to block the deal from federal Liberals and New Democrats. Asked outside the Commons Thursday how the decision will be made, Industry Minister Tony Clement said, “I am neither a head waiter to the premier of Saskatchewan, nor am I butler to the president of BHP.”
But he hinted that there may be room for BHP to sweeten its bid in response to Wall’s fear that the province could lose $3 billion in tax revenue as a result of the buyout. “Obviously we have noted the premier of Saskatchewan’s conclusions,” Clement told reporters. “We have also noted the bidder’s positions on these issues and the positions of many other Canadians besides. And we will take all of that into consideration prior to making a determination.” His comments appeared to dovetail with comments by BHP chief executive officer Marius Kloppers, who said Thursday in London that the company remains hopeful that it can structure the deal to meet Saskatchewan’s tax-loss concerns and convince Ottawa it would be of net benefit to Canada. Wall said he’s still looking at the financial wrinkles of a takeover by BHP. But he doesn’t know how the Australian mining giant could address “what should be the real concern for all of us in this country — the strategic interest,” Wall told the Star. In an impassioned speech to a business audience in Regina Thursday, he declared: “We must say no to this hostile takeover. Canadian-led mining companies are in risk of becoming an endangered species.” But Canada’s long-term stature is also at stake, he said. “This takeover involves 25 to 30 per cent of the known reserves in the world of potash,” Wall said. “This is not like any other takeover that we have contemplated in this country.” PotashCorp issued a statement welcoming Wall’s “thorough and thoughtful” review of the takeover issue and advised shareholders to reject BHP’s “unsolicited offer.”