Gold ends at record high, taps $1,300
SAN FRANCISCO (MarketWatch) — Gold futures ended at a record high Friday as the dollar weakened and investors continued to flock to the metal as a hedge against fears of inflation and currency weakness
Silver tracked gold to settle at a fresh 30-year high, and copper finished at another multimonth high.
Gold for December delivery GCZ10 settled $1.80 higher at $1,298.10 an ounce on the New York Mercantile Exchange, just $2 shy of the key psychological mark of $1,300 an ounce.
Gold has settled at a record high for six out of the past seven sessions, ending the week up 1.6%. The metal hit an intraday high of $1,301.60 an ounce earlier in the day.
“The $1,300 was the line in the sand between bulls and bears,” said Adam Klopfenstein, a senior market strategist with Lind-Waldock in Chicago.
A couple of settlements above $1,300 an ounce could turn that into support, but one of the few certainties of the gold market going forward is likely wild swings, he added.
“You are going to have some stomach-churning volatility from now,” Klopfenstein said.
Silver for December delivery SIZ10  rose 19 cents, or 0.9%, to $21.39 an ounce. That’s a 2.7% increase for silver this week.
Both gold and silver prices “would benefit from some consolidation although diversification and physical demand will continue to provide upside momentum,” said James Moore, an analyst at TheBullionDesk.com, in a note to clients.
Gold’s winning streak intensified after the Federal Reserve on Tuesday said it stood ready to inject more cash into financial systems to support the U.S. recovery.
That put pressure on the dollar, and a weaker U.S. currency is usually supportive of gold and other commodities, as it makes them more attractive for holders of other currencies, broadening their appeal.
In addition to concerns about further quantitative easing and dollar weakness, support for gold also comes from the calendar — the final months of the year are usually boon times for gold, filled with religious holidays around the globe.
Investors have also sought to diversify their portfolios amid lingering misgivings about stock markets and falling bond yields.
Investors are primarily seeking gold as a “stable currency,” said analysts at Commerzbank in a note to clients.
“The most recent actions of several central banks have added fuel to fears regarding a depreciation race among global currencies,” they said. “These fears should boost the gold price in the long run.”
Gold took off some of its shine after news that August durable-goods orders dropped 1.3%, but orders of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft rose 4.1%. See more about durable-goods orders
Bullion held steady after the Commerce Department said sales of new homes in the U.S. were flat in August, matching their second slowest pace on record. Read the story on August new-homes sales
The U.S. dollar on Friday moved lower against its major rivals, with the dollar index DXY, -0.54%  falling 0.7% to 79.39. The euro rose 1.1% to $1.3464.
Gold and the dollar have historically had a strong inverse relationship; when the dollar falls, gold prices tend to gain as a weaker U.S. currency makes gold cheaper for holders of other currencies and broadens bullion’s appeal.
Meanwhile, copper hit a fresh five-month best, ending the week 2.8% higher.
Copper for December delivery HGZ10  ended 3 cents higher at $3.62 per pound. That’s the highest settlement for copper since early April.
Platinum and palladium diverged Friday, with platinum for January delivery PLF11   retreating $4.80 to $1.645.40 an ounce. Palladium for December delivery PAZ10  advanced $3.65 to $560.50 an ounce.