ASX fightback fizzles
Gold, meanwhile, has dropped back to $US1734 an ounce. Aussie dollar has dropped back below 98 US cents - at 97.88 - and remains below 75 yen and 72.5 euro cents. 3.04pm: Will be closing off the live blog shortly. ASX200 is off about 0.7 per cent, and All Ordinaries are down 0.9 per cent. For the ASX200, that makes it about 5.2 per cent lower for the week. All up, that would make about $60 billion sliced off the market for the week. 2.28pm: Looks like we're in for a bit of a rollercoaster ride again. After that initial burst of optimism the ASX200 has slipped back into gloom and is now trading down 21.4 points, or 0.5 per cent, at 3943.5. While banks are still posting solid gains, the big miners are leading the losses. 2.08pm: Helping the market are signs that US stocks will open higher later today. US stock futures are up more than 1 per cent, indicating a recovery on Wall Street after the brutal selloff overnight. The December US S&P 500 contract was up 1.25 per cent in mid-day trade in Asia after dropping to a one-month low overnight. 1.51pm: The market has staged a remarkable recovery over the past two hours and is now trading slightly higher. The S&P/ASX200 is up 2.2 points, or 0.1 per cent, at 3967.1, clawing back more than 80 points from this morning. And the dollar is well off the day's low, buying 98.05 US cents.
It appears a statement by finance chiefs of the G20 group of nations has helped to reassure investors. The G20 vowed to "take all necessary actions" to preserve financial stability and said central banks stood ready to provide liquidity. Analysts said investors were seeing that the market had been oversold and were closing out bets that shares would drop further. Our job is to tame the beast to the greatest extent we can and in Australia we are well positioned, and we are strong in doing so Bizzell Capital partners Peter Wright said the market had become a bargain for overseas investors who denominate assets, including Australian stocks, in US dollar terms. ‘‘There’s an enormous amount of capacity sitting outside the market,’’ said Mr Wright. ‘‘The rapid depreciation of the dollar plus the pullback in Australian dollar and you combine the two, shares becomes doubly cheaper.’’
1.14pm: Prime Minister Julia Gillard has tried to soothe investor nerves over the current turmoil in global financial markets, saying Australia’s economy is strong. Ms Gillard said she understood people were concerned when they saw volatility in the markets. ‘‘Whether it’s today or yesterday, or the day before, or whether it’s tomorrow, whatever we see on international markets in the time in between, the fundamentals of the Australian economy are strong,’’ she said today. Ms Gillard cited "low unemployment, low public debt, a strong banking system, growth, employment prospects, record terms of trade, hundreds of billions of dollars in the investment pipeline" as the reasons Australia remained well placed to deal with the global volatility. 1.08pm: The Aussie dollar started the day a long way down, and while it isn't approaching parity with the greenback again, it has reclaimed some of the lost ground. It's now trading at 98.16 US cents after starting the day at 96.6 cents. Also buying 74.02 yen and 63.7 British pence. 12.55pm: And it's not like countries are watching gobsmacked from the sidelines. South Korea, for instance, has pledged to defend the weakening won, the latest emerging economy to do so, a day after Brazil stepped in with a surprisingly large program to stem the real's sharp fall amid a growing global financial crisis - so Reuters tells us.
Forex authorities were also spotted selling US dollars at the start of trade this morning following the verbal warning, triggering a short-lived rally in the won. "Recent forex market movements in one direction were excessive," the government and the central bank said in a joint statement. They have "agreed to take necessary action to smooth (won moves)." The won fell 2.5 per cent in local trade on Thursday after hitting a one-year intra-day low of 1180.1 to the US dollar. 12.52pm: Could Australian shares actually end higher today? The All Ordinaries are down 0.8 per cent, and the ASX200 is off 0.6 per cent for the day now, and get this: financial stocks are up 0.3 per cent. Banks are usually among the hardest hit when markets worry about debt loads, so we have a strong signal that some investors are spotting what look like bargains. 12.47pm: On the dollar's outlook, St George chief economist Besa Deda says it has a new range, between 95.35 US cents and $US 1.0025. The dollar, therefore, is to stay above parity with the US dollar in the short term, because of deepening fears about the global economy.
''Earlier this week I wrote that the markets appeared to be at another crash through or crash moment, and that is still the case. Last night's plunge was scary, but it was on the back of indecision about what is happening to the world's economy, rather than a definite view that the battle to pull the global economy out of hole it dug for itself in the 2007-2009 financial crisis has been lost. From here the markets could bounce or fall a lot further, depending on what the verdict is.'' 12.29pm: Stocks seem to like the S&P news, with both ASX200 and All Ordinaries paring their losses to about 1.2-1.3 per cent now. Will it stick? 12.25pm: And more detail on S&P: "Australia has high fiscal flexibility," supported by a soundly performing economy, the credit ratings agency said.
11.45am: Aussie dollar, meanwhile, is hovering around the 98 US cent level and remains below 75 yen and 72.5 euro cents. 11.38am: More regional markets have opened, and, as expected, they joined the global sell-off. China's benchmark stock index opened down 1.3 per cent to 14-month lows, after slumping 2.8 per cent in the previous session, Reuters tells us. Across their ditch, Taiwan stocks were hit even harder, tumbling more than 3 per cent at the open, after a 3.1 per cent decline yesterday. Cement and LCD makers were the biggest losers, down 5.7 per cent and 4.6 percent respectively. Meanwhile, Seoul shares have extended early falls to more than 4.5 per cent, with foreign investors taking flight as concerns about global economic stagnation. Banks, shipyards and crude oil refiners were particularly hit, as they are more sensitive to economic cycles and volatility in the won, which continued to weaken. (And shipyards use a lot of iron ore.)
11.33am: So what's it all mean? Here's BusinessDay's Ian Verrender's comment: "If there’s one salient fact to remember in these troubled times, it is this: markets never go to zero. At some stage they will bottom out. But the unravelling debt mess in the northern hemisphere has quite some way to run and the ride is likely to be rough for at least the remainder of this year and possibly longer. World Bank boss Robert Zoellick overnight delivered an alarming assessment of the difficulties facing the global economy when he warned the world was 'entering a danger zone'." 11.26am: Update on gold. It's picked up a little to be just under $US1750 an ounce, Reuters notes. Still, it's been below $US1800 for seven trading days, and futures had their worst day in a month on Wall Street. Reinforces the idea that gold is not the one-way bet that it has been in previous iterations of this debt crisis over the past year or so. 11.21am: So, where are with stocks? Here's our markets wrap, if you want the details:
Burrell Stockbroking director Richard Herring said the early losses on the local market were not as bad as futures trading had pointed to, meaning some investors were likely taking advantage of attractive share values after big falls this week. ‘‘If you look at a relative basis, where indices are from the GFC onwards, we’re only 600 points off our all-time low,’’ he said, referring to the depths of the GFC. ‘‘That is compared to the Dow, which is about 4000 points off its low, so I think we are bouncing along the bottom and there’s some pretty significant value there.’’ 10.59am: Here's a chart, by the way, of how the dollar has fallen over the past 48 hours or so, from Bloomberg. Note that there's a bit of a bounce going on, pushing the dollar back above 98 US cents - more than one US cent off its lows. 10.48am: Bit of a change of pace, but here's a blog that looks at why we love to bag our employers. Not much solace, though, for those who have lost their job or about to. 10.40am: Here's an interesting longer term look at what's ahead for Australia's single-biggest export commodity, iron ore. We know China's appetite will eventually be sated, but the run-up in supply over the next few years means prices are set to be crunched. Not the only reason Rio and BHP shares are down today, but one factor.
Falls were led by crude oil refiners and shipbuilders, with SK Innovation , the country's top refiner, down 6.3 per cent and Hyundai Heavy Industries , the world's top shipyard, tumbling 7.1 per cent. 10.24am: Meanwhile, there some economic news out. The Conference Board's leading economic index for Australia - this is a US body that scans the world's economies - is showing another drop, albeit a modest one. The Conference Board Leading Economic Inde (LEI) for Australia decreased 0.1 per cent in July to 120.5 (2004 = 100), following a 0.5 per cent decrease in June, and a 0.2 percent increase in May, according to a press release. At the same time, The Conference Board Coincident Economic Index (CEI) for Australia, a measure of current economic activity, decreased 0.1 per cent in July to 117.6 (2004 = 100), following no change in June, and a 0.1 per cent decrease in May. The Conference Board LEI for Australia continued to fall in July, and the weaknesses among its components in the last six months have become more widespread. At the same time, The Conference Board CEI for Australia has been on a slightly downward trend since late last year. Taken together, the current behavior of the composite indexes suggests that economic growth could slow in the near term. 10.22am: Stocks, though, now well off their lows, clawing back the losses to be about 1.4 per cent lower overall. Interesting is that the interest rate futures - our local guide to what the RBA will do at its next rates meeting on October 4 - haven't picked up the global gloom. Still only pricing the chance of a rate cut at the next gathering as a 50/50 chance or so. 10.19am: The big miners have posted heavy falls - following losses on the London market. Rio Tinto dropped $3.27, or 5 per cent, to $61.93 after falling 11 per cent in London. Shares in BHP dropped $1.34, or 3.8 per cent, to $34.29 after it fell 8.3 per cent in London overnight. Also suffering a heavy hit was Fortescue which fell 40 cents, or 7.3 per cent, to $5.06.
9:58am: All gloom? Not so. Reuters just reporting South Korea's sovereign wealth fund may raise its stake in Bank of America, while there are rumour China will allow more purchases of foreign equities, which if true will bolster confidence. Anyway, market just about to open. 9:56am: A poll on our dollar story, while not scientific, may be instructive. The ratio of people delaying spending has remained about 50/50 of the total respondents, suggesting the financial turmoil is taking some toll on sentiment. Check it out here, and add your vote. 9:52am: “It would be flippant to suggest this is just a blip,” Tim Schroeders, who helps manage $1 billion in equities at Pengana Capital Ltd. told Bloomberg. “The aggressive selling of equity markets seems to reflect a heightened probability that the world is moving toward a recession.'' ''There’s also a sense that policy makers globally are limited in their ability to alleviate the situation because of the need for fiscal austerity.''
Sounds like a lot of money, but Italy - which had its debt credit rating downgraded earlier this week by Standard & Poor's - alone has more than $1 trillion outstanding. 9:25am: While the dollar's rebound a bit from its sub-97 US cent lows, it's well below the parity mark with the greenback. It was recently buying 97.6 US cents, 72.5 euro cents, 63.6 pence and 74.5 yen. If you happen to be heading to New Zealand for rugby (rather than Melbourne for its AFL prelims), your dollar will buy you just under $NZ1.25. 9.23am: Australia's All Ordinaries is down more than 16 per cent so far in 2011, reducing its total market value to about $1.2 trillion. This year's fall amounts to about $240 billion. For comparison, that figure's not far short of the total demand in Queensland in the 2010-11 financial year - of about $257 billion - according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics. 9.17am: Local investors are bracing for another bleak day on the Australian sharemarket after the latest round of steep falls on overseas markets. The SPI futures, which closed at 7am (AEST), were off almost 2 per cent, or 76 points, to 3890.
Australian shares are already down about 4.5 per cent this week alone, and are on course for their worst weekly return since the monster slide of 7.1 per cent in the first week of August. That slide coincided with political wrangling in the US over raising that country’s debt ceiling, with Standard & Poor’s capping the week with the first ever downgrade of US debt. This time around the concern centres more of Europe where talks over the next tranche of loans for the debt-stricken Greece economy continue. A 24-hour strike by workers in Greece that began on Thursday may add to concerns about the government’s willingness to implement deep cuts to services to close its budget deficit. As one guide for our market, the New Zealand sharemarket has opened about 1.8 per cent lower today.