Clive Palmer's Queensland Nickel creditors vote to liquidate debt-laden company
Creditors of Clive Palmer's Queensland Nickel have voted to liquidate the company, a fortnight after administrators made the recommendation amid crippling debt.
Creditors, including 800 sacked workers, agreed at a meeting in Townsville to wind up the company.
Administrators told the meeting that liquidators will now be able to pursue Mr Palmer for debts owed.
Workers are owed more than $70 million but the meeting has been told almost $60 million will be covered by the Federal Government's entitlements scheme.
One worker told the ABC he was happy it was all over.
"I think a lot of them are happy it's over too, it's been lingering for a long time," he said.
"There's light at the end of the tunnel, it's good."
More than $150 million is owed to unsecured creditors.
However, Mr Palmer said the decision to place Queensland Nickel into liquidation was not the end of the Yabulu refinery near Townsville.
He said Queensland Nickel was one of three companies involved with the plant.
"Queensland Nickel, which is just the management company, employed the staff and managed the joint venture, but the two joint venture companies own the refinery, they own the port, and they are still operational - they're under care and maintenance and there's staff there today," he said.
"They're meeting their obligations - the environment and everything else."
Mr Palmer said the liquidators could not legally recover millions from his other interests.
"I don't think there is any prospect of that," he said.
Mr Palmer said on Tuesday he had commissioned another audit after the damning report from FTI Consulting.
He said Friday he was not finished yet.
"We commenced action against the administrator already because he gave a report we weren't happy with," he said.
"There [are] no claims against me — there is no action started against me."
Administrators FTI Consulting found in early April that Queensland Nickel, which went into voluntary administration last year, had been used as Mr Palmer's "personal piggy bank".
In its report, FTI Consulting found the Townsville refinery could have survived the drop in nickel prices if millions of dollars had not been shifted from it to Mr Palmer's other businesses.
FTI Consulting pointed to a possible breach of fiduciary and common law duties by a director or officer of the company and criticised Mr Palmer and his nephew and former QN director Clive Mensink for being "reckless".
The report said that between November 2012 and June 2013, Mr Palmer instructed QN to transfer $43 million to a number of entities, including nearly $15 million to himself.
QN also paid for 60 vintage cars, which ended up at Mr Palmer's Coolum resort's Motorama Museum.
Federal Opposition Leader Bill Shorten said if Labor won office, it would do everything possible to recover the money owed.
"We will pursue the management of QNI will all the vigour and capacity of the Commonwealth of Australia," he said.