Ireland budget - As it happened
8.20am: First the bailout, now the budget. Today the Irish people will learn the price of the €85bn rescue package that was agreed last month, when finance minister Brian Lenihan presents the 2011 budget in Dublin's Dáil.
It is already being billed as the most painful budget in living memory. With austerity top of the agenda, Lenihan will announce €6bn worth of swingeing spending cuts and tax rises this afternoon. Welfare payments will be slashed, and the income tax take is expected to increase significantly.
With Ireland already suffering from the bitterly cold weather (it's minus one degree celsius in County Kildare right now), it's going to be a bleak day for many in the Republic.
We'll also be watching events in Brussels, where Lenihan's fellow finance ministers are holding talks on the ongoing eurozone debt crisis, and in Greece, where the International Monetary Fund are arriving. Protests are expected…
8.28am: Lenihan is scheduled to stand up in the Dáil to deliver the budget at 3.45pm. MPs get their first opportunity to give their verdict this evening, when they vote on changes to excise duties and sales taxes. A second vote will take place on Thursday, with two more due in early 2011.
The Fianna Fáil-led coalition only holds a tiny majority, and is reliant on suppport from independent MPs. A defeat this evening would sink the budget, bring down the government and trigger an immediate general election.
Professor John Fitzgerald of the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) has predicted that there is an 80-90% chance that the budget will be passed. He told Bloomberg this morning that it was "crucial for Ireland's future" that the measures were approved.
Fitzgerald also argued that opposition parties will be keen for Fianna Fáil to shoulder as much of the blame as possible before they lose (as appears highly likely) next year's general election.
Lenihan is also expected to deliver a statement on Ireland's banking sector early this afternoon.
8.30am: It appears that Fianna Fáil have managed to persuade Michael Lowry and Jackie Healy-Rae, the two independent members of the Dáil, to support the budget – in return for a last-minute package of concessions.
The Irish Independent is reporting that Lowry and Healy-Rae extracted "pledges on local roads, rural hospitals and a number of other pet schemes" in return for their votes.
Healy-Rae has also been claiming credit for reducing the overall increase in college fees. The rumour is that the planned €500 increase in the student service charge will not apply to families who already have a child in college.
Healy-Rae and Lowry are in a deliciously powerful position – if they support Brian Cowen's coalition, this gives the Taoiseach a total of 82 votes, versus the opposition's 80.
8.57am: Sticking with the newspapers, the Irish Independent also reports that ministers will show solidarity with the Irish people and drink from the well of austerity.
Up to a point, anyway. Ministers have apparently decided to scrap one of the government's private jets. There was quite a row this summer about how these aeroplanes were being used as a "personal taxi service", sparing politicians the inconvenience of relying on commercial flights.
Ministers will also waive their automatic right to a state car, and rely instead on a pool of vehicles. This could be good practice for life in opposition.
The Irish Times is predicting that today's budget will be "draconian", and that Cowen and his team will accept pay cuts.
Again, this follows outrage over the pay packet banked by the Irish leadership, with Cowen reportedly the best-paid politician in Europe with a salary of €285,583.
9.14am: One of the biggest fears for Ireland is that many of its young people will be forced to leave the country and seek opportunities overseas.
The National Youth Council of Ireland believes there is a huge risk of a "mass exodus" which would make it much harder for Ireland to recover from the crisis. It published the results of a poll this morning which found that 70% of jobseekers were likely to emigrate within the next year if economic prospects do not improve.
That would mean 58,000 people betwen 18 and 25 leaving the country, warned assistant director James Doorley, who urged Lenihan to offer some support to the young unemployed today:
9.26am: We're hearing that protests have already begun in Dublin outside the Irish parliament buildings.
A crane plastered with anti-government protest placards was driven up to Kildare Street and parked before dawn this morning. The slogans include "Anglo Toxic Bank", and attacks on the generous pensions that government ministers can look forward to.
The crane's arm was fully extended, with a man sitting in the cage at the top of the crane. According to local reports he played music through loud speakers and "has thrown a number of tennis balls to the ground below".
The control panel had been sealed off, but the Irish Journal says the Garda have now managed to bring the protester back to earth, and promptly placed him in a squad car.
9.52am: The broad scope of the austerity cutbacks was unveiled two weeks ago in the National Recovery Plan, which stated that Ireland would cut spending by €10bn over the next four years, and raise €5bn in taxes. So, we already know that 24,500 public sector jobs will be cut by 2014, VAT will rise in stages to 23%, the minimum wage is falling to €7.75 per hour, and both government pay and pensions will be reduced.
But we don't know the details of how €2.8bn will be cut from the welfare budget, or how an extra €1.9bn will be raised in income tax.
On welfare, both child benefit and income support payments are expected to be cut, while the cost of family medicines will probably rise.
There certainly appears to be scope to reform the income tax system. At present, around 45% of people avoid paying income tax at all, while 60% of all income tax is paid by 8% of the population. There is speculation that the duties levied on alcohol, cigarettes and gasoline will all be raised sharply. There was also talk over the weekend that Lenihan will cut ministerial salaries by 10%-15%, and maybe also impose cuts on "semi-state" company bosses.
10.03am: Today's budget will be particularly harsh because the austerity plan is "front-loaded", such that 40% – or €6bn – of the cutbacks are made in the first year.
Dermot O'Leary, an economist at Goodbody stockbrokers in Dublin, has predicted that the budget will include €2.1bn in current spending cuts, €1.8bn in capital spending reductions, and €1.4bn in higher taxation. Another €0.7bn would stem from various one-off elements.
10.15am: My colleague Lisa O'Carroll isn't impressed by the suggestion that prime minister Brian Cowen might take a pay cut:
10.25am: Ireland correspondent Henry McDonald has been talking to people in Dublin ahead of the budget:
Henry also reports that the demonstrator who turned up in a crane this morning (see 9.26am) had been firing tennis balls "over the gates into the square leading up to the parliament building".
10.35am: Here's a picture of the protester outside the Parliament buildings being brought down from his crane (shortly before he was arrested and taken away by police).
10.38am: Breaking news from Brussels - the European Union has formally approved Ireland's €85bn rescue package. It's largely a procedural step, although a sudden change of heart would certainly have sparked a panic.
As well as giving a green light to the various loans and guarantees, the gathering of EU finance ministers (excluding Brian Lenihan, of course) also agreed to extend the deadline for Ireland to cut its deficit to 3% of GDP by a year, to 2015.
11.05am: Irish businesses which have managed to keep afloat through the financial crisis are hoping that tourism may provide a lift in 2011. More from Henry McDonald, out on the streets of Dublin:
11.21am: Support for Fianna Fáil has plunged in recent months, so it appears likely that today's budget will be Brian Lenihan's last (at least for a while). Lenihan's reputation has been savaged by the Irish economic crisis – yesterday the Financial Times awarded him the title of Europe's worst finance minister (for the second year running).
11.36am: In the financial markets, the euro has been rising today on optimism that the Irish budget will be passed. It's gained nearly a cent against the dollar today, to $1.3366. The pound is trading around €1.1811 (making one euro worth 84.6p).
Ireland's sovereign debt has come under a little more pressure this morning. The yield (or rate of return demanded by investors) on Irish 10-year bonds rose to 8.2% this morning, from 8.15% yesterday. That's still comfortably below the 9% levels reached last month, though.
City analysts remain nervous about Ireland's long-term economic changes. Is it really possible to slash so much spending, so quickly, without seriously eroding the chances of a solid recovery?
This is from Oscar Bernal of ING:
11.58am: Other weaker members of the eurozone also saw the interest rate charged on their bonds rise today.
The yield on Spanish 10-year bonds jumped to 5.26% this morning, from 5.12% yesterday. The gap between Spanish and German yields has also widened (by 9 basis points to 243bp). Not a major move – traders say there's a lot of tension in the market, while we wait to see whether the Europen Central Bank buys more government debt.
12.06pm: With less than four hours to go until the budget begins, frantic discussions are still taking place behind the scenes. As mentioned earlier (see 8.30am), the parliamentary mathematics is so tight that every vote is crucial.
RTE newsreader Bryan Dobson is reporting that one rebel Fianna Fáil MP has yet to make his mind up.
Of course, some members of the Dáil may simply want to hear exactly how severe the austerity measures are before deciding whether they can back them. Another independent TD, Noel Grealish of Galway West, has said this morning he will probably vote against the budget (but wants to see the details first)
12.23pm: Bank of Ireland's cash machines and online banking system have failed within the last couple of hours, leaving customers unable to access their funds.
A spokesperson said the fault lay with the bank's internal system and that engineers are working to restore normal services. But the disruption has raised fears that the troubled bank might have ceased trading.
That seems most unlikely - Bank of Ireland is being recapitalised as part of the €85bn bailout, and private equity firm JC Flowers is also considering bidding for the company. But given recent speculation about bank runs, this is a very bad time for such a glitch to strike…
…assuming it is just a glitch, of course. Today has been designated as the global banking system's "day of reckoning" by no lesser authority than Eric Cantona. The enigmatic footballing great had urged the public to empty their accounts on 7 December in a co-ordinated move to bring the financial system to its knees.
But look, it's probably just a technical problem. Bank of Ireland's shares are still trading (up 3.85% at €0.378).
12.44pm: People are continuing to gather outside the Dublin parliament, ready to vent their fury at their elected leaders. This just in from Lisa O'Carroll:
Just taking a quick break, so do also check out the Irish Times's live blog which just started up here, and RTÉ News's own live coverage (they're reporting that the crane used in this morning's protest (see 10.25am) has been hauled away.)
1.30pm: And we're back. Looking at the Bank of Ireland cashpoint situation, PhD student Edd Hind kindly got in touch over Twitter.
@edd_hind I can report Bank of Ireland cashpoint at the Student Union just gave me a tenner, but I am an Ulster Bank customer.
So Eric Cantona's bank run revolution hasn't found much support there, anyway.

My colleague in Paris, Angelique Chrisafis, has written more about King Eric's big idea, and the way it received a predictably frosty response from France's top politicians, and the media.
Le Monde's Pierre-Antoine Delhommais was the most scathing, suggesting Cantona would hire a lorry to withdraw his own "sacks of cash", as "one imagines he hasn't worked for free for all these years, advertising the merits of Bic razors, Nike shoes, Partouche casinos, Neuf Telecom, Lipton Teas, the Renault Laguna or L'Oréal deodorants".
2.01pm: More details of today's budget are leaking out in Dublin.
RTE's political correspondent Brian Dowling is reporting that politicians' pay will be cut by 20% which would take Brian Cowen's controversial salary down to the €200,000 mark. This is much more significant than previously thought.
Informed sources are also telling Dowling that the government will, against expectations, tackle "fat cat" pay in the semi-state sector, forcing through a €250,000 salary cap on chief executives who run businesses that are partly owned by the state.
There had been fears this would be challenged in the courts because it would constitute a change in contract but the word is the government feels, as it is the majority shareholder in the semi-state sector, it will be able to achieve this.
This will mean big cuts for the likes of Padraig McManus, chief executive of the Electricity Supply Board, who has a take-home package of more than €750,000 and about five or six others.
Other cuts being leaked this lunchtime include: • a 4% cut in public sector pensions above €12,000 • €0.04 per litre hike in the price of petrol • €0.02 per litre hike in the price of diesel • No change on cigarettes and alcohol • €10 and €20 cut in child benefit depending on number of children in family
2.07pm: On RTÉ's Radio 1 Liveline show, presenter Joe Duffy has branded the avalanche of detail emerging about the budget as "budgileaks"…
2.13pm: As if broken cash machines (see 12.23pm) weren't enough, Lisa O'Carroll tells me that four councils in Dublin have announced they may be cutting off water supplies from 7pm to 7am:
• Irish finance minister Brian Lenihan will deliver what is expected to be a "draconian" 2011 budget, starting at 3.45pm • Welfare cuts, income tax rises and steeper petrol duty expected (2.01pm) • Tonight's vote remains on a knife edge, with some independent MPs pledging support (8.30am) but others undecided (12.06pm) • Protesters are already gathering in Dublin (12.44pm), and one man has been arrested (10.35am) • Bank of Ireland's online banking system, and some cash machines, have stopped working due to a "technical problem" (12.23pm)
2.31pm: With just over an hour to go until the budget starts Henry McDonald is outside the gates of the Dáil, where there are rather more journalists than angry citizens:
2.55pm: Prime minister Brian Cowen is facing his critics in the Dáil at Leader's Questions. It's been a ding-dong affair (the speaker has been hammering his bell like a toddler with a new rattle in a largely futile effort to maintain order). Eamon Gilmore, head of the Labour Party, accused Cowen of disastrous mismanagement of the economy - which has driven young people out of the country to seek opportunities in the US and Australia.
Cowen hit back, claiming that Labour would have made things even worse - and attacking its plan to cut spending by €4.5bn rather than €6bn:
3.07pm: Brian Lenihan has just done the customary photocall with the Budget 2011. As in previous years, he posed with a CD version of the statement (photo coming soon).
It's pretty icy in Dublin still, so the finance minister shimmied carefully down the steps of the parliament buildings, before thinking better of stepping onto the snowy grass. Not the time for a Kinnock-style tumble.
3.10pm: The noise outside the parliament buildings has intensified in the last few minutes, with more people showing up to protest. Pots and pans are being clanked, and some people are setting off air horns.
Lisa O' Carroll has been interviewing people at the scene (listen to the audio above)
3.31pm: It's emerged that the man arrested for driving a crane up to the Dublin parliament this morning (see 9.26am and 10.35am)is the same person who turned up with a cement mixer truck emblazoned with the words "Toxic Anglo Bank" in September.
Joe McNamara (41), has been charged with being in control of a vehicle which was deemed to be dangerous to the public, and remanded in custody until December 14. Reports suggest he has breached his bail conditions (which included not coming to the attention of the Garda again).
McNamara, a property developer, is said to owe Anglo Irish Bank €3.5m. He was charged with criminal damage following the cement mixer incident.
The Irish Times has some interesting details about today's action; McNamara - who was allegedly wearing a builder's hard hat and a yellow fluorescent coat - raised himself to a height in the cage, where he remained for more than an hour. During the incident he used a loudspeaker to play the hit single Poker Face by Lady Gaga and the theme from the spaghetti western The Good, The Bad And The Ugly.
3.40pm: Just a few minutes until Lenihan starts to deliver the budget, and the noise outside the parliament is growing.
Green Party TD Paul Gogarty has just pledged that he and his colleagues will support the budget - calling it their "moral and patriotic duty".
The Green, of course, are part of Brian Cowen's coalition, but have now forced a general election early next year.
3.45pm: Brian Lenihan has just taken his seat next to his leader, Brian Cowen, and the session is about to start.....
3.46pm: The speaker starts by reminding the Dáil that the Budget speech is confidential until it has been delivered (prompting much chortling, given how many of the measures seem to have been leaked to the lunchtime news programmes).
Lenihan starts by telling MPs that "This has been a traumatic and worrying time for people in our country", who are worried about the implications of the €85bn IMF/EU bailout.
But he claims that the Irish economy is recovering, and returning to growth. From a drop of 7.6% in GDP last year, he predicts a small rise for 2010.
"The recovery is taking shape...led by exports," Lenihan says, arguing that this will ultimately bring unemployment down to more acceptible levels.
3.50pm: Our actions to stabilise the public finances have made progress, Lenihan continues.
So why the need for the bailout? The banking sector, of course. Lenihan argues that without the support of the International Monetary Fund and the European Union there would have been doubts about the state's ability to borrow and support a stable banking sector.
Lenihan admits that the measures he is about to announce will have a significant impact on people, but insists that "it is the government's strong view that the economy can still grow while we make the adjustments in the National Recovery plan."
That, you might say, is the €15bn question.
3.54pm: Lenihan continues...saying that his party (with the support of those in the opposition) had tried to spread the benefits of the boom across the population.
He points out that public spending and pensions increased significantly faster than the rate of inflation.
"Budget 2011 continues the task of bringing the cost of public services back to the level that can be financed in a stable fashion."
3.57pm: The state pension will be frozen next year, Lenihan says, while the working age payment will fall by 4%. He won't commit to levels in future years, saying it depends on unemployment levels.
3.58pm: As expected, child benefit is being slashed. It will fall by €10 per month for each child, with a further €10 cut for the third child.
Lenihan claims this will bring payments back to the levels seen in 2005 and 2006.
4.00pm: Lenihan says that a new Work Placement scheme will create 5,000 places in public service, and also pledges more support to get people into work. An additional 15,000 activation placements for the unemployed will cost about €200m
He also pledges an extra €14m to fund higher fuel allowances though the winter.
4.01pm: Lenihan pays tribute to the outstanding work done by many civil servants (talking about their call to duty), but says that the public sector workforce will be cut over the next few years [that's the 24,500 four-year reduction announced last month]
He also confirms that new entrants will be hit with a 10% pay cut compared to incumbent workers.
4.04pm: Confirmation too that the Taoiseach and his government is taking a pay cut. Brian Cowen (or rather his successor) will see his pay cut by €14k, while ministers will receive €10k less.
Following similar cuts in earlier budgets, this means that Taoiseach's salary has shrunk by €90k in the last few years, Lenihan says.
Again, as expected, a €250,000 cap will be brought in for chief executives at partly state-owned companies.
4.06pm: Public sector pensioners are also taking a hit. Anyone receiving €12,000 or more per year will suffer a 4% cut, although those with smaller pensions will be exempt.
4.10pm: Now income tax, where Lenihan says the present system is no longer "fit for purpose", with 45% of people not paying anything.
His solution -- is to cut income tax bands and credits by 10%, and also cut private sector pension tax relief. The existing income levy and health levy will be scraped in favour of a single levy.
The PRSI social insurance rate (the equivalent of the UK's National Insurance), will be increased for the self-employed and higher earning public servants, while the existing employee PRSI ceiling will be abolished.
Various measures are also promised to cut tax-avoidance by higher earners, but we'll have to dig through the full statement to find them all, I think.
Lenihan says that by broadening the income tax base at both ends of the spectrum, it is possible to lower the overall burden while increasing the overall tax take.
4.14pm: We already knew that the minimum wage was being cut by one euro per hour. Leniham says that new minimum wage rate holders will not be caught up by his income tax changes, but will pay the social charge.
4.15pm: Corporation tax now -- and Lenihan confirms that it will stay at its low rate of 12.5%. This was demanded by all sides of the Dail, but there is very little reaction - just a low murmer. The Budget is being received in near silence.
4.17pm: Onto property taxes, and Lenihan announces the abolition of all existing stamp duty relief.
Now, there will be a flat 1% rate on all property transations costing less than €1m, and a 2% levy above the €1m mark.
Had this scheme been in place before, we would not have seen the unsustainable boom in the property market in the last few years, Lenihan says.
4.20pm: Ireland's controversial €10 airport tax is being abandoned, temporarily at least, in favour of a flat charge of €3 per passenger.
That should please Ryanair's Michael O'Leary, who has claimed that the current scheme is harming tourism.
Lenihan warns, though, that this is a temporary change, which will be reviewed next year. "I do not want to see it used by airlines to increase their fees and charges." Got that, Michael?
4.24pm: As predicted, petrol is going up by €0.04 per litre, with diesel rising by 0.02% per litre, from midnight. We've already heard reports of Dublin garages putting up prices this afternoon.
Ireland's car scrappage scheme is also being extended until the end of June 2011.
4.27pm: Lenihan (Europe's worst finance minister, according to the Financial Times) is now defending the budget - and his own record.
"Everyone pays, and those who can pay more pay more."
He concedes that his administration failed to regulate the banking sector properly, and allowed the construction sector to grow too quickly, but he claims that "I am not convinced that any alternative government would have done any better."
4.28pm: Lisa O'Carroll has some instant analysis of the property tax changes:
4.31pm: Lenihan finishes, saying that his government has "faced up to its responsibilities and admitted to its mistakes". He receives a pretty decent round of cheers and applause from his party.
Henry McDonald watched the budget inside "Scholars" pub in the Firhouse area of south west Dublin:
4.41pm: Michael Noonan, Fine Gael's finance spokesman, takes to his feet to respond. Here's his opening gambit:
Noonan goes on to lay some of the blame today for the Irish economic crash on previous Taoiseach Bertie Ahern. Noonan told the Dáil - where the overall mood appeared sombre and sour - that the "era of Bertie Ahern is dead and gone."
Ahern presided over the Celtic Tiger boom and was constantly accused of wasting the weath by failing to invest it in Ireland's infrastructure.
4.53pm: Mattie McGrath, who represents Cork South Central in the Dáil, has just confirmed that he plans to support the 2011 Budget. McGrath is one of the TDs who has suggested he might oppose it.
McGrath told RTÉ News that he was prepared to back Lenihan's plan, as he believes it shares the pain across Ireland's people. The key, though, is that without an austerity budget there can be no IMF/EU bailout.
"We are in a very serious and perilous situation," he says. "I am worried that if we do not pass the budget, there may not be money in place in January and February to pay all our wages."
4.58pm: Economist and guest Guardian blogger Stephen Kinsella has given his immediate reaction to Lisa O'Connell.
He says the budget has "no stimulus for growth" but also points to some positives including the creation of 15,000 internships for unemployed. "We already know about all the negatives, but if we focus on the positives there are some there."
"With the internships, they don't get paid, they get their dole, but what you do have is an upskilling of a workforce that might have emigrated. It's the bare bones of a growth policy. Okay, it's three years late but it's a start," he said.
Kinsella added that the freezing of the state pension from next year could backfire if there was inflation. "If inflation is at 5% you will be 5% worse off, but they are banking on low inflation."
Kinsella added: "They are targetting the two biggest areas of expenditure for cuts - social welfare and pensions, but they have done their best to keep away from health and education.
"Where they have put the knife to the flesh, they seem to have done it in a judicious way, that's if you already accept the need for fiscal contraction."
5.02pm: Norah Gibbons of Barnado's has hit out at the decision to cut child benefit by €10 per month (or €20 per month for the third offspring). She claims that Lenihan has taken the "lazy" way out, by slashing rates across the board in a way that will hurt the poorest families the most.
"The impact will fall too much on those on low incomes, and those on welfare," Gibbons warned.
5.09pm: One of the most important measures announced by Lenihan is a new "Universal Social Charge" that will replace the existing Income Levy and Health Levy.
Looking at the numbers, this will be capped at zero for those earning less than €4,004 a year, 2% for those earning up to €10,036, 4% from €10,036 to €16,016 and 7% above this.
The Social Charge was flagged up in the last budget, and analysts had expected that employee PRSI payments would also be bundled into it. This doesn't seem to have happened, though.
5.20pm: Ireland's small businesses have also given the 2011 Budget a thumbs-down.
The head of the Irish Small and Medium Entreprises Association branded it a "wasted opportunity" and said it would push businesses further into difficulty.
"We feel it is a wasted opportunity to stimulate the economy. We are concerned with the level of income tax band changes and think that will mean an upward push on salaries making it even harder for small businesses," said ISME's Mark Fielding.
He added: "The increase in excise on petrol and diesel flies in the face to their commitment to reduce the cost of doing business in Ireland and makes a nonsense of their so-called business-focused recovery plan."
Fielding said Brian Lenihan had mentioned small to medium-sized enterprise in his speech but then went on to talk about measures in the Business Expansion Scheme which affects just 1.5% of firms. "He's just ignored the other 98.5%," said Fielding.
One interesting measure within the budget is the removal of perks including cars for former Taoisigh and Presidents, which could cut costs in this area by one third over the next two years.
It means the likes of Bertie Ahern, the former Taoiseach, will no longer have his own car and will have to start sharing with other former presidents and prime ministers. Car engine size will also be reduced to two litres or less.
5.26pm: The universal charge, the new version of National Insurance, will hit lower income workers most. That's the verdict of Peter Vale, tax partner at Grant Thornton.
On the information supplied so far, the charge will mean a payment of 7% will kick in at around €16,000, compared to 6% under the old system (see 5.09pm for the full breakdown)
Vale says the pension reforms will be a "double whammy" for higher earners. The reduction in tax benefits may prove a disincentive to invest in personal pensions and thereby reduce the investment capacity of pension funds that "prop up the value of assets" around the country.
"This is bad news for pensions. It's a double whammy. They are penalising those who built back up their pension fund which has already fallen because of the decline in the market," said Vale.
5.47pm: Across the TV studios and newsrooms of Ireland (and beyond), experts are frantically crunching the details of the budget. Obviously Lenihan announced plenty of measures in his speech but (as with the British budget) there's a lot of detail hidden away in the full budget.
As we don't have a team of accountants here in the Guardian office, I'm delighted that TheJournal.ie have created a Budget 2011 calculator.
The Basic version of the calculator reckons that a single person earning €20,000 per year will be €21 per month worse off, while a married couple with a joint income of €80,00 will have €219 less to spend each month.
Of course, you need to use the Advanced version to get a proper picture - as that covers specific tax credits and suchlike. Please let us know how you are affected, in the comments box below.
5.58pm: The Dáil are continuing to debate the Budget, with Sinn Fein's finance spokesperson Pearse Doherty decribing it as "economic treason".
Around 150 people are reported to be protesting outside the parliament buildings.
John Monaghan, national vice president of the charity St Vincent de Paul said the budget would hit those on the breadline hardest.
"For the first time we have the strange situation where people who are on welfare will be taking a bigger hit than those in work," he said.
The Society estimates that a middle-income couple with two children will lose about €12 to €15 a week whereas those on welfare will lose "in the region of €20" because of the social insurance reforms.
He is also angry over the one euro cut in the minimum wage, which is falling from €8.65 to €7.65.
"Any politician, economist or employer who says decreasing the minimum wage is the pathway out of poverty is seriously deluded," he said.
6.09pm: Lenihan's stamp duty changes have received some support. Marian Finnegan, economist at estate agents Sherry Fitzgerald said the simplification of stamp duty on property could at last boost house sales.
The new flat rate stamp duties - 1% for properties up to €1m and 2% on properties over €1m - will replace the existing rate which saw rates of up to 9% payable on properties over €875,000.
6.29pm: Here's a full round-up of all the measures in today's austerity budget.
• Social welfare payments will be cut by 4%. • Jobseekers', carer's and disability allowances will fall by €8 per week each • Income tax bands and tax credits will be cut by 10% • Child benefit will fall by €10 a month per child, or €20 per month for the third child. • Income and health levies to be merged into a single social contribution charge payable on all income, called the Universal Social Charge • The state pension is frozen next year • Corporation Tax remain unchanged at 12.5% • Public sector pensions above €12,000 per year will be cut by 4% • New employees in the public sector will be paid 10% less than before • The €75,000 ceiling for employee PRSI contributions will be removed • €200m will be provided for training and work placement supports for the unemployed.
• Stamp duty is being reformed, so that properties under €1m will be taxed at 1%, and those over €1m will be taxed at 2% • 25 tax breaks, including all property based relief, will be abolished by 2014. • Petrol duty will go up by €0.04 per litre, and diesel by €0.02, from midnight. • Alcohol and cigarettes are untouched until next year. • Ireland's travel tax is being cut from €10 to €3, but may rise again in 2012 • €14m is being added to the winter fuel allowance fund, worth €40 per family
• The Taoiseach's pay will be cut by €14,000, reducing next year's salary to €214,466. • Ministers' pay will fall by €10,000. • Salaries for senior public servants and heads of semi-state bodies, including the President, will be capped at €250,000 • Former Taoisigh and Presidents will lose their right to a personal car and driver • The Gulf Stream Government jet, which is at the end of its life span, will not be replaced.
6.35pm: The first vote on the budget will be held later this evening, when MPs are asked to give their verdict on the excise duty changes.
The indication from Dublin is that the government has got enough votes to win tonight. Stay 'tuned' for more information - but for now, I'm signing off.
Many thanks for reading, and for the great comments below.