HSBC pays $1.92bn to settle US money laundering claims
The payment includes a deferred prosecution agreement with the US Department of Justice (DoJ), HSBC said in a statement, but not a settlement with UK regulators, which the bank said it would complete shortly.
Stuart Gulliver, HSBC's chief executive said in a statement: "We accept responsibility for our past mistakes. We have said we are profoundly sorry for them, and we do so again [...] we will continue to work closely with governments and regulators around the world.” The lender said that the DoJ would continue to monitor the bank's progress over the next five years to ensure that the bank "fully implement[ed]" additional compliance measures. Shareholders in HSBC were warned earlier this year by chief executive Stuart Gulliver that a settlement could cost more than $1.5bn.
The bank apologised over the summer for failures to enforce anti-money laundering rules, with Mr Gulliver admitting that HSBC needed to "take responsibility for fixing what went wrong".
In July, senior HSBC executives were hauled before a powerful Senate committee to explain the failures that stretched between 2004 and 2010.
A damning Senate report said HSBC left America's financial system exposed to exploitation by drug cartels and terrorist organisations due to its failure to comply with anti-money laundering laws.
The report also contained strong criticism of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, a top US bank regulator, saying the regulator failed to crack down on the bank despite multiple red flags, allowing money laundering issues "to accumulate into a massive problem".
On Monday HSBC named Bob Werner, a former senior official at the US Treasury, as the head of group financial crime compliance at the bank.
HSBC said it continues to co-operate with US authorities.
The US government is aggressively pursuing breaches of anti-money laundering rules and a number of British banks are still under investigation.
Shares in HSBC edged up 0.3pc to 642.8p in early trading in London.