GITEX shopper opens
Dubai World Trade Centre, the organiser of GITEX TECHNOLOGY WEEK, one of the world’s top three information and communication technology events, opened up for what promises to be the biggest and the best GITEX so far.
The event will begin on Sunday at the Dubai International Convention Centre.
The highly anticipated 30th anniversary GITEX will host 3,500 companies including 675 new exhibitors from over 65 countries. In all, more than 133,000 visitors from some 135 countries are expected to converge in Dubai for the exhibition which concludes on Thursday, October 21, 2010.
Helal Saeed Almarri, Chief Executive Officer, Dubai World Trade Centre, organiser of the event said: ‘GITEX TECHNOLOGY WEEK is the definitive ICT event for the whole of Middle East and Africa, inspiring innovation and entrepreneurship. Over the past three decades, the event has helped shape the ICT landscape of the region, partnering with both the public and private sectors in promoting a culture of technology that touches all aspects of modern life and business.’
The 30th edition, 93 times larger in space than the first show in 1981, is introducing several new features that will significantly add value to the ICT industry, including the GITEX Global Leaders Summit, which features keynote addresses today (Sunday) by Rajeev Asija, Executive Vice President Enterprise Solution & Services Business, HCL Infosystems - Strategic sponsor for the event; Ali Faramawy, Vice President, Microsoft International and President, Microsoft Middle East & Africa, Microsoft Corporation; Bhaskar Gorti, Senior Vice President and General Manager Communications Global Business Unit, Oracle; and Randi Zuckerberg, Director of Market Development, Facebook.
Steve Guggenheimer, Vice President, Original Equipment Manufacturer Division, Microsoft Corporation, returns to GITEX for the second year with a keynote speech tomorrow (Monday).
Sitting alongside the Summit, the first ever GITEX Cloud Confex, with HP as platinum sponsor, is also due to start tomorrow. GITEX Cloud Confex features an exhibition and a series of in-depth sessions dedicated to Cloud Computing, often referred to the ‘essential ICT cost-cutter’.
The GITEX Mobile Apps, Content World is also being introduced in response to overwhelming market demand; global mobile applications sales and downloads are forecast to reach US$15.65 billion by 2013 - and the Middle East and Africa is set to be the fastest growing market.
These new elements sit alongside GITEX Business Solutions, Consumer Electronics and the Global Conferences to make up GITEX TECHNOLOGY WEEK.
GITEX TECHNOLOGY WEEK is open to trade visitors and industry professionals only from 10am - 7pm from October 18 to October 20 (Monday to Wednesday). On October 21 (Thursday) the show will open at 10am and close at 5pm. Tickets cost AED 60 per day or AED 120 for a five day pass.
The Consumer Electronics section of GITEX TECHNOLOGY WEEK will be open free to the public from October 19 to 21 (Tuesday to Thursday) for product previews only.