Woodside looking at alternative Browse options
Woodside is looking at other options after shelving its $45 billion Browse LNG development near Broome.
The company says that, after a technical and financial evaluation, the proposed LNG development near James Price Point in north-west Western Australia does not meet its commercial requirements.
Woodside says it recently looked at tenders for the project, which showed the development would not deliver the required commercial returns to support a positive final investment decision.
On the other side of the world, Woodside has opened up another LNG business opportunity.
Woodside says it has has lodged an expression of interest for developing a liquefied natural gas project at Grassy Point in Canada.
However, Woodside is not abandoning Browse, and says it will look at alternative options to develop the gas field with its joint venture partners.
In its statement to the share market, Woodside says those options could include a floating processing plant, a pipeline to existing LNG facilities in the Pilbara or a smaller onshore option near James Price Point.
One of Woodside's Browse joint venture partners, Shell, says it wants the project to use its offshore floating processing technology.
"We believe Shell’s floating LNG technology is the fastest, most economic and the best technical solution available for Browse," the company's Australian head Ann Pickard said in a statement.
"Floating LNG can bring significant long term, sustainable jobs  to Western Australia, Australia, and the Kimberley, as well as providing employment and business opportunities for Kimberley Indigenous people."
Not everyone is a fan of the offshore option though, with both major political parties in Western Australia concerned that a floating platform will provide less economic benefit to the state.
The Maritime Union of Australia has also expressed fears that a floating platform may cause an offshore environmental disaster.
"Aside from the thousands of jobs that Australians would miss out on, the offshore option would also create the potential for environmental Armageddon in the event of a leak or explosion," warned the MUA's deputy national secretary Mick Doleman in a statement.
"This new technology that Shell is trying to foist on the joint venture is untried and untested and could be catastrophic if something goes wrong, such as a cyclone or a tsunami, particularly as it wouldn't be crewed by professional seafarers with high-level safety qualifications."
Commodities analyst and the chief economist of Barratt's Bulletin, Jonathan Barratt, says Shell's floating option is probably likely to get up.
"I think you'll probably look for some form of floating system, not quite as expensive and also a little bit more manageable," he told ABC News Online.
Mr Barratt says opposition from environmental groups has played a part in sinking the James Price Point plan, as have spiralling construction costs in Western Australia.
However, he says the main factor that has sunk the original James Price Point plan is a dramatic slump from peak to trough in natural gas prices as US shale gas production has surged.
"When you've had a complete technology shift where we have so much supply, so many people trying to tap into the resource, then all of a sudden you have too much supply of the product," Mr Barratt explained.
"And when you see prices dropping from $US14 to $US2 [per British thermal unit] all of a sudden a lot of projects do not become viable."
Woodside says it will make a proposal to its joint venture partners regarding work and a budget for the remaining 20 months of the retention leases, and still intends to develop the Browse Basin gas resource.
IG Markets strategist Evan Lucas says the decision to shelve the onshore processing plan, for now at least, shows Woodside (WPL) has learned lessons from the cost and time blowouts on its Pluto LNG project.
"Pluto is now up and running and producing solid flows. However, WPL has had to learn a hard lesson that its onshore processing is a very costly business," he wrote in a note on Woodside's decision.
"WPL's Browse development was looking like déjà vu. Several broker notes show the internal rates of return for Browse were well below viability levels and cash flows were not stacking up."
Jonathan Barratt says the shift from the high-cost land terminal to what may be a much lower cost offshore option is likely to be seen as a positive for Woodside's value.
"It's less pressure on the balance sheet when we've got so much uncertainty in the economic world, and I think its probably a prudent management decision not to commit to the spend," he said.
Investors generally agree, with Woodside's share price rising 4 per cent to $36.68 by 11:14am (AEST).
The Perth-based company is the operator of the Browse joint ventures and owns a 34 per cent stake in the East Browse project and a 17 per cent stake in West Browse.