Rupert Murdoch attacks Gordon Brown in first interview since NoW closed
Speaking to Wall St Journal, media tycoon defends News Corp's handling of scandal and says MPs' comments are 'total lies'
Rupert Murdoch has attacked Gordon Brown in a fierce defence of News Corporation's handling of the phone hacking scandal. Murdoch accused British MPs of lying about allegations of corrupt practices at his newspapers.
In his first interview about the crisis that has engulfed his media empire, Murdoch said some MPs' comments on the scandal were "total lies" and singled out Brown for criticism over the former prime minister's accusation that News International was guilty of "law-breaking on an industrial scale".
The media baron said Brown "got it entirely wrong" when he alleged that Murdoch's British papers had used "known criminals" to get access to his personal information when Labour was in power.
"The Browns were always friends of ours" until the Sun withdrew its support for Labour before the last general election, he told the Wall Street Journal, his flagship US paper.
On Twitter, Murdoch's biographer Michael Wolff said he "seemed genuinely distressed about Gordon Brown not liking him anymore."
Murdoch said he had agreed to appear before the Commons culture, media and sport select committee after being told he would be summoned to a hearing on the hacking scandal next Tuesday.
He said he wanted to address "some of the things that have been said in parliament, some of which are total lies."
The summons was issued after Murdoch said he would not give evidence to the committee until after having appeared before the public inquiry chaired by Lord Justice Leveson.
Murdoch, who will join his younger son James and News International chief executive Rebekah Brooks at the hearing, added: "We think it's important to absolutely establish our integrity in the eyes of the public."
The chairman and chief executive of News Corp also defended the company's handling of the crisis, claiming it had made only "minor mistakes".
The damage to the company was "nothing that will not be recovered," he said, adding that the company had a great reputation in the US.
He admitted "getting annoyed" about the negative media coverage of the scandal but said: I'll get over it."
Amid growing calls from News Corp shareholders for James Murdoch to step down as the chairman of BSkyB, his father also attempted to quash speculation that the scandal had dashed the chances of his younger taking over his media empire.
Rejecting criticism that James Murdoch had reacted too slowly to the scandal, he said: "I think he acted as fast as he could, the moment he could."
He also claimed that his own his reponse to the situation had been prompt and appropriate.
"When I hear something going wrong, I insist on it being put right," he said.
He also denied there were plans to sell News International, or separate it from the rest of News Corp, describing such reports as "pure rubbish".
"Give it the strongest possible denial you can give," he added.
But Murdoch said it would set up an independent committee to "investigate every charge of improper conduct" made against News International.
The committee would be headed by a "distinguished non-employee" and also establish a "protocol for behaviour" for new reporters across the company.