ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Transport workers across Greece have begun a two-day strike in response to another round of austerity measures passed by the Greek parliament overnight.
Chief among them is a broad-based property tax that will be charged to electricity bills. Non-payers will have their power cut, but most people say they simply will not pay.
This time even the police are protesting, one holding a placard that asks: "Is this the police we want?" above drawings of men and women without uniforms.
The text below reads: "There's nothing left to take."
But the Greek government, led by prime minister George Papandreou is standing firm. It has little choice.
International inspectors arrive this week to see if the country is living up to its end of the bargain - tough austerity measures in exchange for the $150 billion in emergency loans.
"The rescue plan for Greece is not only to keep us afloat, it is an investment in a different Greece - a Greece that is confronting problems that were overlooked for decades," Mr Papandreou said.
He spent the day in Berlin, where most of his country's bailout money is coming from.
Tomorrow, the German parliament will vote on whether to give even more cash to its Greek neighbours.
Addressing a gathering of German businesspeople, the prime minister stressed that Greece is engaged in a superhuman effort to reduce its debts.
"We are not a poor country. We were a mismanaged country. What we are doing is nothing short of the rebirth of a nation," he said.
But since the socialist PASOK party came to power in 2009 it has failed to implement promised policies - cutting 36,000 jobs from the public sector, ending tax evasion and selling off loss-making public assets like wharves and airports.
Mr Papandreou was adamant that privatisation is about to deliver the Greek economy a much needed boost.
"Those who have already expressed interest are China, India, Korea, Australia, Brazil," he said.
"They see Greece's tradition in shipping and easy access to ports in the east as an ideal hub."
For her part, German chancellor Angela Merkel was upbeat, staring down her critics.
She says the situation is a debt crisis, not a euro crisis.
"And we will give any support possible so that Greece will have confidence again and that the markets will then know that Greece is on a good path," she said.
The Greek prime minister knows he needs Germany on side if he is going to manage to stave off a debt default.