Indonesia to stop sending domestic workers to Middle East – reports
Jakarta angry over the recent execution of two Indonesian women found guilty of murder in Saudi Arabia
Indonesia will stop sending new domestic workers to 21 Middle Eastern countries after Saudi Arabia executed two Indonesian women in Saudi Arabia, angering Jakarta, local media reported on Tuesday.
The ban affects countries including Saudi Arabia – a major destination for Indonesian maids – United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Bahrain and Egypt, and will come into effect in three months, the manpower minister, Hanif Dhakiri, was reported as saying.
in 2011 Jakarta, which has long complained about the treatment of Indonesian maids in the Middle East, had placed a moratorium on sending new helpers to Saudi Arabia after a worker was beheaded.
The new move is meant to be permanent. Maids already in the affected countries will be allowed to stay in their positions.
Indonesia’s anger at the executions of its citizens abroad comes despite it executing seven foreign drug convicts which drew international protest.
“According to the law, the government has the right to stop the placement of migrant workers in particular countries if it is believed that their employment degrades human values and the dignity of the nation,” Dhakiri was quoted as saying by state-run news agency Antara.
He said there were “many problems” with Indonesians working abroad related to “labour norms and human rights violations”.
Dhakiri was referring to the execution in April of two Indonesian domestic workers found guilty of murder, Siti Zainab and Karni binti Medi Tarsim.
The foreign ministry summoned the Saudi ambassador to Indonesia after both executions, complaining Jakarta had not been informed beforehand.
Drug trafficking, rape, murder, apostasy and armed robbery are all punishable by death under the kingdom’s strict version of Islamic sharia law.
Dhakiri also said Indonesia would tighten the placement of helpers to countries in the Asia-Pacific through measures such as auditing training centres and blacklisting rogue agencies.
The president, Joko Widodo, who took office last year, vowed in February that maids would not be sent abroad in future, although he did not mention a date. Previous Indonesian governments have made similar pledges.
As well as the Middle East, Indonesia also sends domestic workers to many parts of Asia, including Singapore, Hong Kong and Malaysia, and has often complained about the treatment of its workers in those countries.
A Hong Kong woman was jailed for six years in February for beating and starving her Indonesian maid and keeping her prisoner, in a high-profile case that drew attention to the abuse of domestic helpers in the financial hub.