Coldest November night since 1985
Temperature of -17.3C recorded in Llysdinam, Wales's chilliest November night on record and UK's coldest in 25 years
Britain experienced its coldest November night for a quarter of a century last night, as forecasters warned that the unseasonably teeth-chattering temperatures will continue well into this week.
Thermometers at Llysdinam, near Llandrindod Wells, Powys, recorded -17.3C, the coldest temperature for the month seen in the UK since 1985, and Wales's chilliest November night ever recorded.
Other particularly cold spots included Shawbury, in Shropshire, with -12.5C; Lough Fea, in Northern Ireland, with -9.2C; and Church Fenton, in North Yorkshire, with -11.9C.
"You are seeing some ridiculously low temperatures – it has been a bit like it is in the middle of Scandinavia," said Michael Dukes, of the forecasters MeteoGroup, adding that matters could get still worse later in the week. "There should be a bit more of a breeze over the next day or two, which will not feel quite as extreme. But then we might see temperatures threaten -20C in the Scottish glens later. This is certainly an extraordinary cold snap."
The UK's lowest ever recorded temperature in November is -23.3C, recorded in Braemar, in the Scottish Highlands, on 14 November 1919.
More than a foot of snow has already fallen in parts of Scotland and northern England, with around a third of that amount seen in areas of central England and Norfolk. More snow, mixed with sleet and rain, is due later in the week.
The Met Office has severe weather warnings in place for a large section of central and eastern Scotland and north-east England due to anticipated further snowfalls.
The weather has made driving conditions treacherous. A woman died yesterday evening after she was thrown from her vehicle in a collision on the A394 road in west Cornwall. A four-vehicle pile-up on the M1 near Sheffield left two people injured.
The AA said it had dealt with around 15,000 breakdowns by the end of yesterday, up 80% on a normal November Saturday.