ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Massive manhunt underway after dead woman's arm and barrel seen in ute A resident says she saw an arm and a barrel in the back of a ute that was later found dumped with the body of a woman inside. Detectives are now wanting to question a 34-year-old man over the discovery.
'The final straw': NT child protection authority probed in death of staffer A coronial inquest into the death of child protection authority employee has heard concerns over the training and work practices of senior staff in the department.
'I ache to hold you close': The love affair between Eleanor Roosevelt and a female journalist Media reports and history books describe the former first lady and Lorena Hickok as "close friends", but the author of new book White Houses says there is no doubt they were in love.
Woman wins Supreme Court fight against bowls club after a disagreement over coleslaw A Sunshine Coast woman wins a costly Supreme Court battle against the Nambour Bowls Club that cancelled her membership and then banned her from the premises after a disagreement over recycled coleslaw escalated.
It's an all-in scrap for progression to the next round as Senegal face off against Colombia in a Group H shoot-out. Follow all the action in our live World Cup ScoreCentre.
Analysis: England vs Belgium: When losing might be better than winning Two of Europe's heavyweights will lock horns to determine who will progress as winners of Group G at the World Cup, but finishing first may not be all it's cracked up to be. Germany humbled by Korea in night of World Cup match drama
'My instincts were right': Postecoglou speaks out on Socceroos' Cup exit Former Socceroos coach Ange Postecoglou adds his voice to the ongoing World Cup post-mortem, urging the nation as a whole to shed its "comfortable position" as an eternal footballing underdog if genuine progress is to ever be made.
'Witness K' and his lawyer charged over East Timor spying revelations Lawyer Bernard Collaery, whose client exposed a secret Australian spying operation in East Timor, says a prosecution launched against them both is an attack on his profession, a "very brave and courageous veteran" and freedom of speech.
Space is full of grease — enough to make A LOT of butter The Milky Way contains about 10 billion trillion trillion tonnes of greasy matter — or enough for 40 trillion trillion trillion packs of butter — according to research from a study by astronomers.
Dodgy Bankwest manager won Hayman Island trip for selling farm loans: As it happened The banking royal commission hears about a Bankwest manager who won a Hayman Island trip for his sales prowess, but left the bank a year later under a cloud of inflated property valuations and fudged customer figures. 'They came hunting for us': Farmer blasts 'bully' bank at royal commission
Opinion: FFA bottled World Cup campaign, as Socceroos were set up to fail The Socceroos' World Cup exit has nothing to do with their formation on the field — Football Federation Australia never gave them a chance to advance in Russia, writes Richard Hinds.
What is thalidomide and why is it dangerous? The death of Australian doctor William McBride, who helped expose thalidomide as a drug that caused birth defects, hit the headlines today. But what is thalidomide, and what exactly did Dr McBride do?
Opinion: Would paying for Facebook make it better? We may find out soon Would you pay a monthly fee — say $10 — to access an advert and tracking-free version of Facebook? Doing so, if only for one group you care deeply about, might improve our collective social media future, writes Seamus Byrne.
Students at the University of Bristol, set up a crowdfunding page to raise money for an inspirational cleaner who encourages students during exams so he can travel to visit his family in Jamaica.
Noelle Martin was just 17 when a Photoshopped image destroyed her 'dignity and humanity' A selfie from Ms Martin's social media account was doctored into sexually explicit pornography. Now there's new hope for victims of image manipulation and revenge porn as WA introduces tough fines and jail terms for perpetrators.
It's been another cold winter day in Melbourne, with temperatures struggling to make it to 10 degrees Celsius. And while it may look like the fog stuck around all day, there's more to it than meets the eye.
Nicknamed for their sad facial expression, gloomy octopuses are in fact having the time of their lives in the steadily warming waters of Tasmania, a joint science study finds.