Flight cancellations already spilling into Wednesday
An East Coast snow storm created headaches Tuesday -- and already for Wednesday -- for air travelers in the Northeast. The disruptions rippled out to affect flights in other parts of the country.
As of 6 p.m. ET, airlines had canceled about 3,000 flights on Tuesday, flight-tracking service FlightAware says. And, with the storm expected to persist into tomorrow, airlines have already grounded more than about 1,100 Wednesday flights -- including about 190 on JetBlue and more than 200 on American and its regional affiliates, according to FlightAware.
More than half of Tuesday's cancellations were "preemptive," as more than 1,900 of the day's tally came before 7 a.m. ET --- and before the first flakes had begun to fall in big cities like New York, Philadelphia and Washington.
The count grew as the storm intensified, and could keep inching up into the evening. Forecasts called for rapidly accumulating snow and strong winds to persist into the evening at busy airports from Washington, D.C., north through Philadelphia, New York and Boston.
LIST: Airline-by-airline weather waiver highlights FLIGHT TRACKER: Is your flight on time? VIDEO: Arctic blast round two, but is it a polar vortex?
Nearly every big U.S. airline waived rebooking fees for most travelers flying through airports affected by the storm. Restrictions apply, but the waivers generally let fliers make one change to their itineraries without the standard change fees or fare recalculations.
As for the flight cancellations, Tuesday's tally was spread across a number of the East's -- and the USA's – busiest airports.
MORE: Delayed flights: What is your airline responsible for? TIPS: What to do if your flight is delayed or canceled
As of 6 p.m. ET, FlightAware calculated that about 30% or more of the scheduled flights had been canceled at seven big airports: Baltimore/Washington (BWI), New York LaGuardia, New York JFK, Newark Liberty, Philadelphia, Washington Dulles and Washington Reagan National. Another busy Northeast airport – Boston Logan – was nearing a 30% cancellation rate by late afternoon.
Also by 6 p.m. ET, more than half of all flights bound for LaGuardia and were canceled and nearly half of those bound to Philadelphia and Newark had been canceled, according to FlightAware. The cancellation rate for arrivals to Boston, BWI, JFK Washington Reagan and Washington Dulles airports all exceeded 30% as of late afternoon.
Nearly every big U.S. carrier operates at least one hub at one of the airports seeing significant disruptions from the storm. United operates two of its busiest hubs at Newark Liberty and Washington Dulles. Delta has big bases at both LaGuardia and JFK airports while both JetBlue and American operate busy hubs at JFK. JetBlue also has a big base at Boston. US Airways counts both Philadelphia and Washington National among its hubs. And BWI is one of the busiest airports in Southwest's network.
Given the importance of those airports, fliers should expect disruptions in those cities to affect flights elsewhere in the country -- even in regions with calm weather. A flight from Los Angeles to Phoenix, for example, could become delayed or canceled if the aircraft or crew scheduled to operate the flight is bogged down in the snowy east.
Such a ripple effect appeared to materialize by mid-day Tuesday, felt as far south as Florida and as far west as California. In Florida, cancellations mounted by noon ET at such airports as Fort Lauderdale and Orlando, with nearly 10% of today's schedules at those airports canceled. In San Francisco, nearly 5% of today's flights have been canceled, according to FlightAware.
While some of those delays may have had local causes, it's likely that a significant portion of those cancellation totals came from flights that had been schedule to operate to or from the Northeast.
As for Wednesday's anticipatory cancellations, the bulk of those are coming from Boston, Philadelphia, Washington Reagan National and the three big New York City-area airports. Hardest hit as of 6 p.m. ET on Tuesday were LaGuardia, Boston, Newark and JFK airports -- where more about a quarter of Wednesday's departures had been canceled.
TWITTER: You can follow me at twitter.com/TodayInTheSky