Elliot Lake mall roof collapse: Excavation gear on its way, Dalton McGuinty says
Premier Dalton McGuinty says heavy equipment, such as grapplers and other excavation gear, will arrive at the Elliot Lake mall collapse Tuesday afternoon. A sombre McGuinty, who has personally intervened in the emergency with calls to local officials and Prime Minister Stephen Harper, is hopeful dismantling the shopping centre from outside will save any victims trapped in the rubble.
“People need to understand there is real risk associated with this,” the premier said in Toronto. “Because of the collapsed building and the structural stresses it is not unlike a house of cards,” he said. “But I thought it was important that we exercise every option, explore every possible avenue.” Assuring residents of Elliot Lake that all 13 million Ontarians have their back, McGuinty said the government is doing all it can.
“Like the people up there and you here I’m sure if that was your Mum or your daughter or your brother and somebody came to you and said how far should we push I think we’d all say we need to go as far as we possibly can to rescue these individual,” the premier said. While he praised rescue workers who have been toiling around the clock since Saturday’s accident, McGuinty said more can always be done. That’s why he spoke with Harper Monday night to see about help from the Canadian Armed Forces if their expertise is needed. The premier stressed he would not be going to Elliot Lake right away unless he thought it would expedite rescue efforts. He is concerned his presence may cause a distraction from the crucial work at hand.
There are “sophisticated robotics” and other high-tech mining excavation equipment en route from Sudbury that should arrive in Elliot Lake within a few hours. At Queen’s Park, Progressive Conservative Leader Tim Hudak credited McGuinty for taking action after the rescue teams decided it was no longer safe to send crews into the collapsed shopping mall.
“The premier was reacting to the vast majority of Ontarians who felt in their gut they didn’t want to give up,” Hudak told reporters. “His reaction was a natural human reaction and I was pleased to hear as a result of the premier’s intervention that they continue the work.” The time for examining why more rescue equipment was not on site sooner and why the decision to halt the rescue effort will come later, he added. “Leave the questions for later, let’s save lives,” Hudak said, suggesting the temporary stand-down in the rescue was made in “the fog of war.” “In my view we should not leave any tools in the toolbox…there are people who are currently living and breathing under the concrete.”