Soldiers evacuate homes after Tadcaster bridge collapses
Military drafted in to help carry out evacuation in storm-hit Yorkshire town after Environment Agency warns of significant risk to life
An evacuation is under way in the north Yorkshire market town of Tadcaster where the authorities warned of a significant risk to life after a historic bridge collapsed into a swollen river.
In one of the most striking images to emerge from the recent storms and flooding, onlookers watched as a large section of the bridge over the river Wharfe fell on Tuesday evening.
As soldiers were drafted in to help carry out the evacuation from homes, the Environment Agency issued a severe flooding warning due to the structural failure of the bridge and urged those in the area to move immediately.
“The situation is serious and there is a significant risk to life,” the agency said. “Please follow the advice of the emergency services and officials in the area.”
Additional emergency services arrived on the scene shortly after the partial collapse of the bridge before 5pm, which also triggered a gas leak.
North Yorkshire police said homes in the town, which is 10 miles from the city of York, were being evacuated either side of the bridge. Those moved out were being taken to a rest centre at Tadcaster Grammar school.
Onlookers ran as a wave rushed towards the bank and a strong smell of gas came from pipes left visible in the gaping hole. The road had been closed due to fears over the structural safety of the bridge, but a small crowd gathered on Tuesday evening as stone could be heard falling into the water and creaking noises were heard.
Johnny Lyttle, a civil Engineer working on flood risk management projects in Yorkshire and the North East, tweeted that the decision to close the bridge due to structural fears had “almost certainly saved lives”.
Tadcaster has been among several towns in the region hit by flooding in recent days. A large cordon around a section of the main road on each side of the bridge was in place last night as police told local people to leave the area due to fears of a gas leak.
Figures from 2004 recorded that the the combined population of Tadcaster East and Tadcaster West was 7,280, with 3,800 in the east and 3,480 in the west.
While it has been redeveloped over the centuries, the bridge was built in about 1700 and was based on the first stone bridge built in 1200, according to Tadcaster council.
The Battle of Tadcaster in 1642 was also fought in the area around the bridge.