ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Emergency crews are evacuating homes in and around Ballarat, as heavy rain falls across the state.
Floodwater has covered many major roads in central and north-eastern Victoria, including several places along the Hume Highway.
The State Emergency Service (SES) says it is getting calls from across Victoria, and has been swamped with calls from people whose homes are inundated at Creswick and Clunes.
SES spokesman Gordon Hicks says people who are worried about rising waters should stay indoors unless they have to leave for medical reasons.
He also urged residents to call crews early if they need help.
"If your house is under threat I suggest taking all your valuables off the floor," he said.
"Make sure you give us a call well and truly before it becomes a definite problem. We are inundated with calls from people saying 'oh the waters about to come in'."
The Bureau of Meteorology says Ballarat received 47 millimetres of rain before 9:00am today.
The ABC's rural reporter for Ballarat and the Central Region, Caleb Cluff, says his property has begun to flood.
"As far as I can see, and I can't get out of my property, the roads are cut both ways to Maryborough," he said.
"We live about 10 or 12 kilometres from Maryborough. There's minor localised flooding and I'm hearing reports that there's heavier flooding back towards Clunes and Creswick."
The SES is currently helping residents at homes in Creswick.
Reports that Creswick nursing home John Curtin Aged Care is being evacuated were refuted by the home's manager.
Flood warnings remain current for much of the state.
The weather bureau has warned that approaching storms could be the most significant weather event in Victoria for the past 15 years.
Heavy rain fell overnight across the state's north, with the highest falls of about 45 millimetres recorded at Mount Buffalo in the north-east.
Last night the bureau said a low-pressure system could bring rainfalls of up to 150 millimetres across the north-west, north and north-east overnight and today, and could cause flooding problems for months.
Stephen King from the Bureau of Meteorology says much more rain is expected today.
"The worst is yet to come if you have a look at the radar there's still plenty of cloud up to our north," he said.
SES state controller Tim Wiebusch says the Ovens and Kings catchment could receive more than 100 millimetres of rain.
He says people should also be aware of dangerous winds.
"Potentially up to 100 kilometres an hour, so we're alerting people for the risk of falling trees and debris being across the road," he said.
Mr Wiebusch is urging people in low lying areas to take precautions in case they become isolated.