Indonesian police chief General Sutarman says he knows what happened to the missing Malaysian Airlines plane
TWO people have come forward claiming they know what caused Flight MH370 to disappear without a trace.
Indonesia’s police chief General Sutarman reportedly told a meeting of airline officials and senior police, “I spoke to the Malaysian Police Chief, Tun Mohammed Hanif Omar. I actually know what had actually happened with MH370.”
Indonesian news organisationKompas.com reported General Sutarman’s comments were witnessed by a number of high-ranking police officers and Lion Air representatives.
It is not clear when the claims were made.
The astonishing comments have sparked concern that officials have always known what caused the Malaysian Airlines plane to vanish six months ago with 239 passengers and crew on board.
Inspector General of Police in Malaysia, Khalid Abu Bakar, said he was shocked at General Sutarman’s statement and promised to question him.
The news comes as an aviation expert claimed MH370’s pilot, Zaharie Ahmad Shah, was responsible for the plane’s disappearance.
Ewan Wilson, formerly the head of Kiwi Airlines, believes Ahmad Shah killed himself and his passengers by switching off the on board oxygen supply.
Wilson claims “mentally ill” Ahmad Shah locked his copilot, Fariq Hamid, out of the cockpit, depressurised the cabin and shut down all communications before turning the plane around.
He added that 53-year-old Ahmad Shah’s “suicide” followed five other “suicide flights” in recent times.
“Ahmad Shah was a man known for his methodical, thorough nature, for his love of the technical, and probably for his ego, too,” Wilson told The Mirror.
“This (crash) would have been his final sad act to his family and to the world: ‘find this one’.”
Wilson, a commercial pilot who was convicted of fraud following the collapse of Kiwi Airlines, made the sensational claims in a new book “Goodnight Malaysian 370” — named after Ahmad Shah’s last broadcast to air traffic control.
Wilson’s book, penned with New Zealand journalist Geoff Taylor, took four months to research.
No trace of the plane has been found.
A new search for the Boeing 777, which was flying from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing when it disappeared, is set to be launched next month.