Tropical Cyclone Stan crosses WA coast bringing heavy rain, strong winds
Tropical Cyclone Stan has weakened to a category one system and is expected to be downgraded to a low as it continues moving inland over Western Australia's eastern Pilbara region.
The cyclone crossed the coast east of Pardoo in the early hours of Sunday, bringing wind gusts of up to 150 kilometres an hour.
Residents between Port Hedland and Wallal, including Marble Bar, Pardoo and Eighty Mile Beach, remain on red alert and are urged to stay indoors.
The weather bureau's Joe Courtney said the system was dumping heavy falls and could cause flashing flooding in parts of the eastern Pilbara.
"It's still likely to cause heavy rain and strong winds as it goes through the interior of the state, so some of the desert communities will feel the impacts of this even going into [Monday] morning as it tracks towards the South Australian border," he said.
"The heaviest rain in the centre probably falls up to around 100 millimetres, we've had totals of 125 millimetres being reported, will be a bit patchy but certainly near the centre itself, falls near 100 mills are likely.
"The highest winds are probably in fairly remote areas at the moment, those winds might affect places like Telfer but certainly more marginal winds in terms of potential for damage now."
The Great Northern Highway between Port Hedland and Roebuck roadhouse is closed to traffic.
Ripon Hills Road from Marble Bar to Telfer and Marble Bar Road to Marble Bar Village are also closed.
Drivers are being urged to travel through the region with caution and to be aware of floodwaters.
The town of Port Hedland has been given the all clear from BoM, indicating any immediate dangers posed by the storm have now passed.
ABC reporter in Port Hedland, Elise Batchelor, said rain had fallen consistently overnight.
"It's been raining overnight and it's still quite steady, there's not wind, just a very steady rain and that will bring relief for people of the town who all prepared for much worse," she said.
Pardoo Station manager Eric Galancho, who came to the Pilbara from San Francisco, said a cyclone for him was "quite an experience".
"I feel confident in the sense that I've got a lot of good people around me who have been through this before," he said.
Stan is the first cyclone of the season for Australia.