Cargo plane crashes during takeoff in Ghana, killing at least 10
The accident happened just before 7.15pm local time in Accra at the Kotoka International Airport, which sits near newly built high-rise buildings, hotels and the country's Defense Ministry.
Witnesses said the Boeing 727 cargo plane first smashed through the fence that runs around the buildings before hitting the bus.
A badly mangled minibus was beside the plane wreckage, and 10 bodies lay nearby, according to witnesses.
Police and soldiers quickly cordoned off the neighborhood where the plane crashed. The area is near to El-Wak Sports Stadium and Hajj Village, where Muslims in the country stay before they journey to Mecca.
Local television showed images of the plane lying across a road with its tail and wings broken off from the body as the flight crew jumped off and received help from emergency responders.
One witness reported seeing the plane come down and hit the bus, killing those inside.
"I closed from work, walking home in the rain, only to see the plane falling and people in the Benz bus crushed to death," said Kofi Anor.
Billy Anaglate, spokesman for the Ghana Fire Service, said that all 10 passengers in the bus were killed on impact. The plane's four crew members appear to have survived the crash and were rushed to a local hospital for treatment.
"What happened is that the Allied (Air) Cargo plane, actually I was told, was traveling from Nigeria to Ghana. At the landing it was short of the boundary, and it went off onto the road side. It crashed into a bus that was bound for Accra," he said.
"... (The plane) broke the barrier and went onto the road and hit the vehicle and unfortunately in the vehicle everyone ended up dying. The poor people were killed."
"I urge you to conduct preliminary investigations as early as possible," Mr Mahama told a press conference on Saturday. "And no early conclusions should be drawn to the cause of the accident."
Ghana, a nation of more than 25 million in West Africa, has not had a major airplane crash in recent years. The last air emergency the country had was in June 2006, when a TAAG Linhas Aereas De Angola flight to Sao Tome hit birds during takeoff. The plane landed safely and none of the 28 people onboard were injured.