Two killed and 83 injured as airplane makes emergency landing at Moscow
Two people have been killed and 83 have been injured after a passenger jet carrying at least 155 people made an emergency landing at a snowy Moscow airport after its engines failed.
The plane skidded off the runway and crashed into buildings, Russian officials said.
The plane, a Tupolev Tu-154 belonging to Dagestan airlines, was forced to land at Domodedovo airport, federal aviation agency spokesman said. The cause of the engine failure was unclear, he said.
Officials had said 155 people were on board, but the emergencies ministry website reported the plane was carrying 168 passengers and eight crew members.
The plane had taken off from another Moscow hub, Vnukovo airport, and was en route to Makhachkala, the capital of Russia's southern region of Dagestan. The pilot received signals that engines had cut out about 80km (50 miles) into the flight at an altitude of 9,100m (30,000 ft), and requested an emergency landing at Domodedovo, south-east of Moscow, an official said.
Federal officials said two people were killed, and the health minister, Tatyana Golikova, said 83 injured people were taken to five hospitals.
The federal investigative committee said two of the three engines had initially cut out, and the third failed as the plane was coming in to land. "The plane slid off the runway and collided with buildings," the statement said.
Passenger Vitaly Chumak was quoted by Russian news agency Interfax as saying the plane broke into three parts after landing and barely missed a fence.
In September a Tu-154 airliner was carrying 72 passengers and nine crew when it suffered an electrical system failure while flying from the northern Siberian town of Polyarnyi to Moscow. President Dmitry Medvedev bestowed awards on the pilot, who landed the plane and avoided casualties, despite rolling into a forest outside an abandoned military base.
The Tu-154 has been the workhorse of the Soviet and post-Soviet civilian aviation industry, first entering service in the 1970s. But after a series of crashes involving the aging fleet raised safety concerns, flagship carrier Aeroflot recently withdrew all of its Tu-154s from service, with the last flight in January.
The midrange jet remains, however, the mainstay of smaller airlines across Russia and the former Soviet Union. It is banned from parts of Europe due to excessive engine noise.
The plane that crashed in heavy fog earlier this year, killing the Polish president, Lech Kaczynski, was also a Tu-154.