Hurricane Irene cancels Martin Luther King Jr celebration
Impending Hurricane Irene has put the dampeners on the the Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial dedication with the event having to be postponed until September or October.
The organisers of the ceremony, which will see the 30ft statue of the late civil rights leader unveiled in Washington DC, announced said they had made the decision in the interests of public safety.
The hurricane which has been battering the Bahamas and Florida is expected to hit the east coast cities of Boston, New York and Philadelphia throughout the weekend and into Monday.
Around 300,000 people had been expected to turn up to the unveiling on Sunday following five days of celebration.
Organisers hope to have the memorial open for Friday and Saturday but said the official dedication, which was due to coincide with 48th anniversary of the famous black leader's ‘I Have a Dream' speech, would have to be postponed.
The opening gala event, at which Preisdent Obama gave a speech, was moved to the Washington Convention Center after the National Building Museum suffered damage in Tuesday’s earthquake.
Public address: Martin Luther King III, left, and Attorney General Eric Holder, right, speak at another event to honor Martin Luther King Jr at the Washington Convention Center on Thursday in Washington D.C. Martin Luther King Jr National Memorial Project Foundation President and CEO Harry Johnson has insisted that the dedication will go ahead as planned in spite of the approaching storm. The general public can only visit the new memorial in Washington D.C. today until 10pm local time before the dedication, as it will be closed on Friday and Saturday to prepare the site. Get to higher ground: Bloomberg tells New Yorkers to prepare... Earthquake? Get over it! West Coast pokes fun at East Coast... The Honoring Global Leaders for Peace international salute gala on Wednesday evening featured a number of well-known politicians, musicians and religious figures gathering together. Former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Reverend Jesse Jackson were both in attendance, as well as the memorial sculptor himself, Lei Yixin. Still on: Martin Luther King Jr National Memorial Project Foundation President and CEO Harry Johnson said that the dedication will go ahead as planned inspite of the approaching storm Maker: Martin Luther King Jr memorial sculptor Lei Yixin, of China, was present at the gala on Wednesday Sweet music: Singer-songwriter India Arie, centre, greets Stevie Wonder, right, during the gala Strength in numbers: Reverend Andy Young, left, Suzan Johnson Cook, ambassador-at-large for International Religious Freedom, centre, and Reverend Jesse Jackson, right, pray together during the gala
Stevie Wonder performed and he was joined by singer-songwriter India Arie, Reverend Andy Young and Suzan Johnson Cook, the ambassador-at-large for International Religious Freedom.
An interfaith service for 3,000 people is also scheduled for Saturday to mark the opening of the memorial - and that has had to be moved from the Washington National Cathedral .
The earthquake cracked spires 300ft above ground so the event will instead be held at the Basilica of the National Shrine, reported the Washington Post.
The formal dedication of the memorial is scheduled for 11am Sunday and event organisers say the venue of the ceremony, which is expected to be attended by President Obama, cannot be moved.
This weekend, many people who worked alongside Mr King in the struggle for justice and equality for black Americans plan to come together again to dedicate the monument built in his honour.
Five years ago, U.S. Representative John Lewis, Rev Young and Rev Jackson broke down in tears as they helped break ground on what would become the memorial on on a cold November day.
'All of us had been to jail, all of us had lived under the threat of violence. We all had that acute sense of social justice. None of us had life insurance, or a retirement plan. But we had each other. And we still do' Rev Jesse Jackson on U.S. Rep John Lewis, Rev Andy Young and himself
They mused together over their last staff meeting before they went to Memphis in April 1968, which would end in King's assassination.
The memory dredged up feelings no one else could fully share.
‘We just looked at each other,’ Rev Jackson said. ‘It was a different moment for us.’
He added: ‘All of us had been to jail, all of us had lived under the threat of violence.
‘We all had that acute sense of social justice. None of us had life insurance, or a retirement plan. But we had each other. And we still do.’