5 dead as historic, 20-inch rain swamps Houston area
Drenching rain, which brought flash floods to much of eastern and southern Texas on Sunday and Monday, deluged Houston, killing five and leading to scores of water rescues.
Harris County Judge Ed Emmett said two people died in a vehicle that ignored barricades at a freeway underpass. He said traffic cameras recorded the vehicle going around the blockade and head into the water. The vehicle didn’t make it through.
Two deaths reported earlier Monday included one man found inside a truck that that drove into high water on a freeway service road.
Harris County Precinct Sgt. Herbert Martinez says crews monitoring the high water on the road saw the man in the 18-wheeler truck drive directly into the water. He says it’s possible the driver may have suffered some kind of medical emergency.
Another man, identified only as a contractor working for the city’s airport system, also was found dead in a submerged vehicle not far from Houston Intercontinental Airport.
In Waller County, west of Houston, the Royal Independent School District confirmed Monday evening that teacher Charles Odum died in rising floodwaters.
Monday was one of the rainiest single days ever recorded in Houston, with nearly 10 inches of rain reported at the city's official weather observing location at the airport as of mid-afternoon.
Hundreds of homes and many major roads were flooded out in the Houston area, forcing schools, governments and businesses to close and causing power outages for thousands of residents.
Many areas reported over a foot of rain. One spot near Houston unofficially recorded as much as 20 inches.
Nearly 900 water rescues were performed in the city of Houston alone, and 1,222 total in the metro area, according to Harris County officials.
The National Weather Service called it a "historic rainfall event" for the region.
A flash flood emergency was in effect on Monday for the Houston area, and the weather service warned residents to stay off the roads.
The city opened several emergency shelters throughout the region, AccuWeather reported.
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner called the flooding "unprecedented" in the city. More than 100 water rescues were performed overnight, he said at a press conference Monday morning.
Seven bayous were over their banks in Houston, Turner said.
The weather service said flooding was ongoing and warned residents to stay out of the floodwater, noting the risk of drowning along with potential encounters with "chemicals, ants and snakes."
Parts of northwest Harris County and the nearby communities saw rates of 2 to 4 inches of rain per hour.
Hundreds of flights at both Houston airports were canceled or delayed.
Several school districts and many government buildings in the Houston area were closed Monday.
The storms were part of a wide weather system that left warnings and watches through Tuesday morning for  Austin, San Antonio, Dallas, Fort Worth, and as far east as Texarkana.
Texas Gov. Greg Abbott says some taxpayers affected by severe rain and flooding will qualify for an extension to file their federal tax returns that were due at midnight.
Abbott said Monday that his office had been in contact with the IRS about pushing the tax filing deadline for those in areas inundated by heavy downpours. More than a foot of rain dumped on parts of Houston and knocked out power to thousands of residents.
The storms were from the same system that walloped the Rockies with heavy snow over the weekend, including more than 50 inches in Pinecliffe, Colo.
In Austin, flash flood watches and warnings were issued; some extend until Tuesday morning.
The weather service issued flood watches and warnings for parts of North, Central and South Texas on Monday. Many areas could see 3 to 8 inches of rain; isolated pockets could get even more.
In the Dallas-Fort Worth area, a flash flood watch remains in the area through Tuesday morning with rain continuing in the forecast through at least Wednesday into Thursday. Road closures have been reported and commuters are urged to exercise caution on roadways.
In Johnson County, south of Fort Worth, more than 30 road closures were reported.
There were also reports of voluntary evacuations underway in the community of Horseshoe Bend in Parker County, west of Fort Worth.