Storm toll: 2 dead, 4 hurt, 450,000 lose power
A powerful and rare summertime windstorm packing 50-70 mph winds is being blamed for two deaths, four injuries and knocking out power to over 450,000 people Saturday afternoon.
A father driving in Gig Harbor with his 3-year-old daughter was killed when a tree fell on his car. He died at the scene; his child was not hurt.
"This is heart wrenching, a father was just taken from their child, husband taken from their wife, certainly just a tragedy just out of nowhere," Gig Harbor Police Chief Kelly Busey said.
About 90 minutes later In Federal Way, a 10-year-old girl was struck and killed by a falling branchwhile attending a sleepover at the Trellis Apartments.
Four others were hurt during the Deuces Wild Triathlon at Joint Base Lewis-McChord Saturday morning when three trees fell. The injured were taken to Madigan Army Medical Center for treatment of non-life-threatening injuries, officials said. Two have since been released while two more are being held overnight for observation.
There were many other tales of close calls amid dozens of reports of downed trees and power lines across the much of the Western Washington lowlands, damaging homes and wreaking havoc on roads and freeways.
In the North Sound, a large tree fell across the northbound lanes of I-5 near 196th Street SW in Lynnwood, striking one car, but no one was hurt. I-5 was also shut down in the southbound direction for a time near NE 145th Street in Shoreline due to downed trees.
Over on I-405, eight trees toppled along the southbound lanes just south of SR-527 in Bothell, according to the WSDOT. There have been multiple reports of trees down on local roads across the region. Several trees toppled in the Olympic National Park, prompting park rangers to close all roads into the park and campgrounds. Puyallup closed all its parks in the city and ordered the closure of the Farmers Market in Pioneer Park.
In Shoreline, power lines fell on a truck at N. 185th Street and Dayton Ave. N, setting the truck on fire. Luckily no one was hurt. In Lacey, firefighters had to don water rescue craft to save two people whose boat overturned on Long Lake. They were safely rescued.
At the peak of the storm, Puget Sound Energy reported about 224,000 people without power while Snohomish PUD estimated over 175,000 outages and Seattle City Light had about 59,000 at their peak. Tacoma Public Utilities reported 20,000 around midday but had restored more than 10,000 of those by late afternoon.
Wind speeds were on par with some of the stronger storms Western Washington typically receives in the late fall and winter, with gusts in the Seattle-Tacoma area reaching 40-50 mph, while gusts to 60-70 mph were common in the North Sound and along the coast. Whidbey Island Naval Air Station reported a gust of 70 mph, while Everett's Paine Field had multiple gusts around 60 mph, peaking at 61 mph. The Coast Guard took a report from a boat in the Rosario Strait that recorded a gust of 81 mph. Lopez Island clocked in at 66 mph and Bellingham hit 58 mph.
Closer to the metro area, Tacoma reported a gust of 54 mph, while Gig Harbor hit 51 mph and Seattle hit a gust of 46 mph. Over on the coast, Westport hit 63 mph while both Forks, Hoquiam and Astoria all hit 62 mph. But the largest gust recorded in the western half of the state belonged to Destruction Island just off the north coast, which measured a sustained wind of 79 mph gusting to 87 mph.
Those kind of wind speeds would do damage in any month, but the damage with this storm was particularly severe because the trees were still heavy and full of leaves. The first windstorm of a season tends to be the one to break off all the more susceptible branches that weakened over the summer, which was especially an issue this summer with our recent dry weather.
Damaging winds were not limited to the western half of the state. The wind gauge at the Yakima training center recorded a gust of 77 mph Saturday afternoon, while Lewiston, Idaho hit 72 mph. Most gusts were in the 40-50 mph range with blowing dust an issue in the Columbia Basin as well.
Winds will continue to ease Saturday night. A series of weaker weather systems are forecast to push through the region for Sunday into much of next week, but strong winds won't be a factor.