Official: Pilot signaled trouble moments before crash that killed 163 in Nigeria
The details emerged as search and rescue crews worked to recover bodies from the wreckage, while authorities searched for the flight data recorders to try to piece together what brought down the plane Sunday, killing all 153 people aboard and at least 10 on the ground.
It was unclear how many people were inside the building and on the street outside at the time of the crash, Mohammad Sani Sidi, the emergency management director, told CNN from the crash site.
Nigeria's National Emergency Management Agency said late Monday that 137 bodies -- including the body of a woman clutching the body of a baby, apparent residents of the area -- had been removed from the crash site. Alexander Bankole, director of search and rescue for the agency, announced at 7 p.m. that the search would be suspended overnight and resume Tuesday morning.
The pilot declared an emergency as the plane was on final approach to Murtala Muhammed International Airport, and witnesses said it appeared the plane was having engine trouble, said Oscar Wason, Dana Air's director of operations.
Wason identified the pilot as an American, but did not release his name or hometown. The co-pilot was from India, and the flight engineer from Indonesia, Wason said.
U.S. citizens were on board the flight, the U.S. State Department said Monday, but the agency did not have an exact number. The consulate in Lagos was working to notify the victims' next of kin, spokesman Mark Toner said.
The flight, bound from the Nigerian capital of Abuja, crashed at 3:43 p.m. (10:43 a.m. ET) Sunday in the neighborhood of Iju Ishaga, just north of the airport, according to the Nigerian Civil Aviation Authority.
Workers also were sifting through the debris for personal effects, trying to match passports, identification cards and other paperwork to the passenger manifest. Technicians took pictures of cell phones, some partially melted.
The airplane that crashed was 22 years old and was purchased from Alaska Airlines. It underwent a routine maintenance checkup every 200 hours, and it had just been inspected three days earlier, Wason said.
The Nigerian aviation authority has not asked Dana Air to ground its planes, though the airline canceled all its flights Monday as show of respect for the victims of the crash, he said.
Nigeria's deadliest air disaster came in July 1991, when all 261 on board a Nigerian Airways airliner were killed when the plane crashed shortly after takeoff in Saudi Arabia.
"Our thoughts and prayers are with the families of guests who were involved in the Dana Air mishap," the airline posted on its website. "May the souls of the deceased rest in peace."
Lagos, with a population of more than 7.9 million people, is one of the fastest-growing cities in the world. It is Nigeria's commercial hub.