Migrant boat capsize off Libya leaves 400 dead
About 400 migrants have died in an attempt to reach Italy from Libya when their boat capsized, survivors said on Tuesday.
The tragedy was the latest in the Mediterranean where the death toll from shipwrecks has surged this year.
The boat, carrying about 550 migrants, flipped about 24 hours after leaving the Libyan coast, according to some of the 150 survivors who were rescued and brought to a southern Italian port on Tuesday morning, Save the Children reported.
Aid workers in Italy believe many children were onboard the boat, with Save the Children's Carlotta Bellini saying the group spoke to several survivors who said young children and teenagers were among those presumed drowned.
"There were also very young people in the group, we believe that adolescents in particular may have lost their lives," she said.
The survivors of the latest shipwreck were mostly sub-Saharan Africans, but no further details were available, a Save the Children spokesman said.
The International Organisation for Migration's (IOM) spokesman in Italy, Flavio Di Giacomo, said his organisation interviewed several survivors, who said there were between 500 and 550 people on board when the ship sank.
"We are continuing to investigate in order to understand how the shipwreck happened," Di Giacomo said.
Laurens Jolles from the UN's refugee office said it was unacceptable that so many desperate people were risking their lives at sea.
"Nine bodies were found and recovered. The others have not been found yet. They're just missing. They're probably on the bottom of the sea, but the 400 makes it a huge accident," she said.
Before this incident, more than 500 migrants died while crossing the Mediterranean from Africa this year, up sharply from 47 in the same period of 2014, the IOM said.
The Italian coastguard said its teams had saved nearly 8,000 people at sea during a series of rescue operations since Friday.
Recent good weather in the Mediterranean has prompted a surge in the number of migrants attempting to reach Italy aboard boats.
An increasingly violent and chaotic situation in Libya, a key jumping-off point for migrants, also helped prompt the huge spike in the number of asylum seekers trying to make it to Europe.
More than 300 drowned in February when attempting the crossing in cold weather and rough seas.
According to Italian authorities, more than 15,000 migrants have arrived in Italy so far in 2015.
There were 15,000 in April alone last year and an average of 25,000 each month between June and September.
Save the Children, the IOM and other humanitarian organisations have called for the European Union to bolster its sea rescue operations before the migrant flows soar during the summer months.
Separately, the EU border control agency, Frontex, said migrant traffickers had fired shots to prevent their wooden boat being confiscated, after rescuers saved the 250 people it was carrying off the coast of Libya.
After the migrants had been transferred, a speedboat approached and its crew fired several shots into the air before the assailants sped away with the empty migrant boat, Frontex said.
The agency said the episode marked the second time this year armed smugglers took back a vessel used to transport migrants following a rescue in the central Mediterranean.