Teen critically hurt in Negev attack; IAF strikes Gaza
Dear Reader, As you can imagine, more people are reading The Jerusalem Post than ever before. Nevertheless, traditional business models are no longer sustainable and high-quality publications, like ours, are being forced to look for new ways to keep going. Unlike many other news organizations, we have not put up a paywall. We want to keep our journalism open and accessible and be able to keep providing you with news and analyses from the frontlines of Israel, the Middle East and the Jewish World.
An anti-tank missile shot from the Gaza Strip directly hit a school bus outside Kibbutz Sa'ad in the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council on Thursday, injuring two people. Defense Minister Ehud Barak ordered the IDF to respond speedily and to attack using all means necessary. An Israeli attack helicopter machine-gunned a target in Gaza City after the missile attack, for the first time since Operation Cast Lead. A Reuters correspondent said the sound of heavy fire from the helicopter was audible in the center of the city.
An emergency information line was opened for the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council: 08-680-6450
IDF forces struck back at various locations throughout the strip. Three people were killed and at least eight people, including a 4-year-old girl were injured in IDF and IAF strikes, Palestinian medics said.An IAF F-16 warplane bombed a major Hamas security compound, rocking Gaza City with a big explosion and wounding at least one person there.In the Negev attack, the 16-year-old was in critical condition after paramedics managed to resuscitate him. He was airlifted to Soroka Medical Center in Beersheba where he was undergoing surgery. Soroka officials said that he was suffering from head injuries.The bus driver was listed in light condition after being hit in the leg. They were the only people on the bus.Magen David Adom has raised its alert level to "Level B," one stage short of the highest level.Local officials in the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council were reporting a barrage of mortar shells and Kassam rockets being fired at the border region following the missile attack.Forty-five rockets and mortar shells on Thursday afternoon were fired into Israel from the Gaza Strip in the span of three hours, according to a tweet by the IDF Spokesperson. Palestinian terror groups claimed that they had fired two longer-range rockets into Israel following the IDF strikes.Children were ordered to in schools and kindergartens with their teachers considering the ongoing mortar and rocket fire.A mortar shell struck a home in the Eshkol Regional Council. The building sustained damage but police said no injuries were reported. Police sealed off roads in the area due to the threat of additional projectile fire. Civilians in the area were asked to remain in their homes.