Killing of boy, 4, by US troops frays Afghan ties further
AfghanPresident Hamid Karzaitoday condemned US troops for killing a four-year-old boy in the southern province of Helmand, in an incident set to add fresh strain to troubled relations between Washingtonand Kabul. Helmand governor Naeem Baloch told Karzai during a meeting in Kabulabout the shooting, which comes as the US and Afghanistanwrangle over a deal to allow some US troops to remain in the country after this year.
The US-led NATOcoalition in Afghanistanissued a statement expressing "deepest sympathies to the family who suffered the loss of a loved one" in the incident on Wednesday and vowing to investigate "what happened and why".
Relations between Washingtonand Kabulhave been poor for years, and negotiations over the bilateral security agreement (BSA) have erupted into a long-running public dispute.
Karzai made a surprise decision not to sign the agreement promptly despite having vowed to do so, leading to the threat of a complete withdrawal of NATOtroops by the end of 2014.
"We condemn the killing of this boy in the strongest terms," presidential spokesman Aimal Faizi told AFP.
"We have been calling for the complete end of military operations in residential areas. This demand has not been taken seriously by foreign troops and the result is civilian casualties including women and children."
Civilian casualties have been one of the most sensitive issues of the 13-year military intervention in Afghanistan, and Karzai has often used accidental shootings and misguided airstrikes to berate foreign countries and stir public anger.
Faizi said a ban on military operations in civilian areas was one of the Afghanconditions of signing the BSA.
"The ball is the US court," he said. "We are waiting for practical steps to be taken to end these operations and for the launch of a peace process. We believe the US can deliver on these demands." Signing the BSA is a precondition for the delivery of billions of dollars in Western aid for Afghanistan, which will hold an election to choose Karzai's successor in April.
In a classified cabled reported by the WashingtonPost this week, US Ambassador James Cunningham said he did not expect Karzai to agree to sign the document before the vote.
The BSA would see several thousand US troops remain in Afghanistanto provide training in the fight against Taliban insurgents after the NATOcombat mission ends in December.