Syrian Forces Press Assault on Northern City
In an interview, he said that both sides were engaged in “a media war,” with each claiming control, but that the situation was similar to what had prevailed in Homs, where government forces controlled about two-thirds of the city and some central neighborhoods were in rebel hands.
A Syrian television channel, Addounia, showed scenes of destruction in Idlib, for which it blamed “foreigners and terrorists,” and showed interviews with nervous-looking residents who praised the Syrian Army for protecting them.
The Syrian military’s expanded campaign in the north came after days of seemingly fruitless diplomatic pressure on Mr. Assad to reach some accommodation with the array of opposition groups aligned against him. , the former United Nations secretary general appointed by the United Nations and the as a special emissary to meet with Mr. Assad, left Damascus this past weekend without an agreement.
At the Security Council on Monday, there was no sign that efforts to reach consensus on a Syria cease-fire resolution had made any progress, with resisting Western efforts to portray Mr. Assad as responsible for the violence that has left more than 7,500 people dead. Russia maintains that the opposition has equal responsibility for the violence.
Reinforcing Russia’s support for Mr. Assad, a senior official in dismissed requests by Western and Arab governments for a halt in weapons shipments to the Syrian Army. Russia is supplying them under existing contracts, the official, Anatoly I. Antonov, a deputy defense minister, said at a briefing for foreign journalists in Moscow.
“We have specialists in Syria and we cooperate militarily with Syria,” he said. “This is not a secret. We have good, solid, military and technical cooperation with Syria. And today, we don’t have a basis to reconsider this military cooperation.”
Syria’s restriction on foreign news coverage of the conflict has made it impossible to independently assess the fighting and differing accounts of casualties and blame. But it was clear from witnesses and activists reached by and telephone on Tuesday that the military’s campaign was intensifying in and around Idlib.
An activist contacted via Skype in the border town of Khan Shaykhoun, about 40 miles from Idlib, reported heavy fighting there. The activist, who gave his name as Derar, said the town had been under heavy shelling since the morning and that he had seen about two dozen soldiers defect and burn a seized tank.
Another activist reached in Syria via Skype, Sami Ibrahim of the London-based Observatory group, said soldiers had stopped a car in Idlib Province and killed all seven occupants, including a child and two men wounded by shelling en route to a private hospital, because the nearest hospital was working with security forces.
Mr. Assad has portrayed the uprising as a crime wave by foreign-backed terrorist gangs, while opposition groups have insisted that his promises of reform and compromise are lies and that he must leave power as part of any cease-fire or peace proposal. The struggle, already the most violent of the Arab uprisings, has increasingly taken on the appearance of a civil war.
Reinforcing that appearance, the main United Nations refugee agency said at least 30,000 Syrians had fled to neighboring countries since the conflict began last March, and at least 200,000 more had been internally displaced.
Illustrating a further danger to fleeing civilians, Human Rights Watch reported that Syrian forces had planted antipersonnel land mines banned by an international treaty on the borders, and that the mines had already caused civilian casualties. Syria is among 37 countries — including Russia and the — that are not signatories to that treaty.
An Amnesty International report on Syria released late Tuesday, based on interviews with Syrians who had fled to , described what it called a system of widespread detention and torture of civilians suspected of antigovernment activity, which the organization said amounted to crimes against humanity that should be prosecuted. The report also noted that armed opposition groups had also committed some abuses.
While his forces were assaulting Idlib, Syrian state television reported that Mr. Assad had issued a decree setting parliamentary elections for May 7, the latest in his series of proffered political reforms. Opposition groups and their supporters called the election announcement a farce.
The announcement came as Mr. Annan said in a statement that he was expecting a response from Mr. Assad to proposals he had made to end the fighting. Mr. Annan has not publicly discussed the specifics of those proposals.
“Once I receive their answer we will know how to react,” Mr. Annan said in a statement. “The killings and violence must cease. The Syrian people have gone through a lot and they deserve better.”
The main exile opposition group, the Syrian National Council, had issued an urgent call on Monday for international military intervention, after activists said soldiers and pro-government thugs had executed dozens of civilians in Homs. The government said its opponents were responsible for those killings.
Internal struggles continue within the Syrian National Council, though, with Reuters reporting Tuesday that three prominent members had resigned because they felt the group was not effective enough. A group member told Reuters that others could leave as well.
But the council also seemed to be having some success overcoming its differences with other groups. A commander of the Free Syrian Army told that it had agreed to coordinate actions with the Syrian National Council. Riyadh al-Assad, the commander, said that the Free Officers, an armed group that had been closer to the council, had joined the Free Syrian Army.