Syrian President Appoints Ex-Minister to Form New Government
President Bashar Assad issued a decree Sunday appointing Adel Safar, the agricultural minister in the resigned government, to form a new Cabinet. 
Syrian security agents have also upped their number of arrests in a bid to quell anti-government protests that have swept across the country for two weeks.
Assad fired his Cabinet last week in an attempt to appease protesters demanding reforms.
The tightening of security is a move to ease pressure Assad's ruling dynasty, which pro-democracy protesters have threatened.
The unrest comes against the backdrop of revolutionary change across the wider Middle East, including Egypt, Tunisia and Libya. The violence in Syria could have implications well beyond the country's borders, given its role as Iran's top Arab ally and as a front line state against Israel.
But according to Reuters, hundreds of protesters still gathered in Douma Sunday to receive those wounded in prior violence.
As 50 wounded arrived in secret police cars overnight in Municipality Square, where five were killed Friday, the crowd chanted "Freedom!".
The death toll from two weeks of protests was around 80 people, after at least seven were killed Friday in clashes with security forces. Authorities began arresting dozens of people, mostly in and around the capital, Damascus, in the hours after the protests broke up and into early Saturday, activists said.
They asked that their names not be used for fear of reprisals.
The extraordinary wave of protests has proved the most serious challenge yet to the Assad family's 40-year dynasty, one of the most rigid regimes in the Middle East. After Assad blamed a "foreign conspiracy" for the unrest and offered limited gestures of reform, protesters who had expected more from him returned to the streets.
In the city of Douma, near Damascus, security forces were taking strict measures and checking identity cards of people trying to enter or leave, a resident said. At least five people were killed in Douma on Friday.
"Some shops are open but there is tension. Many people are staying home," the resident said on condition his name not be published for fear of government reprisals. "There are a lot of security patrols. I have never seen Douma like that."
U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon expressed deep concern about the violence and called on Syria's government to address the "legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people."
The government blamed Friday's bloodshed on "armed gangs." However, the state-run news agency acknowledged for the first time that Syria was seeing gatherings of people calling for reform.
Syria has restricted media access and expelled journalists, including two Associated Press journalists were ordered to leave the country Friday with less than an hour's notice.
Assad inherited power 11 years ago at the age of 34 after the death of his father, Hafez, who ruled Syria with an iron fist for three decades.