Syria Has Used Chemical Weapons, Israel Says
Secretary of State suggested there were mixed messages emerging from Israel, saying that he spoke to Prime Minister on Tuesday morning and that the Israeli leader “was not in a position to confirm” the intelligence assessment. Israeli officials said they would not try to explain the apparent difference between Mr. Netanyahu’s statement and that of his top military intelligence officials.
At the same time, Daniel B. Shapiro, the American ambassador to Israel, said that contingency plans to address the use of chemical weapons in Syria were “very much part” of the discussions between Defense Secretary and his Israeli counterpart here on Monday.
The Israeli intelligence analyst, Brig. Gen. Itai Brun, told participants at a security conference in Tel Aviv that the Syrian government “has increasingly used chemical weapons.” That echoed accusations that Britain and France made in a letter last week to the secretary general of the , calling for a deeper investigation.
“The very fact that they have used chemical weapons without any appropriate reaction,” General Brun said, “is a very worrying development, because it might signal that this is legitimate.”
General Brun’s statements were the most definitive to date by an Israeli official regarding evidence of possible chemical weapons attacks on March 19 near Aleppo, Syria, and Damascus, the capital. Another military official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that the evidence had been presented to the Obama administration but that it had not fully accepted the analysis.
None of the assertions — by Israel, Britain or France — have included physical proof. Experts say the most definitive way to prove the use of chemical weapons is to collect soil samples promptly at the site and examine suspected victims.
A senior Defense Department official noted that “the use of chemical weapons in an environment like Syria is very difficult to confirm.” He added: “Given the stakes involved, low-confidence assessments by foreign governments cannot be the basis for U.S. action. The president has clearly stated that the use of chemical weapons would be a game changer. Thus, we must be absolutely confident of use before determining how to respond.”
That will not be easy. The Syrian government, which has accused insurgents of using chemical weapons and has requested that a United Nations forensics team investigate, has refused to allow that team to enter the country because of a dispute over the scope of its inquiry.
Mr. Kerry, at a meeting of foreign ministers in , urged that members of the alliance be ready to respond if it was determined that Syria had in fact used chemical weapons.
But after his phone call with Mr. Netanyahu he told reporters, “I don’t know yet what the facts are,” adding, “I don’t think anybody knows what they are.”
Israeli military officials insisted at an annual conference of the Institute for National Security Studies, one of the country’s leading research institutes, that after a month of investigations they now understand what happened. General Brun said, “It is quite clear that they used harmful chemical weapons.” He cited “different signs,” including photographs of Syrians “foaming at the mouth.” In a briefing after those comments, another Israeli military official said it was believed that the attacks involved sarin gas, the same agent used in a 1995 assault on the Tokyo subway system that killed 13.
The Syrian attacks killed “a couple of dozens,” the military official said, in what Israel judged as a test by Mr. Assad of the international community’s response. He said that the government had deployed chemicals a handful of times since then, but that the details and effectiveness of those attacks were sketchier.
“Their fear of using it is much lower than before using it,” the official added. “If somebody would take any reaction, maybe it would deter them from using it again.”
The public statements regarding the attacks, made days after the British and French governments wrote to Secretary General of the United Nations saying they, too, had evidence of chemical weapons, could complicate the situation for Washington.
If the United States has been more reluctant than its allies to come to firm conclusions about chemical weapons, it may be because such proof could force Mr. Obama’s hand. In August, the president told reporters that any evidence that Mr. Assad was moving the weapons or making use of them could prompt the United States to act.
“That would change my calculus,” he said. “That would change my equation.”
Mr. Obama’s aides have since amended his statement, saying that he was referring to major use of chemical weapons — akin to what employed against the Kurds two decades ago — or the transfer of weapons to terrorist groups. Mr. Hagel’s spokesman, George Little, said in , , where Mr. Hagel arrived on Tuesday, that the president’s warnings remained in place.
“We reiterate in the strongest possible terms the obligations of the Syrian regime to safeguard its chemical weapons stockpiles and not to use or transfer such weapons to terrorist groups like Hezbollah.”
The United States has made efforts to gather evidence from the field in Syria, but with few apparent results. Majid, a rebel commander from the eastern suburbs of Damascus, said recently that his battalion had been contacted, through intermediaries, by the , requesting samples to be tested for the presence of chemicals. Speaking via from Jordan, and on the condition that he be identified only by his first name for his safety, Majid said that the C.I.A. had requested soil, urine and hair samples from several areas around Damascus.