Obama pulls 33,000 troops out of Afghanistan
Afghanistan withdrawal ... Barack Obama during his televised address from the White House. ‘‘We have around 1500 people in Afghanistan,’’ Ms Gillard said. ‘‘As recently as today the chief of the defence force has confirmed to me that those 1500 Australian personnel are required to acquit our mission in Oruzgan Province. ‘‘In terms of the announcement of the United States our work in Oruzgan Province will continue in the same way.’’ Ms Gillard insisted Australia’s strategy in Afghanistan would not change as a result of the US decision.‘
‘We are working to build up the capacity of the Afghanistan nation to provide for its own security." Mr Obama revealed his plan to Americans during a prime-time TV address from the White House, saying that the US with the help of its coalition partners was meeting its goals in the region. Noting recent heavy losses inflicted by al-Qaeda and the Taliban, Mr Obama said America was beginning the draw-down from “a position of strength”. “Of course, huge challenges remain,” he said. “This is the beginning – but not the end – of our effort to wind down this war."
The draw-down is faster than that speculated on recently by US media, and faster than that recommended by some of the President’s closest advisers, including the retiring Defence Secretary, Robert Gates, and the head of coalition forces in Afghanistan, General David Petraeus. But Mr Obama, who has been looking to balance national security with pressing domestic political needs, said it was time for America “to focus on nation building here at home”. Rallying a country despairing over the slow pace of economic recovery and lingering high unemployment, Mr Obama said: “Let us finish the work at hand. Let us responsibly end these wars, and reclaim the American Dream that is at the centre of our story.” The withdrawals will return American troop numbers in Afghanistan to where they were before the surge that was announced by the president in December 2009. More than 67,000 troops will remain as part of the multi-nation force until at least 2014. Other contributors to the allied mission, namely Britain and Germany, are expected to follow suit. Australia has a force of more than 1500 in Afghanistan.
The US decision coincides with stepped-up diplomatic efforts to broker a peace deal with the Taliban, although progress is reportedly mixed. It also concurs with the views of a majority of Americans who have tired of the decade-long campaign, especially since the US got its man – al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden – who was killed by US special forces in a raid inside Pakistan early last month. Members of Congress have been pushing for a scaling back of US military commitments overseas so that more money can be used to reignite America’s faltering economic recovery. The war this year alone is expected to cost the US more than $US120 billion. The pace of further withdrawals will be dictated by the ability of Afghanistan’s security forces to take control of the country, with Washington hopeful that the bulk of its remaining forces will be able to leave, as planned, by 2014.
Mr Obama said that after the initial draw-down, US troops would “continue coming home at a steady pace as Afghan security forces move into the lead”. “Our mission will change from combat to support. By 2014, this process of transition will be complete, and the Afghan people will be responsible for their own security.” Mr Obama warned against a new isolationist America, claiming the US should not abdicate its lead role in the world. “Some would have America retreat from our responsibility as an anchor of global security, and embrace an isolation that ignores the very real threats that we face,” he continued. “Others would have America over-extend ourselves, confronting every evil that can be found abroad.”
“And even as there will be dark days ahead in Afghanistan, the light of a secure peace can be seen in the distance. These long wars will come to a responsible end."