As NATO Airstrikes Continue, Libya Stokes Its Propaganda Machine
With no way of stopping the airstrikes, it seems as though the hidden power of the government’s intelligence and security agencies has been turned to persuading world opinion — above all, opinion in the NATO countries carrying out most of the airstrikes, the , and — that the strikes’ main victims, and often the intended targets, are civilians, and not military, as NATO has said.
But so far, the Qaddafi effort has fallen far short. Rather, the pattern reporters have seen on officially guided bus trips, often in the middle of the night, is of strikes that have been eerily precise, with the targets mainly military encampments or command-and-control “modules,” like the Bab al-Aziziya command compound in central Tripoli.
The compound was subjected to some of the heaviest daylight bombing of the war on Tuesday, with at least half a dozen massive strikes.
Civilian damage, where there has been any, has been mainly in the form of blast and shockwave impact on nearby buildings. Where civilian buildings have been hit, they appear to have been empty, and linked in some way to the military targets.
Sightings of civilian casualties have been rare, though not for want of official endeavor. But 11 weeks into the airstrikes, the government minders’ credibility, at least among foreign reporters, has worn perilously thin.
Visits to bombing sites, hospitals and funerals have produced a succession of blunders, including patients identified as bombing victims who turned out not to be, empty coffins at funerals and burials where some of those interred turned out not to be airstrike victims at all.
On Sunday, the enterprise appeared to have topped itself. In the morning, reporters were taken to a Coptic Christian church in the eastern Tajura district, where a stained-glass window had been blown out by bombs or missiles that struck a military encampment next door. Though vehemently denied by the minders, that much was confirmed to reporters, innocently, by a 9-year-old daughter of a priest.
In the evening, the reporters were taken to a farmyard with a dead dog and a cluster of dead chickens, then to a hospital where a 7-month-old girl, unconscious on a bed, was displayed as a victim of the airstrike that killed the animals. But a medical staff member slipped a note in English to a reporter saying that the girl was, in fact, the victim of a car accident.
On Monday, Khalid Kaim, the deputy foreign minister, offered a halting apology, saying some Libyans incensed by the airstrikes had become “overenthusiastic” in talking to reporters. “This is not the government policy,” he said. “Maybe they are searching for something, and they made a mistake.”
But a more fitting epitaph may have been the admonition offered by a government minder who tried to stop Western TV crews from going into the church’s courtyard and filming the pile of bombing debris in the adjacent plot, the one identified by the girl as a military installation.
“,” the minder replied mirthlessly, “it is a big ridiculous.”