Syria unrest: 'Eleven protesters killed in Hama'
Syrian troops have reportedly shot dead at least 11 anti-government protesters in the city of Hama.
Clashes in the central city continued for a second day on Tuesday as residents burned tyres and erected barriers to prevent tanks entering.
At least 20 people were arrested on Monday as troops sought to reassert control over the central city.
Hama was the scene of the suppression of an uprising against President Bashar al-Assad's father in 1982.
There were reports that Tuesday's attacks centred on two districts north of the Orontes River, which divides the city of some 800,000 people.
Residents said the dead included two brothers, Baha and Khaled al-Nahar, Reuters news agency reports.
The reports cannot be independently verified as the Syrian authorities have banned most foreign media from the country.
"There is an open civil defiance in Hama," Rami Abdul-Rahman, the London-based director of the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, told the Associated Press news agency.
Continue reading the main story Hama - a bastion of dissidence - occupies a significant place in the history of modern Syria. In 1982, then-President Hafez al-Assad, father of Bashar, sent in troops to quell an uprising by the Sunni opposition Muslim Brotherhood. Tens of thousands were killed and the town flattened. The operation was led by the president's brother, Rifaat. Similarly, current President Bashar Assad has turned to his own brother, Maher, who commands the army's elite Fourth Division, to deal with the unrest. Hama, with a population 800,000, has seen some of the biggest protests and worst violence in Syria's 2011 uprising.
"There is a kind of determination not to submit to any tanks or military vehicles," he added.
He told Agence France Presse that at least 35 people had been wounded in the clashes.
On Friday, the city saw some of the biggest demonstrations yet against the rule of President Assad.
A day later, Mr Assad sacked local governor Ahmad Khaled Abdel Aziz for reportedly failing to suppress the protests.
Activists say more than 1,350 civilians and 350 security personnel have been killed across Syria since protests began in mid-March.
The opposition has refused to take part in any dialogue while the violence continues.
The French foreign ministry has condemned the violence.
"Yet again, the Syrian regime has chosen repression and the use of armed forces against its population, which only wants the right to exercise its fundamental rights," it said in a statement.
Ministry spokesman Romain Nadal said the world could not stand "inactive and powerless" in the face of the violence, adding that he hoped the Security Council would adopt a "clear and firm position" on Syria in the light of the "unacceptable, ferocious and implacable armed repression".
Syrian activists have suggested that the symbolism of a crackdown in Hama - where at least 10,000 people died when a Muslim Brotherhood uprising against then President Hafez al-Assad was crushed by the army in 1982 - made it unlikely.
"Assad may wait to see whether large-scale protests in Hama continue. He knows that using military aggression against peaceful demonstrations in a symbolic place like Hama would lose him support even from Russia and China," activist Mohammad Abdallah told Reuters from Washington.
President Assad is facing the most serious challenge to his family's four-decade ruling dynasty in Syria.
The uprising shows no sign of letting up despite a deadly government crackdown that has brought international condemnation and sanctions.
His administration has blamed a "small faction" of "saboteurs" of exploiting popular grievances.
Send your pictures and videos to yourpics@bbc.co.uk or text them to 61124 (UK) or +44 7624 800 100 (International). If you have a large file you can upload here.