Las Vegas car crash: Police say woman with toddler aboard 'intentionally' rams dozens of pedestrians
A woman with a toddler in her car has "intentionally" rammed into pedestrians on the packed Las Vegas Strip, killing one person and injuring at least 26 others, police say.
"This was not an act of terrorism ... we've ruled that out," deputy police chief Brett Zimmerman told reporters, adding that an investigation was underway.
"We have determined that this is an intentional act."
Peter Boffelli from the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department said it was not immediately clear if the female driver was impaired.
He said she was being interviewed and tested for drugs and alcohol.
Police described her as an African American woman in her 20s who was driving a 1996 Oldsmobile with Oregon license plates.
"She went up off the street, onto the sidewalk, two or possibly three times," Las Vegas police lieutenant Dan McGrath told reporters.
He said the woman was expected to be charged within hours.
Urging more eyewitnesses to come forward, police said the driver was not from Las Vegas and had been there for at least a week.
The toddler in the car was unharmed, they said.
"This is a huge tragedy that occurred on our strip," Mr Boffelli said.
An 11-year-old was among the injured, along with visitors from Montreal, Canada, University Medical Centre spokeswoman Danita Cohen said.
The crash occurred shortly after 6:30pm (local time) between Planet Hollywood, where the Miss Universe pageant was taking place, and the Paris Las Vegas Hotel.
Citing a witness, local media outlet 8 News NOW said some men tried to stop the car.
The suspect initially left the scene, it reported.
Witness Rabia Qureshi, a tourist from Wisconsin, told the local NBC station KSNV that the vehicle in question looked like "a bowling ball and the human bodies were like pins".
"You think it's a show, because you're in Vegas," she said.
"But then I saw some people fly in the air."
Police warned people to avoid the area and said the strip had been closed to traffic in the vicinity.
The United States is on high alert after 14 people were killed in an attack in the Californian city of San Bernardino earlier this month.