Myanmar's sectarian clashes claim more lives
The death toll climbed again in Myanmar's volatile west on Friday as sectarian clashes between Buddhists and Rohingya Muslims that have seen thousands of homes set ablaze flared for a fifth day.
The continuing violence occurred despite authorities sending extra security forces to the state of Rakhine to clamp down on the unrest -- and casts a shadow over recent reforms in the Asian nation.
At least 64 people have died in clashes across six townships over five days, Rakhine state spokesman Win Myaing said Friday. Almost half those killed were women.
Several people were also injured Friday when security forces opened fire to disperse a crowd, the spokesman said. The injuries were unintentional, he added.
Local resident Aung Min Khaing, 25, was one of 27 people treated Friday at the hospital in Sittwe, the capital of Rakhine state.
Khaing, from Minbya township, told CNN he was struck in the arm and back by bullets but wasn't sure who had opened fire -- the security forces or Rohingyas.
The situation across Rakhine state was not much worse than a day earlier, Myaing said, although some houses in Yanbye Township were set on fire.
Rakhine is home to the Rohingya, a stateless Muslim minority who say they have been persecuted by the Myanmar military during its decades of authoritarian rule. Myanmar does not recognize them as citizens.
Unrest between the majority Buddhists and the Rohingya has tested efforts of President Thein Sein's administration to seek reconciliation with Myanmar's different ethnic groups and move the country toward more democratic governance.
The president's office warned Thursday that "manipulators" behind the violence can expect to be found and prosecuted.
No ban has been put in place on celebrations for the Muslim holiday of Eid al-Adha, the president's office said Friday. However, Yangon's regional government said it could only promise security for Eid celebrations in certain places.
Overnight curfews, in effect since a severe outbreak of communal violence during May and June, have been lengthened in several townships, said Myo Than, manager of Rakhine state government's information department.
The clashes between Buddhists and Rohingyas during the summer killed at least 88 people -- mostly Rohingya -- according to state-run media.
That violence erupted after police detained three Muslim men on accusations they raped and killed a Buddhist woman. Clashes spread, prompting the government to deploy the military to restore order.
Hundreds of Rohingyas tried to cross the border into neighboring Bangladesh but were turned back. Bangladesh said it already had too many Rohingya refugees, estimating that about 300,000 live in the country.
Those who lost their homes have had to live in refugee camps. About 75,000 people were displaced, according to the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Myanmar.