Another Greek tragedy: Blast damages Athens court building
A powerful bomb detonated outside a court building in central Athens Thursday morning, causing much damage but no injuries, police said.
The authorities found the device and cordoned off the area around the Athens administrative court after calls to the private television station Alter and the daily newspaper Eleftherotypia at 7:40 am warned that a bomb would go off there in 40 minutes.
"In both cases, the caller said the device had been strapped to a scooter outside the courthouse and gave the scooter's registration number. The explosion occurred two minutes after the deadline," an officer at the Athens police headquarters said, adding that police bomb disposal experts had gathered the remnants of the device and the scooter and were examining them.
A local resident told the private television station Skai that he had seen two men dressed in police uniforms pull up near the court building on a motorcycle about 6:30 am. The witness said he greeted the men, who told him they were abandoning the scooter because it had engine problems. The witness added the pair then got into a white van parked nearby and were driven away by a third person.
The explosion damaged the facade of the court building as well as several cars, and also blew out windows in nearby apartment buildings.
Shortly before the bombing in Athens, a much smaller explosion occurred outside the Greek Embassy in Buenos Aires in the middle of the night.
The officer said it was too early to determine which of the several guerrilla organizations might have orchestrated the attack. He said another anonymous call made to Eleftherotypia nearly an hour after the explosion had warned that a second bomb would go off at a tax office in southern Athens. By midday there had been no other explosion.
Please read our before posting comments
indianexpress.comindianexpress.com TERMS OF USE: The views expressed in comments published on indianexpress.com are those of the comment writer's alone. They do not represent the views or opinions of The Indian Express Group or its staff. Comments are automatically posted live; however, indianexpress.com reserves the right to take it down at any time. We also reserve the right not to publish comments that are abusive, obscene, inflammatory, derogatory or defamatory.