Syrian troops fire during protest in Latakia after Assad's speech
Update at 11:48 a.m. ET: Al-Jazeera TV quotes one witness as saying the clashes broke out in front of the mayor's office in Latakia, where 12 people were killed last week during protests. The witness says the latest unrest broke out within an hour after President Bashar Assad's speech in Damascus.
Update at 11:17 a.m. ET: Witnesses say Syrian troops fired today during a protest in Latakia, the AP reports. It is the first reported clash between security forces and demonstrators since a morning speech by President Bashar Assad, who promised job opportunities. Assad blamed much of last week's popular protests on "conspirators."
Witnesses, who asked to remain unidentified for security reasons, say police fired during the protest by about 100 people — although it was not immediately clear whether they were firing in the air or at the protesters, the AP reports.
Update at 11:06 a.m. ET: Al-Jazeera TV reports that Syrian activists are very disappointed with Assad's speech and have called for more demonstrations after Friday prayers.
Update at 8:28 a.m. ET: President Assad addressed the violence in Daraa last week in which scores of protesters were killed by security forces.
He said police were under orders not to fire on citizens in the southern city but some decisions may have been made at the spur of the moment amid the chaos.
"It is important to find the reasons and causes and investigate and hold accountable those responsible if there have been actions that led to bloodshed," Assad said.
At least 61 people were killed during protests around the country last week.
Update at 8:13 a.m. ET: President Assad announces salary increases and says new measures will be presented for "combating corruption and increasing job opportunities."
Taking a swipe at Arab TV news channels such as Al-Jazeera, Assad says the "satellite channels try to distort the clear facts. They lie and then they believe their own lies."
Update at 8:06 a.m. ET: President Assad notes that Syria is being affected by popular unrest and the "wave of energy" in neighboring Arab countries. "There remains the question: This wave -- is it leading us or are we leading it?"
Update at 8:02 a.m. ET: President Assad says "we do need reforms" but addressing public demands should not be seen as a sign of weakness. "The needs of society are the right of the society, and the state is obliged to fulfill those demands," says Assad, who is often interrupted with standing ovations or shouts of approval from members of parliament. He blames some of the popular discontent on poor communication between the government and the people. "We sometimes fail in marketing our ideas. Sometimes they are misunderstood as well."
Update at 7:54 a.m. ET: President Assad says a conspiracy has tried to drive a wedge between sects, "trying to incite each side against the other."
Update at 7:47 a.m. ET: President Assad says the people have called for needed changes but many have been misled. He says there has been a "strong sabotage" in the country.
Update at 7:36 a.m. ET: Assad says conditions in Syria are a "test to our unity," and he lashes out at "conspiracies" in the country.
Earlier posting: Syrian President Bashar Assad is making his first public address to his country since the eruption of a widespread, deadly public uprising.
He entered the Syrian parliament chamber to a rousing reception by MPs.
Monday, Assad -- whose father ruled the country with an iron fist for 30 years -- accepted the resignation of his Cabinet.