Yemen: At least 10 children reported dead in school air strike
A spokesperson for the aid group Medicines Sans Frontiers (MSF) says their staff in northern Yemen received the bodies of at least 10 dead children after Saudi-led coalition warplanes bombed a school.
MSF said 21 children, all under 15 years of age, were admitted with injuries in the town of Haydan, near Saada.
"A bit before 10:00am we received the first 15 children," Hassan Boucenine, the MSF head of mission in Yemen, told the ABC.
"Relatives, neighbours brought them to the hospital."
Mr Boucenine said the children who were killed died of multiple trauma and head injuries. He called on all parties to respect civilians.
"Civilian infrastructure, such as schools and hospitals, must be respected. This war is now claiming a greater number of civilian lives and it must stop."
In a statement the UN children's agency, UNICEF, said the children who were killed were aged between six and 14 years old.
They were studying in a religious school in the Juma'a Bin Fadil village in Haydan.
The UN agency said they had verified seven deaths so far but that "bodies are still being pulled out of the rubble and the death toll is expected to increase".
"With the intensification in violence across the country in the past week, the number of children killed and injured by airstrikes, street fighting and landmines has grown sharply," UNICEF said.
"UNICEF calls on all parties to the conflict in Yemen to respect and abide by their obligations under international law.
"This includes the obligation to only target combatants and limit harm to civilians and civilian infrastructure."
Local journalists in the town of Saada posted graphic photos of dead children lined up in a row on social media, saying the school had been bombed by Saudi-led coalition jets.
A spokesman for the Saudi-led coalition had no comment on the attack.
Saudi Arabia and its allies have launched thousands of air strikes against the Houthis since they drove the internationally recognised Government into exile in March 2015.
The UN accuses the coalition of targeting civilians, with 2,000 believed to have been killed in the airstrikes.
Saturday's (local time) incident in Saada comes after 13 civilians in the capital Sana'a were killed on Tuesday after Saudi aircraft bombed a potato chip factory.