At least 29 killed in Yemen army&sbquo Qaeda clashes
It’s difficult to understand why a car’s behaviour changes after a change of owners Many people believe that there is a soul in all living things and some even believe that there is a spirit in inanimate things like mountains, rocks or streams. Many people also develop such attachments ...
Mars rover still silent as red planet dust storm goes global CAPE CANAVERAL: A dust storm at Mars is now global, keeping NASA's Opportunity rover out of touch with Earth. Flight controllers lost contact with the rover more than a week ago. At the time, the dust storm covered one-fourth of Mars. NASA said Wednesday the storm now encircles the red planet...
More than 200 people killed in weekend violence in central Nigeria JOS, NIGERIA: More than 200 people were killed over the weekend in violence in central Nigeria's Plateau state, the state governor said, making it one of the bloodiest clashes in the months leading up to an election. Police previously said 86 had been killed. There has been a spike i...
KATHMANDU: Helping its students gather practical knowledge on different aspects of research, the Central Department of Anthropology (CDA), Tribhuvan University (TU) organised a two-day field visit to Tinthali, Kavrepalanchowk on May 26 and 27. The IInd and IVth Semester students pursuing Mast...
Heat-stable drug could save thousands from post-childbirth bleeding: WHO LONDON: A new formulation of a drug to prevent excessive bleeding in women after they give birth could save thousands of lives in poorer countries, according to a study co-led by the World Health Organization (WHO). The drug, called carbetocin and made by Ferring Pharmaceuticals, could prove ...
Not just heat: Climate change signs can be seen all around WASHINGTON: You don’t just feel the heat of global warming, you can see it in action all around. Some examples of where climate change’s effects have been measured: Glaciers across the globe are melting and retreating, with 279 billion tons of ice lost since 2002, according to NASA’s...