Bahrain Grand Prix: Force India come close to withdrawing
Force India came within an ace of pulling out of the Bahrain Grand Prix it was revealed last night as a protester’s death rocked the year’s most controversial race.
Until now it had been thought that the Northamptonshire team sat out second practice on Friday in concern over their brush with petrol bombers on Wednesday.
But last night it was revealed the team’s bosses had fought a desperate battle with a rattled, worried and ­annoyed crew ready to return to Britain and the move was a compromise.
After the team’s refusal to take to the circuit, sources reported there was a confrontation between F1 ringmaster Bernie Ecclestone and Force India team boss Robert Fernley.
The cars spent the session on jacks and the outfit left as soon as contracted media obligations had been met.
And yesterday their cars were ­mysteriously absent from TV coverage by ­Ecclestone’s Formula 1 Management, which broadcasts F1.
It is unusual for a team not to appear even once, especially as Scot Paul Di Resta qualified an impressive 10th and teammate Nico Hulkenberg, 13th.
Paddock sources were in no doubt it was ­intentional.
Fernley refused to comment, but ­Ecclestone said: “I was busy and didn’t notice Force India were not on. I will look into it. It could be technical, but I suspect it was more to do with the ­Bahrain laws on no alcohol advertising. They have a whisky company ­prominently on the car. They should have taken it off.”
Force India cars display sponsor Whyte & MacKay on the nose while other teams in the paddock removed them in Muslim countries such as ­Bahrain, UAE and Turkey under an agreed code of conduct. McLaren ran without Johnnie ­Walker, Sauber ­removed Tequila ­sponsor Cuervo, but Red Bull kept Singha, which is also the name of an umbrella company.
Sunday Mirror understands, though, that Force India had been given the go-ahead to run with the whisky brand on their cars. And some speculated that Force India’s removal from the screens for an hour was Ecclestone’s revenge as he tries to hold together a worried sport, caught in an escalating conflict.
Force India sat out the practice ­session to show their discontent and sources told the Sunday Mirror there was a risk almost the entire team, backed by upset wives, girlfriends and worried families, could have walked out on Sakhir ­entirely. As it was two members of the team were allowed to fly home.
One source described the state of the team on Thursday and Friday as ­“fragile and emotional”.
Other team members in the lower half of the grid have been concerned at the low levels of security they have been ­offered. While leading teams like Ferrari and McLaren have been staying at the plush Sofitel close to the circuit behind a ring of steel, poorer teams have been forced to brave the troubles in the 20 mile drive to their hotel in the embattled city and its suburbs.
Ecclestone has publicly offered to ride back with teams, after dark and without security. “The Bahraini people are some of the politest people in the world,” he said. “I love it here.”
Police yesterday confirmed the first death in a week of confrontations. Salab Abbas Habib, 36, was found dead in the village of Shakhuran not far from the scene of one of the largest protests. As it is, the race is set to go ahead today, despite threats of a track protest.