ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Syrian forces have launched a fresh assault on the site of last week's Houla massacre, forcing villagers to flee heavy shelling in fear of more carnage.
Machine gun fire was followed in the afternoon by shelling that targeted homes near where more than 100 people were killed on Friday and Saturday, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.
The watchdog said smoke was seen billowing above the village as residents escaped to other towns in the region "for fear of a new massacre".
Syria's opposition called for UN observers to rush to the area to protect residents.
"The murderous regime is currently carrying out bombing of Houla ... using tanks and shells," the Syrian National Council, the main opposition coalition, said.
"The council calls on UN observers to travel quickly to Houla and put pressure on the regime to stop the bombing and protect civilians who are still there.
"People are calling in distress following the regime's brutal attack on their community, especially after the army's withdrawal of roadblocks, which usually signals the beginning of attacks."
The weekend massacre of 108 people, mainly women and children has sparked international outrage, with Western nations expelling Syrian diplomats and ramping up talk of further sanctions.
A new video released by activists shows survivors of the horror describing gunmen herding whole families into rooms and killing them in cold blood.
"They entered our homes ... men wearing fatigues herding us like sheep in the room and started spraying bullets at us," said an apparently injured woman in the video.
"They are all shabbiha [militia] of Assad. They came to us from (the nearby villages of) Fela and Sharklia. They are Alawite pigs. They attacked us and said 'Die you pigs', and left."
Renewed attacks on Houla came as monitors deplored the discovery of 13 more bodies, apparently killed execution-style with their hands bound, in Assukar in the country's east.
UN mission chief Major General Robert Mood said the bodies had been found on Tuesday night (local time).
"All the bodies had their hands tied behind their backs and some appear to have been shot in the head from a short distance," he said in a statement.
The veteran Norwegian peacekeeper said he was "deeply disturbed by this appalling and inexcusable act".
The Assad regime has denied any involvement in the Houla killings, blaming them as it regularly does on "terrorists".
Australia, the United States, Britain, France and other Western nations have expelled Syrian diplomats in the wake of the Houla massacre, while France also floated the idea of armed intervention to protect civilians.
French president Francois Hollande said on Tuesday he did not rule out military intervention, provided it was approved by the UN Security Council.
In Australia, Foreign Minister Bob Carr also said military intervention was worth discussing, but warned of the significant challenges involved in getting it off the ground.
But Germany said it saw no grounds to speculate on military options in Syria.
German foreign ministry spokesman Martin Schaefer said UN-Arab League envoy Kofi Annan's peace plan was the "best of all possible" options for action and warned of the need to avoid the unrest "spreading like wildfire in the region".
Russia also voiced its opposition to the "counterproductive" expulsion of Syrian envoys from Western nations
Its foreign ministry said the expulsions would only damage existing efforts to end the 14-month crisis through talks.
Meanwhile Syria gave a top diplomat from the Netherlands 72 hours to leave the country, according to Syrian state television.
The expulsion of the Dutch chargé d'affaires marked the exit of one of the few top-level representatives of Western countries left in Damascus.
Syrian rebels have given President Bashar al-Assad a 48-hour deadline to abide by a UN backed international peace plan to end violence, or face consequences.
A spokesman for the rebel Free Syrian Army said the rebels would be "free of all commitment" if the regime did not comply.
He said rebel fighters would defend Syrian villages and cities.
The Syrian National Council said the only way for the peace plan to be saved was for Mr Assad to resign.
"An international understanding for Assad's stepping vdown is the only way to save Annan's plan and the political solution; otherwise the situation is on the verge of explosion and will threaten the entire region," SNC chief Burhan Ghalioun said.
In a statement issued after a telephone conversation with German foreign minister Guido Westerwelle, Mr Ghalioun stressed the "necessity that the international community moves quickly to put an end to the massacres".
Either the international community should "work with Russia to overcome the division in the Security Council, or with the Friends of Syria" group, the statement added.
Yesterday, China restated its opposition to armed intervention in Syria while Russia sought to halt fresh UN Security Council action.
"China opposes military intervention in Syria and opposes regime change by force," foreign ministry spokesman Liu Weimin said in Beijing.
With Russian and Chinese support, the Security Council on Sunday strongly condemned the Syrian government for using artillery in Houla.
But Russia, which along with China had vetoed two earlier Security Council resolutions highly critical of Mr Assad's regime, says it is "premature" for the council to consider new action.