Tony Blair had way out of Iraq invasion, Chilcot inquiry told
As former PM is recalled to give further evidence, notes reveal Jack Straw argued there was 'one last chance to avoid war'
Tony Blair was offered a way out of attacking Iraq at a secret meeting with his foreign secretary Jack Straw eight days before the invasion, according to documents lodged with the Chilcot inquiry, which tomorrow will question the former prime minister for a second time.
An anonymous official told the inquiry: "I recall a meeting with the prime minister where the foreign secretary [Straw] made the argument ... for the UK military not being involved.
"The point the foreign secretary was making, in my view, was that this was the final opportunity to decide on a different track – advising the prime minister that he still had a chance to avoid it if he wanted to ... The argument he was making was more in terms of, 'If you want to avoid your own resignation, prime minister, you still have an opportunity and here it is. You have a way out and why don't you take it?'"
The note by the anonymous official continues: "It was offering the prime minister a way out if he wanted it ...The thing that I was absolutely struck by privately was the prime minister's response, the speed of it and the absolute insistence of it, and the fact that he had got his arguments all marshalled and all laid out."
The meeting between Blair and Straw, attended by officials at No 10, is described as "very personal" and was not officially recorded.
Tomorrow, Blair is expected to be questioned about conversations with his ministers, and about any private assurances to George Bush about Britain joining the US-led invasion.
The credibility of the inquiry for many observers will stand or fall on what the five-member inquiry panel, armed with documentary evidence that the public is being prevented from seeing, will be able to extract from Blair.
The inquiry summoned Blair back after hearing discrepancies in earlier evidence casting doubt over his public remarks about when, and in what circumstances, Britain would go to war, and what he was told by the government's chief law officer about the legality of an invasion.
Crucial evidence is contained in notes sent to Bush described by Sir John Chilcot as providing "important and often unique insights into Mr Blair's thinking and the commitments he made to President Bush, which are not reflected in other papers". The notes, said Chilcot, "illuminate prime minister Blair's positions at critical points".
In one of three letters he wrote to Sir Gus O'Donnell, the cabinet secretary, requesting permission to publish Blair's notes, Chilcot insisted: "The question of when and how the prime minister made commitments to the US about the UK's involvement in military action in Iraq, and subsequent decisions on the UK's continuing involvement, is central to its considerations."
After consulting Blair, O'Donnell told Chilcot that the notes could not be disclosed on the grounds that "exchanges between the UK prime minister and the US president represent particularly privileged channels of communication, the preservation of which is strongly in the public interest".
One of Blair's private secretaries, Matthew Rycroft, said in private evidence released by the inquiry this week that the former prime minister regarded the notes he sent to Bush as part of a "personal dialogue" and they were deleted from the official record.
Blair wrote the notes after a succession of meetings with Bush. Witnesses to the inquiry have indicated that Blair made clear to Bush from April 2002, nearly a year before the invasion, that he was committed to overthrowing Saddam Hussein with or without UN security council backing, and despite official legal advice that military action would be in breach of international law.
One of Blair's notes is believed to relate to a two-hour White House meeting with Bush on 31 January 2003. A memo written by Sir David Manning, Blair's chief foreign policy adviser and stamped "extremely sensitive" records that the US president was determined to invade Iraq without a new UN resolution. Extracts of it were subsequently leaked.
"Our diplomatic strategy had to be arranged around the military planning," wrote Manning. "The start date for the military campaign was now pencilled in for 10 March ... This was when the bombing would begin." According to the memo, "the prime minister said he was solidly with the president and ready to do whatever it took to disarm Saddam".
The meeting and the assurances Blair gave to Bush are linked directly to the second major issue behind the decision to recall Blair: his attitude to the advice he was getting from the attorney general, Lord Goldsmith. According to a document released to the inquiry, the day before the 30 January 2003 White House meeting Goldsmith warned: "My view remains that a further [UN] decision is required." Blair wrote in the margin: "I just don't understand this."
The inquiry asked Goldsmith whether a statement by Blair to the Commons earlier in January 2003 that a fresh UN resolution was not necessary was "compatible" with the advice he gave the former prime minister. "No," replied Goldsmith.
Goldsmith reveals that as early as October 2002 he learned that Blair "had indicated to President Bush that he would join the US in acting without a second [UN] resolution." Goldsmith told the inquiry: "I thought that such action by the UK would be unlawful."
The Chilcot inquiry was announced by Blair's successor, Gordon Brown, in June 2009 after the remnants of the British military presence finally left Basra amid continuing controversy over the country's role in the invasion of Iraq.
It was not welcomed by Blair. Brown was advised by a reluctant Whitehall to set up an inquiry of privy councillors that would meet in secret. The outcry that followed the initial decision to hold a new inquiry behind closed doors helped to persuade Sir John Chilcot, and later Brown, that it should be held in public after all – subject to a process allowing Whitehall to have the final word.
Sceptics were not encouraged by the make-up of the five-member inquiry panel, all from the establishment. They were further dismayed by the apparently cosy atmosphere in which the witnesses were questioned.
However, before the inquiry broke up during the general election campaign (public hearings have now resumed) it was becoming increasingly evident that Chilcot was determined to be more rigorous than expected. For the first time, the inquiry yesterday released evidence from MI6 officers spelling out their warnings, as early as November 2001 as the Bush administration was already preparing for war, of the dangers of invading Iraq. "What can be done about Iraq? If the US heads for direct action, have we ideas which could divert them to an alternative course?" a senior, unidentified, MI6 officer wrote in a memo to Sir David Manning, Blair's foreign policy adviser.
Manning, like many of his colleagues in Whitehall, wanted the UN weapons inspectors under Hans Blix to be given more time. The inquiry, which yesterday also released heavily-redacted evidence from Sir Richard Dearlove, head of MI6 at the time, has learned how the Bush-Blair momentum for war built up and was not stopped. The Chilcot inquiry, which should report later this year, has said it will concentrate on lessons to be learned, but not determine whether the invasion was lawful or not.