Syria Keeps Red Cross Out of Homs After Rebels Leave
He said the “humanitarian situation was very serious then, and it is worse now.”
The convoy’s arrival in Homs came as at least 12 people, including children, were killed in an apparent rocket or mortar attack by the Syrian Army on antigovernment protesters in Rastan, another central Syrian city roiled by the uprising. Graphic video posted online showed hundreds of people protesting, then fleeing in panic at the rocket explosion, which sent body parts flying.
If it succeeds in entering Baba Amr, the relief convoy will give international officials an opportunity to make a detailed assessment of the fighting there since dissident forces withdrew on Thursday. The retreat set the stage for elite government soldiers to turn their attention, and superior firepower, to other insurgent redoubts farther north, despite the increasing international pressure for a cease-fire.
The seven-truck convoy was the fourth in the last two weeks sent by the Red Cross to Homs in conjunction with the Red Crescent Society, which has 10 distribution points across the city. But the violence in Baba Amr had prevented the establishment of one there.
There were only sketchy details of what was actually needed because communications were so poor, organizers said. “We don’t have any concrete information about what is going on inside,” said Hicham Hassan, a Red Cross spokesman.
Friday has traditionally been the day for mass protests across the country, and they even took place in some Homs neighborhoods despite the violence. With all the talk by , and others of providing arms to the opposition, demonstrators chose the collective name this week of “The Friday of Equipping the Free Syrian Army.”
A heavy security presence in central Damascus kept the city completely shut down, with no buses or other mass transportation vehicles allowed downtown. Similar restrictions were imposed on the suburbs, but several demonstrations erupted that were quickly dispersed by government thugs, the shabeeha, witnesses said.
“The Assad regime wants to frighten us by making big massacre in Baba Amr,” said Subhi, 24, a protester in the suburb of Midan who gave only one name because of fear of retribution. “I want to say to Bashar, if you kill more, we will demonstrate more. We will not return to our homes after a year of uprising. “
In more distant suburbs like Saqba, hundreds managed to gather to demonstrate, and an activist reached by telephone in Aleppo said numerous small protests had been scattered around the city, Syria’s largest. He said the security services had gathered around mosques to prevent any demonstrations and that four tanks were deployed on the main highway leading into Aleppo from the north.
, meanwhile, became the latest Western nation to close its embassy in Damascus in a gesture of protest directed at President .
The fighting in Syria has spurred deep international division, with and vetoing a resolution, promoted by Arab and Western nations, that called on Mr. Assad to step aside.
There were new signs on Friday, however, that even Russia’s patience with Mr. Assad was wearing thin. In an interview with six foreign newspapers in , Prime Minister of Russia distanced himself somewhat from Mr. Assad, refusing to answer the question of whether he could survive as a leader.
“I don’t know. I can’t make this kind of assessment,” he said. “It is perfectly obvious that there are serious domestic problems. The reforms that were proposed obviously should have been implemented long ago. I don’t know whether Syrian society — the government forces and the opposition — can come to an agreement, find some consensus that is acceptable to everyone, but that would have been the best solution.
“The first thing that we should do now is to end the armed conflict and bloodletting,” he said, accusing the West of siding with the Syrian opposition against Mr. Assad.
Two French journalists who had been smuggled out of Baba Amr on Thursday as resistance collapsed, Edith Bouvier of Le Figaro and the photographer William Daniels, were flown out of Beirut on Friday and returned home.
Ms. Bouvier was wounded in the attack last week that killed Marie Colvin, an American war correspondent working for The Sunday Times of London, and the French photographer Rémi Ochlik. The bodies of Ms. Colvin and Mr. Ochlik have been turned over to the Red Cross and the Red Crescent and were taken to a Damascus hospital, where they will be stored awaiting repatriation, said Mr. Hassan, the Red Cross spokesman.