Algerian police crack down on protesters
Thousands of riot police deployed in Algiers to prevent repeat of mass demonstrations that forced out Egyptian president
Thousands of riot police have been deployed in the capital of Algeria to stop an anti-government demonstration from gathering the momentum of the protests that forced out the Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak.
About 50 protesters managed to reach the square in Algiers where the protest was due to take place but they were surrounded by hundreds of police and some were arrested, the Reuters news agency reported.
Opposition groups have called for a march to demand democratic change and jobs, but it has been banned by government officials and most residents have so far stayed away.
"I am sorry to say the government has deployed a huge force to prevent a peaceful march. This is not good for Algeria's image," Mustafa Bouachichi, a leader of the League for Human Rights, said.
Protesters who managed to reach May 1 Square, where the march was due to begin at 11am (10am GMT) shouted "Bouteflika out!" – a reference to the Algerian president – before police arrested some of them.
Near Kennedy Square, about 2 miles from the centre, police outnumbered residents.
Mubarak's resignation yesterday and the overthrow of Tunisia's leader last month have led many to ask which country in the region could be next for regime change.
With scattered strikes and clashes, including five days of rioting in early January, the atmosphere in Algiers has been tense. There have been numerous copycat and attempted suicides, mirroring the attempted self-immolation by a young man that set off the Tunisian protests in mid-December.
The Co-ordination for Democratic Change in Algeria, an umbrella group of human rights activists, unionists, lawyers and others, insists the march will take place despite warnings by authorities to stay off the streets.
"Algerians must be allowed to express themselves freely and hold peaceful protests in Algiers and elsewhere," the human rights group Amnesty International said in a statement.
Today's protest is not backed by Algeria's main trade unions, its biggest opposition parties or the radical Islamist groups which were banned in the early 1990s, but it still has grassroots support.
The march was "likely to be violent, but unlikely to destabilise the regime", said Eurasia Group, a political risk consultancy.