US warns against air travel between South Sudan and Uganda over terrorism threat
Dear brother i have disqualified your knowledge about the history of Sudan or colonization. Let me tell you what was there before colonization and what colonization means in three words. Colonization means:
Sudan before colonization: We were in a Stateless period. let me put it in simple words so you can understand it.
Sudan was not a state before 1956, however, on 01/01/ 1956 Sudan became the state.
Remember that Sudan shifted from Stateless to Slavery, then from slavery to colonization, then from colonization to political independence but not economical independence, then from political independence to Jalaba (NIF) genocide against black Africans since 1956 - 2010 (Arabization and Islamization of Sudan).
Where does Nuer fit in these historical facts as you put it that "The British freed the Dinka from slavery by the Nuer" ?
Where did you get your historical records from?
Did you read a history book called "The Dinka resistance to the condominium Rule of 1902-1932". Written by Lazarus leek Mawut.
If not please shut your mouth and say Alleluia because Jesus Christ is the only one who has saved us from slavery not Nuer.
Let other people talk about Nuer power, instead of you talking about your own power everyday. So what if Nuer are powerful? Nuer power is still the power of the Southern Sudan and the whole Sudan.
If Nuer have power to defeat British by then to freed Dinka, then why did Nuer allow Jalaba to ruled us since 1956 to 2010?
Who is powerful, British or Jallaba?
Why can Nuer free southerners or Nuba or Darfurians from Jalaba since 1956, if they had defeated British and freed Dinka from slavery.
Getwech, What you don’t Know is your enemy not Dinka.
You already know who are Dinkas that is why you talk about them every day on this website. You are derailing people from thinking about what is beyond CPA.
I do respect all Nuer who know the true historical facts about Sudan and who do not talk about tribalism like you do always.
Getwech you can write about Dr Riak Machar. I will never say anything about it. I have never reply to your comments which are all about Dr. Riak Machar as if Riak is the only politician in the Southern Sudan. But When you write about historical facts don’t make up false stories and claimed that they are historical facts.
Dear Gatwech,"information is not knowledge, and knowledge is not understanding and understanding is not wisdom".
Don’t ever write your nonsense about Dinka, if you do have a brain. Dinkas are not superior or inferior, but they are equal to all other tribes in the Southern Sudan.
I have no intention to hurt you by this comment, but i am telling you the truth because i know you and you know me. Repent and you will be forgiven.
"what then can we say, if God is for us who can be against us".