Gaddafi's 'command and control capability' destroyed says official
But the US denied targeting the residence or Gaddafi himself. "I can guarantee he’s not on the targeting list. We’re not targeting his residence,’’ vice admiral Bill Gortney told reporters at a Pentagon press conference. Australian Foreign Affairs Minister Kevin Rudd said people should be very sceptical of Colonel Gaddafi's claims that allied actions had already resulted in civilian casualties.
American, British and French forces would use the "absolute best" targeting strategies to avoid killing civilians, Mr Rudd said. "I think it's realistic to assume, however, that that ongoing risk exists," Mr Rudd told the Seven Network. Mr Rudd said it was important to see this week’s initial bombardment as "phase one" in a multi-phase operation. "This will be a long process," he told ABC television today. Our target is how to help our people in Libya, especially in Benghazi. Believe me, they are living a nightmare. A nightmare, really
Asked just how long he envisioned the intervention would last, Mr Rudd said: "I’m not prepared to speculate on timelines here. The truth is, these operations are invariably very difficult, very complex, very time-consuming, very resource-intensive.’’ Defence Minister Stephen Smith said reports so far indicated there had been no civilian casualties from the allied air attacks. "But of course in the fog of war we need to wait a bit of time to satisfy ourselves that that is absolutely the case," he told Sky News. Prime Minister Julia Gillard said Colonel Gaddafi had been given the opportunity to stop the violence. "He chose not to do that," she told reporters.
"He chose to continue the violence, to continue the bloodshed." Ms Gillard dodged a question on whether the intervention should seek to end Colonel Gaddafi's rule. "The motivator here is our responsibility to protect as human beings the people of Libya," she said. US Defence Secretary Robert Gates said it would be "unwise" to have coalition forces go after Colonel Gaddafi.
Mr Gates said the intervention was backed by a diverse coalition but expanding its goals would complicate the consensus. There are indications that the consensus is already on shaky ground. Arab League Secretary General Amr Mussa has reportedly criticised Western military strikes on Libya even though he pushed for a no-fly zone. "What has happened in Libya differs from the goal of imposing a no-fly zone, and what we want is the protection of civilians and not bombing other civilians," Mr Mussa has been quoted as saying. But Mr Rudd said Mr Mussa may have been misquoted or mistranslated.
"There is now genuine uncertainty about what he has said," Mr Rudd said. "Knowing how strongly Amr Moussa felt about this when I've been in contact with him, I'd be surprised if his views have been represented completely accurately." But strategic specialist Hugh White warned the politics surrounding the intervention were going to get more complicated. "The Arabs have woken up and discovered they have supported not just something which is meant to stop Gaddafi flying his jets but something which is going to involve air attacks on land targets," Professor White said.
British forces fired Tomahawk missiles at air defence targets on Sunday night from a Trafalgar-class submarine stationed in the Mediterranean off the Libyan coast, the Ministry of Defence said. Earlier, French fighters launched a second wave of operations against Libyan targets following Saturday's international operation to enforce a no-fly zone, the BBC reported. The operation came as a Libyan military spokesman announced a new ceasefire in the campaign against a military uprising. But US President Barack Obama's national security aide Tom Donilon said the ceasefire "isn't true" or has been "immediately violated". UK officials said Britain would consider the promise of a ceasefire on "actions not words", as more war planes left for the theatre from eastern England.
Libyan spokesman Milad Fokehi said the ceasefire, effective from 9pm local time on Sunday (0600 AEDT Monday), had been decided following an African Union call for an immediate cessation of hostilities. "In line with the statement published by the African Union panel at Nouakchott on Saturday and UN resolutions 1970 and 1973, the high command of the armed forces ordered a ceasefire from Sunday at 9pm," he said. Colonel Gaddafi's regime had declared a ceasefire on Friday after UN Security Council resolution 1973 authorised any necessary measures, including a no-fly zone, to stop his forces harming civilians in the fight against the rebels. But his troops continued an assault on the rebel stronghold of Benghazi, prompting US, British and French forces to intervene with air strikes in line with the resolution. Western coalition strikes stem from a "big misunderstanding" about the nature of Libya's rebellion, Colonel Gaddafi's son said, claiming the rebels were "gangsters" and "terrorists".
US, British and French forces have launched the West's biggest intervention in the Arab world since the 2003 US-led invasion of Iraq, firing more than 120 Tomahawk Cruise missiles and conducting bombing raids on key Libyan targets. US military officials say the strikes have stopped Colonel Gaddafi's forces in their tracks. Asked if the Gaddafi regime would retaliate by launching strikes on Western commercial aircraft, Saif al-Islam responded: "No, this is not our target. "Our target is how to help our people in Libya, especially in Benghazi. Believe me, they are living a nightmare. A nightmare, really."