Western forces attack Libya
THE United States, France and Britain launched strikes against Libya from the air and sea today, the opening salvo in an international military campaign against the regime of longtime leader Muammar Gaddafi.
The US military said more than 110 Tomahawk cruise missiles were fired by American and British forces at 20 Libyan air defence system sites, while France said it carried out four air strikes that destroyed several armoured vehicles belonging to pro-Gaddafi forces.
British Prime Minister David Cameron confirmed that his country's forces were also in action over Libya.
The head of Libya's parliament, Abul Qasim al-Zuai, condemned the West's air strikes as acts of "barbaric aggression" and Libyan state television said Gaddafi would speak about the "crusader enemy" this evening.
The unrepentant and defiant Gaddafi released a statement earlier this morning claiming, "I have all the Libyan people with me. I am prepared to die ... they are prepared to die for me - men, women and even children."
The Libyan leader said the Mediterranean had been turned into a "real battlefield'' and that arms depots were being opened to his people to defend the country.
in a brief audio message broadcast on state television, Gaddafi condemned the allied Western attacks on Libya as "barbaric, unjustified Crusaders' aggression.''
He vowed to retaliate with military and civilian targets in the Mediterranean, warning that the interests of Mediterranean and North African countries were now "in danger.''
"The Mediterranean region has become a real battlefield,'' he said. "Arms depots have been opened and all the Libyan people are being armed'' to defend the country against Western forces.
It was a showdown that had been building for weeks and was finally triggered when Gaddafi ignored a cease-fire and a UN resolution establishing a no-fly zone, instead warning the heads of Britain, France and the UN, "you will regret it if you take a step to intervene."
The reaction was swift, with French warplanes swooping over the North African nation, hitting their first target, a military vehicle, at 4.45pm GMT (3.45am AEDT).
US President Barack Obama, said he had authorised "limited military action in Libya" but emphasised no American ground troops would be involved.
"We must be clear, actions have consequences and the writ of the international community must be enforced," he said.
Shortly afterwards, the Pentagon's Vice Adm. William E. Gortney said US ships and one British submarine fired more than 110 Tomahawk cruise missiles at 20 targets to "take down critical nodes in the air and missile defense systems."
Most of the strikes, he said, were on or near the Mediterranean coast and represented the "first phase of what is likely to be a multi-phase operation."
Several loud blasts were heard east of the Libyan capital and Gaddafi stronghold of Tripoli and balls of fire could be seen on the horizon, witnesses told AFP. However, it was not clear if this was related to the missile strikes.
For its part, Libyan state television claimed, "Civilian targets are being bombed by the 'crusader' enemy fighter planes in Tripoli." The official news agency Jana said there were "civilians casualties as a result of this aggression."
There was no independent confirmation of either claim.
In one of those strange quirks of history, Operation Odyssey Dawn - the name given to the multinational effort - was launched eight years to the day after US President George W. Bush ordered the start of war against Iraq.
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said the US would use its "unique capabilities" to enforce the terms of the UN resolution. She said while the US would not deploy ground troops "there should be no mistaking our commitment to this effort."
At the same time, US Defence Secretary Robert Gates postponed his trip to Russia until tonight to monitor events in Libya, the Pentagon said.
The southern edge of Benghazi suffered at least two morning air strikes as well as sustained shelling, which sent thick smoke into the sky. Pro-regime forces claimed they were acting in self-defense during the clashes and denied that they were the aggressors.
A rebel told AFP that a plane downed in flames over Benghazi was one of their French-built Mirage fighters and that Gaddafi's forces shot it out of the sky. Images were shown of the pilot ejecting and parachuting down some distance from the plane, but his condition and whereabouts were unknown.