Syrian civilians killed in apparent revenge bombing for pilot death
Rebels say at least 30 died in airstrikes on town where militant reportedly killed air force pilot from crashed plane
At least 30 civilians have died in Syrian airstrikes on a town north-east of Damascus a day after rebels reportedly killed an air force pilot, a monitoring group and rebels said.
According to their reports, the raids targeted a medical centre, a school and a residential area in Jayrud, a heavily populated area that struck a truce with the army that had spared it from heavy bombing on other rebel-held areas. As a result it had become a sanctuary for thousands of civilians fleeing battles nearby.
The UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said scores of residents were also injured in the aerial strikes on Saturday, as well as shelling from army posts in the area.
A rebel spokesman said the strikes seemed to be in revenge for the killing of the pilot, who parachuted down near the town after his plane crashed on Friday.
“The strikes against civilians are in retaliation against the execution of the pilot by Nusra Front,” said Said Seif al-Qalamoni, from the Free Syrian Army’s (FSA) Shahid Ahmad Abdo brigade that operates in Jayrud alongside al-Qaida’s Nusra Front and other groups.
Rebels in a joint operations room targeted a main army base in the region with Russian-made surface-to-surface missiles after the aerial strikes, Qalamoni said.
Syrian state media said Friday’s plane crash was due to a technical fault and the pilot had ejected, while the rebel group Jaysh al-Islam said it had shot down the plane, but did not say how.
The group said the pilot was arrested and subsequently killed by a fighter from the Nusra Front while being held at a joint command centre.
The army had warned of a strong response after the killing was reported shortly after he was shown on a rebel video circulated on social media giving details of his mission.
Meanwhile, Russian and Syrian planes intensified their bombing on Saturday of a strategic rebel-held area of Aleppo that is near the only route into opposition-held parts of the northern city. If the Malah area fell to the army and its allies they would succeed in laying siege to areas where more than 400,000 people live under rebel control.