Egypt protests: President Mubarak sends in the army to Egypt's burning streets
Thousands of Egyptians gathered after Friday prayers and fought battles with lines of riot police at all the major junctions of the capital.
Riot squads gave way to armoured personnel carriers as the crowds ignored a curfew imposed at dusk.
Police managed to keep the crowds from Tahrir Square – Liberation Square – in the city centre by cutting them off from each other at every major junction.
But by nightfall the situation threatened to spiral out of control as protesters defied a nationwide curfew.
The headquarters in central Cairo of the governing party was set on fire and a crowd surrounded the central radio and television building. 870 were injured, several with bullet wounds.
Hillary Clinton, the US Secretary of State, led calls for the authorities to show restraint, saying that the protests "underscore that there are deep grievances within Egyptian society, and the Egyptian government needs to understand that violence will not make these grievances go away."
"We are deeply concerned about the use of violence by Egyptian police and security forces against protesters," Mrs Clinton told reporters.
William Hague, the Foreign Secretary, urged the Egyptian government to heed the "legitimate demands" of protesters.
He said it was "impossible to predict what the outcome will be of a long period of disorder, of violence or attempted revolution".
Mr Hague added: "The right response of countries concerned with the situation, not just Egypt, is to respond to the legitimate demands of economic development and a more open and flexible political system."
Dozens of British tourists caught in Cairo were warned not to leave their hotels by the Foreign Office during the continuing unrest.
Overnight on Thursday the Egyptian authorities closed down first Facebook and Twitter, then the internet and finally, on Friday morning, the mobile phone network.
In doing so they managed to split the opposition movement but encouraged greater violence as initially peaceful chanting gave way to frustrated mobs charging the lines with stones and petrol bombs.
The protests which began last Tuesday had become quieter by Thursday but a Facebook page with 91,000 followers had begun calling for a gathering outside major mosques across the country on Friday, the Muslim day of rest.
Mohamed ElBaradei, the former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency whose calls for reforms has made him a figurehead for opposition to Mr Mubarak, came under fire from tear gas after praying in public outside a mosque near his home in Giza, the suburb near the Pyramids.
He was hustled away inside the mosque and was later reported to be under house arrest.
As protesters squared up against the lines of riot police, they shouted slogans calling for Mr Mubarak to go – along with his unpopular son, Gamal, whom many think Mr Mubarak is grooming to succeed him.
"People want the regime to fall," was one chant, the same that had been levelled at President Zine al-Abedine Ben Ali of Tunisia two weeks before to the day.