Peace talks in Jonglei's Pibor county stall after ambush kills 3 people
By John Actually and Thon Philip Aleu
October 5, 2010 (BOR) - Authorities in Pibor county of Jonglei state say efforts to bring peace between a rebelling army general and the southern government have stalled after an attack that killed three people on October 4.
Unknown gunmen killed 3 people, including 2 policemen, and injured three others in an ambush on a boat travelling between Gumuruk and Pibor on October 4, according to the county’s commissioner Akot Mazee.
The Pibor commissioner told Sudan Tribune by phone that the motor boat carrying 7 civilians and 8 policemen left Gumuruk at 3pm and were attacked 6pm.
"The attackers escaped without any casualties", said the commissioner.
As well as two policemen, a woman was killed in the attack, leaving behind her four-month-old baby and her seven-year-old daughter who is still missing.
Although there is so far no evidence as to who carried out the attack, the commissioner accused the forces of renegade David Yauyau, of assaulting the boat.
“The attack was meant to destroy the peace talk between the government of South Sudan and Yauyau at Kurnyang”, he said.
According to the commissioner, peace talks between the Yauyau and the Government of Southern Sudan are currently in progress at Kurnyang to “iron out” some burning issues.
Mazee, says that a small boat heading to Gumuruk from Pibor headquarters came under fire at about 6pm local time on Monday at the time peace talk between local leaders and David Yauyau was under way in Kurnyang.
David Yauyau took up arms against the government of Southern Sudan in May 2010 after refusing to accept election defeat for a state assembly seat. Yauyau, from the Murle ethnic group in Pibor
"I’m not sure whether Kurnyang will be peaceful for [peace] talks," Mazee told radio Jonglei on Tuesday in reference to the venue of negotiation with Yauyau men.
In September 2010, Southern Sudan army spokesman announced that reconciliation were underway in Pibor.
"The local authorities in Pibor County (Joglei state) have started peace talks with David Yauyau," said the official spokesperson of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) Major General Kuol Diem Kuol at the time.
However, commisioner-Mazee told radio Jonglei on Tuesday that the latest incident cast doubt on the Pibor peace talks.
"I’m not sure whether Kurnyang will be peaceful for [peace] talks," he said in reference to the venue of negotiation with Yauyau men.
As southern Sudanese prepare for referendum, insecurity remains a challenge to peaceful conduct of the voting processes.