Libya: Col Gaddafi vows death or victory
Al-Orouba, a Syrian TV station, reported that Gaddafi said he would address the Libyan people in the coming hours and that the decision to withdraw from the Bab Al-Aziziya compound was a "tactical move".
He said that the compound was levelled to the ground after 64 Nato airstrikes and vowed either death or victory in the fight against “aggression”.
His comments came hours after The National Transitional Council declared the political transition in the country “begins immediately”, with rebels saying they will move their headquarters from Benghazi to Tripoli by Thursday.
Speaking from Qatar, Mahmoud Jibril, the executive head of the NTS, said: “This is the new Libya, where every Libyan works as a beloved brother, hand in hand, to serve the interests of the nation to ensure equality and justice for everyone.
“We have to be transparent in front of the whole world. Now we have to concentrate on building and healing our wounds.”
Qatar will today host a meeting of Arab states, to organise $2.4 billion (£1.45 billion) in aid for the country.
Mr Jalil later French television last night that 400 people were killed and 2,000 wounded in the three days of fighting in Tripoli. He added that they had captured up to 600 Gaddafi soldiers. He said he thought Gaddafi himseld had fled Tripoli.
On the most momentous day so far in the six-month civil war, opposition forces raised their flag from the roof of Gaddafi’s official residence after swarming into his Bab al-Azizia compound in their hundreds with virtually no resistance.
Television footage of rebels holding aloft a gold-plated head of Gaddafi wrenched from a statue inside his home sparked wild celebrations on the streets of Tripoli and in rebel-held cities across Libya.
Nato said it was confident he had not left the country as his opponents began searching the hundreds of miles of tunnels that radiate from the capital. The despot was warned: “You can run but you can’t hide.”
Fighting was still raging in parts of the country, with reports that Gaddafi loyalists were regrouping to defend Sirte, half way between Tripoli and Benghazi.
In the rest of the country, forces loyal to Gaddafi were reportedly shelling Zuara, a Libyan port town about 40 miles from the Tunisian border, while rebels also fought Gaddafi loyalists for control of Sabha, an important city in the southern desert 400 miles south of the capital, likely to be a final stronghold. His home town of Sirte was also expected to welcome rebel forces shortly after loyalists retreated from the eastern oil hub of Ras Lanuf. Al-Jazeera last night said that the NTC was in negotiations with tribal leaders in Sirte and hoped to enter the town peacefully.