British hacker for Islamic State Junaid Hussain 'killed in Syria drone attack'
A British computer hacker accused of being a member of Islamic State has been killed in a US drone strike in Syria, according to reports.
Junaid Hussain and his wife, Sally Jones, a mother-of-two and former punk rocker from Chatham, in Kent, had been dubbed ‘Mr and Mrs Terror’.
Hussain is thought to have pursued Ms Jones who fled the UK for Syria in 2013.
In June this year Hussain was linked with an IS plot to attack an Armed Forces Day parade in south London.
The American military and intelligence community is said to be in the final stages of confirming the death of Junaid Hussain, 21, from Birmingham.
A US official was quoted as saying they have a "high level of confidence" that he was killed after a strike specifically targeted Hussain while he was travelling in a vehicle in Syria.
The claims have not been confirmed by British authorities.
Reports have described Hussain as a key operative in the extremist group, allegedly involved in online hacking and recruitment activities.
The 21-year-old was said last month to have been number three on the Pentagon's "kill list" of IS targets.
It was reported that the plan to explode a pressure cooker bomb - killing soldiers and bystanders on the route - failed after Hussain unwittingly recruited an undercover investigator from The Sun to carry it out.
He allegedly told the investigator: "It will be big. We will hit the kuffar (unbelievers) hard InshAllah. Hit their soldiers in their own land. InshAllah. Soldiers that served in Iraq and Afganistan will be present. Jump in the crowd and detonate the bomb.
"They think they can kill Muslims in Iraq and Afghanistan then come back to the UK and be safe. We'll hit them hard InshAllah."
In June 2012, aged 18, Hussain was jailed for six months after making prank calls to a counter-terror hotline.
He admitted making the nuisance calls and publishing former prime minister Tony Blair's address book in June the previous year.
Hussain was a member of TeaMpOisoN (TeamPoison), a group which had claimed responsibility for more than 1,400 offences where personal and private information has been illegally extracted from victims in the UK and around the world.
TeamPoison also claimed to be behind online hacking attacks involving foreign politicians, major international businesses, an international humanitarian agency and foreign law enforcement.