Turkey's PM blames Kurdish militants for Ankara blast; six soldiers killed in separate bombing
Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoglu has blamed Kurdish militants from Turkey and Syria for a deadly car bombing in Ankara that killed 28 people.
Mr Davutoglu said the bomber was a Syrian national named Salih Necard.
"It has been revealed that this attack was carried out by members of the terrorist organisation in cooperation with a YPG [Syrian Kurdish People's Protection Units] member who infiltrated [Turkey] from Syria," Mr Davutoglu told reporters in Ankara.
Turkey's President Tayyip Erdogan said 14 people had been detained over the bombing, with more detentions expected.
The head of the Syrian Kurdish Democratic Union Party (PYD), the YPG's political arm, said the group was not responsible for the attack, but Mr Erogdan rejected the denial.
"Even though those who head the PYD and PKK [Kurdistan Workers Party] say this has no connection with them, based on the information obtained by our interior minister and our intelligence agencies, it is identified that this is done by them," he said.
The attack happened at the height of evening rush hour in the capital, not far from Turkey's Parliament, government buildings and military headquarters.
A vehicle laden with explosives reportedly targeted a convoy of buses carrying military personnel that were stopped at traffic lights, the army said.
Plumes of smoke were seen and the powerful blast was heard all over the city, sending residents to their balconies in panic.
Within hours of the car bomb, Turkish warplanes struck bases in northern Iraq of the PKK, which Mr Davutoglu accused of collaborating in the car bombing.
Mr Davutoglu added that Turkey would continue to shell positions of the YPG in Syria. Senior members of the PKK were killed in air strikes on their camps in northern Iraq launched overnight, he added.
Senior members of the PKK were killed in air strikes on their camps in northern Iraq launched overnight, he added.
"Yesterday's attack was directly targeting Turkey ... all necessary measures will be taken against them," Mr Davutoglu said.
The blast came after an attack in Ankara in October blamed on Islamic States, when two suicide bombers struck a rally of pro-Kurdish and labour activists outside the capital's main train station, killing more than 100 people.
Turkey regards the outlawed YPG and the PKK as terrorist groups.
Washington, which has said the YPG is not a terrorist group, has backed the insurgents in the fight against IS in Syria.
The comments came as Turkey's military revealed a bomb had killed six Turkish soldiers in the country's south-east.
Another soldier was seriously injured in the attack, the armed forces said in a statement.
The blast hit the armoured vehicle on the highway linking Diyarbakir, the largest city in the mainly Kurdish south-east, to the district of Lice.