ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Activists inside the Syrian city of Homs say they feel like they are just "waiting to die" as regime troops step up a relentless assault on rebel-held suburbs.
A fifth day of shelling left around 70 people dead on Wednesday, in what activists say was the heaviest assault yet by troops loyal to president Bashar al-Assad.
The shelling and gunfire resumed at dawn and continued all day as regime troops tightened the noose, cutting off power, communications and supplies in a determined bid to crush resistance.
Activists in Homs say they fear the constant shelling is designed to pave the way for a full ground assault in coming days.
As the fighting continues, more details are emerging of the plight of those trapped inside the city.
Amateur video posted on YouTube shows small children being treated for head wounds in makeshift hospitals as rebel fighters struggle to stave off the government assault.
"I've seen whole families killed this week," activist Ahmed, a 28-year-old accountant, told Reuters from Homs.
"Now I feel like I'm just waiting to be the next to die."
Among those killed in Homs were several children who reportedly died when electricity was cut to a local hospital.
Danny Abdul Dayem, a British Syrian in the city, showed foreign media the body of a young boy in a makeshift clinic.
"He got hit by a smart bomb in his house," he said.
"Is this what the UN is waiting for? Is this what the UN is waiting for? Until they kill all the children, kill all the women?"
Other reports said yesterday's death toll also included three entire families - a total of 19 people who had been massacred in their homes.
Another man, Abu Rami, described the danger of those Homs residents trying to flee.
"A lot of families trying to go out and to escape from this area," he said.
"If they can't escape from bombing, they will be shot by snipers on the roofs by a far away distance."
Speaking by satellite phone from the beleaguered Baba Amr neighbourhood, activist Hussein Nader said the bombardment had lessened by dusk but that tanks had moved closer to the besieged district, where 30,000 inhabitants have been without water, electric or telephone lines days.
"There are neighbourhoods on the eastern side of Baba Amr that are disaster zones from heavy shelling apparently designed to open the way for tanks," he said.
"Dozens of people are under the rubble with no way to get to them because they are firing at anyone who moves in the street."
He said activists were trying to distribute water in bottles but that bandages and antiseptics had run out.
The bloodshed continued even after Mr Assad reportedly gave Russia's foreign minister Sergei Lavrov a promise to end the ongoing violence.
The Russian minister has been in Damascus for talks with the Syrian regime, but France and Britain have dismissed Russia's efforts to end the crackdown and expressed new scepticism that Syria's president was committed to ending the crisis.
Syrian state-run TV has again blamed armed terrorist gangs for the violence.
Meanwhile, UN secretary-general Ban Ki-moon says the Arab League is planning to revive its monitoring mission in Syria.
The mission first went to Syria in December, reaching a strength of 165 members, but the Arab League suspended it on January 28 because of the worsening violence.
Hadi Abdullah, an activist in Homs, said there were reports that columns of tanks were headed toward the city from Damascus.
"The explosions this morning are deafening," he said.
"We can't reach some areas because of the intensity of the shelling and snipers, and communications have been cut off so we don't know what is going on."
Another activist, Omar Shaker, says 40 per cent of buildings in Baba Amr neighbourhood, targeted with the most intense shelling, had been hit and some areas had been completely destroyed.
"Since dawn the shelling has been extremely intense and they are using rockets and mortars," he said.
"They have destroyed all infrastructure and bombed water tanks and electricity poles. The humanitarian situation is extremely dire and food is lacking.
"We are trying to set up a field hospital but we have no medical supplies."
Mr Shaker said it was clear the onslaught was aimed at paving the way for a ground assault on rebel strongholds in the city of 1.6 million.
"The shelling right now is from far away which means troops are not moving on the ground," he said.
"When the shelling eases it means they are moving."