Realtime Business News, Economic News, Breaking News and Forex News – RTTNews
Five employees including four journalists of a Maryland newspaper were shot dead in a targeted attack inside the newsroom Thursday. Police arrested the assailant soon after the shooting. He was identified as 38-year-old Jarrod W. Ramos, who had a long-standing dispute with the paper. The gunman blasted his way into the Capital Gazette newsroom in Annapolis at about 2:40 p.m. and fired indiscrimina
Key Senate Democrats have urged Majority Leader Mitch McConnell not to hold a vote on Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy's replacement until after the midterm elections, citing his blockage of Merrick Garland in 2016. Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer led the opposition by warning against the nominee President Donald Trump will choose to replace Justice Kennedy. He urged Senate Republicans
Trump Steps Up Attacks On Russia Investigation In Tweetstorm President Donald Trump stepped up his attacks on the investigation of Russian meddling in the 2016 election in a flurry of posts to Twitter on Thursday. In the tweetstorm, Trump raised questions about potential conflicts of interest for special counsel Robert Mueller and the "13 Angry Democrats" on...
Trump To Meet With Putin In Helsinki On July 16 The United States and Russia have agreed to hold a summit of the leaders of the two countries within weeks in a third country. The White House announced Thursday that U.S. President Donald Trump will meet with Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin on July 16 in Finnish capital Helsinki. "The two leaders will discuss relations between the United States and Russia and a range of national security issue
With 2 matches each in Group G and H, the first phase of World Cup 2018 completes today. COLOMBIA-SENEGAL (Group H) The last day of the first round features 2 crucial matches in Group H. Japan and Senegal have four points; Colombia have three; and pointless Poland are already eliminated. Senegal can advance to the next round by avoiding a defeat, while Colombia is guaranteed to progress
An immigration reform bill backed by House Republican leaders failed by a wider than expected margin in a vote on Wednesday. The House voted 301 to 121 against the Border Security and Immigration Reform Act, with 112 Republicans joining with all of the Democrats in the chamber to block the bill.
In a move that could allow President Donald Trump to reshape the nation's highest court for years to come, Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy has announced his retirement. Kennedy sent a letter to Trump on Wednesday revealing his decision to retire as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, effective July 31st.
Support for the Republican tax reform bill has seen a notable slide over the past two months, according to the results of a new Politico/Morning Consult poll. Thirty-seven percent of registered voters expressed support for the bill that included significant reductions in taxes, down from 44 percent...
Public sector unions were dealt a potentially crippling blow by the U.S. Supreme Court on Wednesday, with the court striking down an Illinois law requiring non-union workers to pay fees to cover the cost of collective bargaining. In the 5 to 4 ruling, the Supreme Court's conservative justices argued...
After reports President Donald Trump planned to impose strict limits on Chinese investment in the U.S. contributed to a sell-off on Wall Street on Monday, the administration has revealed what is seen as a more moderate approach. Administration officials told reporters Trump wants to strengthen the...
Shocking Win For Young Alexandria Over Rep. Joe Crowley In New York Primary In the biggest upset in the 2018 midterm election season, a 28-year-old Democratic Socialist dealt a shocking defeat to 10-term incumbent Rep. Joe Crowley in the Democratic primary in New York's 14th congressional district. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, who ran her campaign focusing on issues such as Medicare for All, abolishing Immigration and Customs Enforcement, and stripping corporate money out o
In 'Death Group' Even The Champions Fight For Survival This is the day when Group F possibly turn into a "death group," where its a do-or-die for all four teams. None of the Group F quartet have booked their place in the knockout rounds yet, and none of them are completely out of the running either. GERMANY-SOUTH KOREA (Group F) Flying into Russia two weeks ago, the Germans would never have imagined they would find themselves in the middle of
President Donald Trump has warned that Harley-Davidson will have to pay a heavy price for deciding to shift some of the production of its iconic motorcycles overseas. The Wisconsin-based motorcycle manufacturer announced on Monday: "To address the substantial cost of this tariff burden long-term, Harley-Davidson will be implementing a plan to shift production of motorcycles for EU destinations fr
We have two big matches in store in Group D for Tuesday, which is still wide open and all but Croatia will have to sweat it out until last minute to earn a pre-quarter final berth. ARGENTINA-NIGERIA (Group D) Tonight's do-or-die encounter in Saint Petersburg promises to be one of the most thrilling matches of this World Cup's phase one. Having been backed into a corner after dropping poi