Syria: 200 Ba'ath officials quit in protest against regime
Resigning from the Ba'ath party, which has ruled Syria since taking power in a 1963 coup, was unthinkable before pro-democracy protests erupted in the southern city of Deraa on March 18.
The violence is thought to have killed more than 450 people, and international criticism sharpened after 100 people were killed on Friday and security forces began an attack on the southern city of Deraa on Monday.
Two hundred party members from Deraa province and surrounding regions said they had resigned in protest against the attack, in which security forces killed at least 35 people.
"In view of the negative stance taken by the leadership of the Arab Socialist Ba'ath party towards the events in Syria and in Deraa, and after the death of hundreds and the wounding of thousands at the hands of the various security forces, we submit our collective resignation," they said in a declaration.
Another 28 Ba'athists in the coastal city of Banias also resigned on Wednesday in protest at the "practices of the security forces against honourable citizens ... and torture and murder they committed".
Analysts say the demonstrations that have spread across Syria have grown in intensity, with protesters who began calling for reform of the system now demanding its overthrow.
Yesterday William Hague claimed Mr Assad is unable to introduce reforms because of pressure from hardliners within his family, according to William Hague.
The Foreign Secretary sought to portray Mr Assad as a hostage of powerful relations who had prevented him from pursuing a path of reform.
Attempts to distinguish Mr Assad from the hawks in his inner circle came as the West prepared to impose tough sanctions on him and members of his family.
The UN Security Council failed to agree on a statement condemning the Assad regime following resistance from Russia, China and Lebanon last night. However, Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Spain summoned Syrian ambassadors for a final warning to end the brutal repression of anti–government protests, in which more than 450 civilians have died in the past six weeks.
But even as the West's diplomatic language has grown more robust, a lingering belief that Mr Assad retains a genuine desire to make his government more accountable to the Syrian people has persisted in certain circles.
"One of the difficulties in Syria is that President Assad's power depends on a wide group of people in his own family and, of course, other members of his own government," Mr Hague said in an interview.
"I am not sure how free he is to pursue reform, even if he wanted to do so." Amid the gravest crisis of his 11–year rule, Mr Assad has offered some concessions, notably the lifting of emergency laws imposed after the president's Ba'ath party seized power in a coup in 1963.
But even as he announced the measure last week, Mr Assad said any continuing protests would draw a harsh response – a threat that he made good the next day when more than 100 demonstrators were shot dead on Good Friday.
Some observers have blamed the brutality of the repression on a coterie of powerful relations of the president, most notably the his younger brother Maher, his brother–in–law Assef Shawkat and his cousin Rami Makhlouf.