Hundreds of al-Qaeda inmates in mass Iraq jailbreak
The men escaped during a mass break-out at Baghdad's Abu Ghraib prison, where hundreds of inmates were executed during Saddam Hussein's rule and where US troops were involved in a prisoner abuse scandal in 2004.
The raid, a demonstration of al-Qaeda's resurgent power in Iraq, involved a combination of gunmen and suicide bombers who blasted their way into the high-security compound in the Iraqi capital's western suburbs. Among those said to have been freed were convicted senior terrorists awaiting execution.
"The number of escaped inmates has reached 500, most of them were convicted senior members of al-Qaeda and had received death sentences," Hakim Al-Zamili, a senior member of the security and defence committee in parliament, told Reuters.
"The security forces arrested some of them, but the rest are still free."
A second, simultaneous raid, took place in a prison in Taji, around 20 miles north of Baghdad, although there conflicting reports as to whether any inmates had been freed. While some reports said that the guards had kept the prisoners confined to their cells, another MP on the security and defence committee, Shwan Taha, said that between 500 and 1,000 inmates escaped from the two prisons.
At least 40 people are believed to have been killed in the attacks, which were launched around 9.30pm on Sunday night when militants fired a salvo of mortar rounds into both jail compounds.
Suicide bombers then drove cars packed with explosives into the prison gates, while gunmen followed up machine-gun fire and rocket-propelled grenades. At Abu Ghraib, several militants wearing suicide vests ran into the prison to help free inmates, while other fighters took up ambush positions nearby to fend off the Iraqi government's efforts to send in reinforcements. It took ten hours for the Iraqi government, which despatched helicopter gunships to the scene, to restore order. Officials said that at least 20 members of the security forces and around 21 inmates, with the final death toll expected to rise.
A vast, low-rise compound surrounded by walls, barbed wire and watchtowers, Abu Ghraib has a notorious place in modern Iraqi history. During Saddam's time, its grotesquely over-crowded cells were home to thousands of prisoners, many of whom only left via the twin gallows in the execution chamber.
Shortly before the US-led invasion in 2003, Saddam granted the inmates of Abu Ghraib a mass amnesty, letting loose large numbers of convicted criminals who were partly responsible for the outbreak of lawlessness that followed his downfall. In 2004, it gained fresh infamy when graphic photographs emerged of the abuse of Iraqi detainees, giving a major boost to the anti-US insurgency. Since US troops left Iraq in 2012 it has been entirely under Iraqi control.
That al-Qaeda should feel confident enough to mount an attack on the country's most high-security jail shows how the group has regrouped in the last two years. In recent months it has launched regular waves of devastating attacks across the country, often killing hundreds at a time. Most of the victims have been on government targets or areas populated by Shia Muslims, who count aspostates in al-Qaeda's Sunni extremist vision.
The group's ranks have been swollen by ex-insurgents freed under previous government amnesties, some of whom are now also fighting against President Bashar al-Assad's Shia regime in neighbouring Syria.
In a separate attack yesterday, a suicide bomber killed at least 22 soldiers in an attack in Mosul, another Sunni Muslim stronghold. Some 600 people are now believed to have died in Iraq this month alone, prompting fears of a return to all-out sectarian warfare of 2006-7. The Shia-dominated government of prime minister Nuri-al Maliki is under growing pressure to prevent retaliatory attacks on Sunni areas by Shia militants.