Central African Republic: Desperate migrants wait for airlift home
Goemans said he was shocked by the conditions endured by the migrants, which he said were the worst he had seen in 20 years in the field.
"People are traumatized, people are dealing with some strains that you cannot believe -- so many of their relatives have been killed ... and they are all traumatized."
The three charter flights to Chad will be followed by two to Bamako in Mali, he said. About 700 Malians will be taken back to their home country by Tuesday, he said.
It has now stepped in with its own charter flights so that those stranded in desperate need don't have to wait any longer or travel on cargo planes without seats, Goemans said.
The organization is also working with governments across the region to help their nationals who've been brought home, some of them destitute, to resettle, he said.
Many will need psychological and social support to help them recover from their experience, he said, not least because foreigners have often been the target of the violence currently tearing the Central African Republic apart.
The operation to fly out all the migrants stranded in the country will likely take several weeks. Many are outside the capital, Goemans said, making movement dangerous and access difficult.
While nearly 27,000 migrants from neighboring countries have been evacuated by their countries, at least 33,000 more who've asked for help from their embassies remain in urgent need of aid, the IOM said Friday.
"The evacuation of these migrants must be done quickly and in an orderly manner to avoid people trying to leave on their own overland and taking terrible risks, in desperation," said IOM West Africa director Carmela Godeau.
genocide is brewing, Since then, political turmoil and violence have spiraled. Seleka is a predominantly Muslim coalition, and to counter the attacks on Christian communities, vigilante Christian groups have fought back. The United Nations has said it fears a genocide is brewing, and aid agencies warn of a humanitarian crisis.
At least 1,000 people have died in the violence, and some 958,000 more, many of them children, have been forced from their homes within the Central African Republic, according to the United Nations' refugee agency, UNHCR.
There are also more than 86,000 refugees in Cameroon, Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of the Congo who fled the Central African Republic in 2013, the UNHCR said Friday.