Children killed in bus attack in Syria
At least 110 people were killed in violence across the country Sunday, the opposition Local Coordination Committees of Syria said. They included 45 in Damascus and its suburbs, many of them members of the Free Syrian Army. Twenty-six of the deaths were in Homs and 20 were in Daraa, the LCC said.
"We strongly condemn this heinous act," said Abdul Hafiz Abdul Rahman, an activist with the Syrian human rights organization MAF. He said when he saw the video, "I felt that part of me died, and now I'm worried about the revolution." He also cited a video posted to YouTube last month in which someone identified as a Syrian lieutenant appeared to be executed by rebels. "True, we are in a state of war, but if we do such acts like this ... then we are becoming the very entity that we are revolting against."
An activist in Rastan posted a message on Skype saying, "The shelling is continuing for hours now. There is massive destruction as well as many people killed and injured. We call for help to break the siege around the city. There is no running water or electricity. There is lack of food and baby formula. The only automated bakery was shelled so we have lack of bread as well."
The SANA report made no mention of former Prime Minister Riyad Hijab, who resigned Monday, citing the "killing and terrorist regime." His spokesman said Hijab had no choice but to take the job because the regime would have killed him if he had declined.
"I wish she had called. I wish she had called then, at the beginning," said Emine Erdogan. "... If she had called, I would have told her, 'Come to Turkey with your children. Let us give you protection.' Believe me, I would want very much if she would have come and lived here with her children."
Though the Syrian civil war rages on with no end in sight, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Saturday the United States would start to develop contingency plans with its Turkish allies in the event that the embattled Syrian regime collapses.
"There is a very clear understanding about the need to end this conflict quickly, but not doing it in a way that produces even more deaths, injuries and destruction," Clinton said after talks with her Turkish counterpart, Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu.