Russia's Sergey Lavrov: U.S. 'running the show' in Kiev
In an interview with state-run RT, Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov lamented how he felt U.S. officials were quick to blame his nation for everything awry in Ukraine and to insist Moscow can unilaterally solve it all. Lavrov said that while those in Ukraine's east and south who defiantly oppose the Kiev-based government are "not puppets" of the Kremlin, such a characterization would describe the relationship between Ukraine's leadership in Kiev and the United States.
As proof, Lavrov pointed to the timing of the Ukrainian government's relaunch of its security operation just after a two-day visit from U.S. Vice President Joe Biden. He claimed acting President Oleksandr Turchynov has "ordered the army to shoot at ... people if they are engaged in peaceful protests," yet hasn't disarmed extremists and what he called "the right sector."
"If our interests, our legitimate interests, the interests of Russians have been attacked directly -- like they were in South Ossetia for example -- I do not see any other way but to respond in accordance with international law," he told RT, referring to Russia's 2008 invasion of Georgia.
"Poland has been there for the United States," Mull said Wednesday in front U.S. troops standing in formation next to Polish troops. "Today, as the trans-Atlantic community confronts Russia's unacceptable aggression against Poland's neighbor, Ukraine, a sovereign and independent state, we have a solemn obligation in the framework of NATO to reassure Poland of our security guarantee."
Whatever the cause or culprit, a part of Ukraine -- Crimea -- has broken off and joined Russia. Some in the West fear that Russia will try to repeat that scenario elsewhere in Ukraine and perhaps in other countries in which ethnic Russians live or where Russia or the former Soviet Union historically has had significant influence.
treaty that defines this alliances states Some of those countries include the Baltic states and Poland, which, like the United States, are part of NATO. The treaty that defines this alliances states that if any one NATO member "is the victim of an armed attack, each and every other member of the alliance will consider this act of violence as an armed attack against all members and will take the actions it deems necessary to assist the Ally attacked."
"I think that if we did not take the steps that we are taking now, (Putin) would think that maybe it's an option," Volker, who served as ambassador from 2008 and 2009, told CNN's Wolf Blitzer. "... If we did not do that, I think he would wonder: What would be the response of NATO if he did have some ... action there?"
Ukraine's Internal Affairs Ministry A Ukrainian army helicopter, for instance, was targeted Wednesday "by unknown gunmen" in Kramatorsk, which is about 9 miles (15 kilometers) from Slavyansk. On Ukraine's Internal Affairs Ministry website, Deputy Minister Sergiy Yaroviy said the helicopter suffered "minor damage" to its blades but was able to land safely, with no injuries to its crew.
"We have eyewitnesses who testified about hearing the so-called little green men bragging about the murders," he said Wednesday. "We have another eyewitness who saw these men alive in the torture cells and who was able to escape."