Dozens killed in suicide bomb attacks at rally, early voting stations in lead-up to national election in Iraq
At least 50 people have been killed in Iraq as suicide bombers targeted a political rally and Iraqi police and soldiers casting their votes early for a national election on April 30.
A suicide attacker killed at least 30 people and wounded 50 others at a Kurdish political gathering in the town of Khanaqin, 140 kilometres north-east of Baghdad.
The Kurds were celebrating the television appearance of Iraqi president Jalal Talabani, a Kurd incapacitated since late 2012, who cast his vote in Germany where he was undergoing medical treatment.
"The attacker snuck among the crowds near the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan's headquarters and blew himself up, causing a tragic massacre," one police officer said, sobbing after he discovered his brother was among those killed.
Meanwhile, Sunni Muslim militants, mostly disguised in army and police uniforms, struck at polling centres around Baghdad and northern Iraq as militants tried to disrupt Iraq's fourth national election since the fall of Saddam Hussein in 2003.
A curfew begins on Tuesday night (local time) as ordinary Iraqis prepare to vote on Wednesday.
Security forces are at war with an Al Qaeda offshoot, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIS), in western Anbar province and other areas encircling the capital.
Prime minister Nuri al-Maliki is battling for a third term in office but faces fierce opposition from political opponents, with sectarian violence in the Shiite Muslim-majority country at its most intense since 2008.
In the western Mansour district of Baghdad, six police died and 16 others were wounded when a suicide bomber dressed as a policeman detonated his explosives at the entrance of a school being used for voting, police and medical sources said.
In the Sunni neighbourhood of Adhamiya, a bomber blew himself up in front of another polling centre, killing four soldiers and wounding seven.
"We saw a person in army uniform coming out from a side street. He started to run in our direction. We all started to flee after realising he was a bomber," Ahmed Sultan, a soldier who was waiting to vote, said.
"While I was running a powerful blast threw me... everybody was shouting 'run, run, a second bomber could hit us'."
ISIS, which wants a Sunni Muslim caliphate, has threatened Sunni Iraqis with death if they vote.
The attacks seemed designed to intimidate people debating whether it was safe to vote.
In northern Iraq, where ISIS has been hitting the security forces with ambushes, assassinations and explosions in their homes, at least 10 police were killed.
In Tuz Khurmatu, a suicide bomber wearing a police uniform blew himself up near a polling station, killing three policemen and wounding nine, police said.
Sunni militants have repeatedly attacked the area, which is home to the Shiite Turkmen minority.
A bomber in a police uniform blew up himself and six policemen by a voting centre in Kirkuk.
One soldier was killed and four wounded when a suicide attacker in an army uniform blew himself up near a polling station in the town of Hawija, 70 kilometres south-west of the northern city of Kirkuk, police said.