Kunduz hospital bombing: Doctors Without Borders (MSF) says 33 still missing from US air strike
Medical aid group Doctors Without Borders says 33 people are still missing several days after an attack on its hospital in the Afghan city of Kunduz, sparking fears the death toll could rise significantly.
A US air strike on the hospital killed 12 staff and 10 patients, prompting the medical aid agency, also known as Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), to close the centre and demand an independent international investigation.
The centre was seen as a lifeline in a war-battered region with scant medical care and which is once again on the frontline after a stunning Taliban operation.
"We are still in shock," said Guilhem Molinie, the head of MSF in Afghanistan.
"We lost many colleagues and at the moment it's clear that we don't want to take the risk for any of our staff."
MSF has set up a hotline in the hope of tracing the nine patients and 24 staff who are still unaccounted for.
"We cannot speculate on their whereabouts," it said in a statement.
It is possible, MSF added, that unidentified bodies remain in the hospital but that cannot be confirmed amid the ongoing insecurity in the area.
NATO secretary general Jens Stoltenberg said defence ministers from the alliance had discussed the attack, which is the subject of three separate probes by the US military, NATO and Afghan officials.
"We addressed the situation in Kunduz, including the tragic loss of lives in the Doctors Without Borders hospital," he told a press conference.
"We underlined the importance of a full and thorough and transparent investigation. We need to have all the facts on the table."
His comments came a day after US president Barack Obama apologised to the aid group and promised a full probe into the hospital attack.
Meanwhile the NATO chief said the alliance was preparing to "take decisions" on the future of its training and advisory mission in Afghanistan, which replaced the alliance's combat role in the country last year and is set to end in 2016.
The Taliban's recent capture of Kunduz has however badly shaken confidence in the Afghan government's ability to hold the militants off despite NATO support, leading to second thoughts.
"Later this year, we will decide on the troop levels and where they will be based," Mr Stoltenberg said.
"This will be done on the basis of a detailed security assessment which we expect in the coming weeks."
The US has also signalled its willingness to consider slowing its withdrawal from Afghanistan.