Egypt unrest: Deadly clashes erupt as Port Said mourns
Three people have been killed and 400 injured in the Egyptian city of Port Said at the mass funeral for about 30 people killed in unrest on Saturday.
Clashed broke out as the coffins were carried through the streets. Unrest was also reported in the capital, Cairo.
Saturday's clashes in Port Said were sparked by death sentences passed on 21 local people over football riots.
Supporters of the defendants attacked the prison holding them. Two policemen were also killed in the unrest.
Security was stepped up in Port Said in the aftermath of the rioting. The military has been deployed around key buildings.
But there were clashes between security forces and mourners during Sunday's mass funeral. Gunfire was heard near the procession as police fired tear gas into the crowd of tens of thousands of angry mourners.
Meanwhile, anti-riot policemen barred Egypt's interior minister from attending the funeral of two colleagues killed in the Port Said clashes, venting their fury at Mohammed Ibrahim for not arming police with live rounds to protect themselves from rioters.
In Cairo anti-government protesters clashed with security forces near Tahrir Square for a fourth consecutive day.
The UK embassy, located near the square, remained closed to the public on Sunday because of the "unfolding turbulence", officials said. Other nearby Western embassies were also closed.
Egypt's President Mohammed Morsi was addressing the nation in a television broadcast on Sunday evening.
Correspondents say Port Said remains in a state of rage after the 21 defendants were sentenced over riots which killed 74 people after a football game last February.
February's violence began when fans of Port Said side al-Masry attacked visiting supporters from Cairo club al-Ahly.
Saturday's death sentences sparked celebrations in Cairo but anger in Port Said, where more than 30 people were killed.
The violence followed a day of unrest on the second anniversary of the uprising that ousted Hosni Mubarak. At least seven people were killed and more than 450 wounded across Egypt.
Friday saw a big anti-government rally in Cairo's Tahrir Square, with opposition supporters clashing with police.
The liberal opposition accuses Mr Morsi of being autocratic and driving through a new constitution that does not protect adequately freedom of expression or religion.
The government is also being blamed for a deepening economic crisis.
President Morsi and his allies have dismissed the claim, saying they have a democratic mandate following recent elections.
The constitution, drawn up by an Islamist-dominated body, was approved by a referendum last month.