Suspects in Charlie Hebdo attack, store siege killed
French security forces on Friday killed the two brothers suspected in the Charlie Hebdo massacre while raiding a printing facility where they had holed up with a hostage, who was freed unharmed, according to multiple reports.
Meanwhile, at a separate siege of a kosher supermarket in Parisfour people, as well as a gunman, were killed, according to NBC News. French police are now searching for a woman said to be an accomplice of Amedy Coulibaly, the suspected hostage-taker at the kosher market, U.S. law enforcement told NBC News.
A Paris prosecutor said Coulibaly killed four people when he entered the kosher market on Friday, the Associated Press reported. Fifteen hostages in the store were later set free, the AP said.
The three-day terror spree has become one of the worst the country has seen in decades.After the clashes on Friday, French President Francois Hollande said the threats to France—in the form of terrorism and racism—were not done.
He praised the work of law enforcement and security forces in handling the hostage situations, adding that France will continue to increase security in public places.Hollande stressed French unity in the aftermath of the attacks, cautioning against racism.
Earlier on Friday, Said Kouachi, 34, and his 32-year-old brother Cherif Kouachi, who were wanted in the killing of 12 people at the French satirical publication, came out firing at police after they stormed the printing shop, according to several reports.
A member of al-Qaida's branch in Yemen told the Associated Press on Friday that the group had orchestrated Wednesday's attack on Charlie Hebdo "as revenge for the honor" of Islam's Prophet Muhammad. The publication had previously published cartoons depicting Muhammad.
The Yemeni branch's leadership chose the target "carefully," the member told the AP.U.S and European sources close to the investigation said on Thursday that one of the brothers, Said Kouachi, was in Yemen in 2011 for a number of months training with Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), one of the group's most active affiliates.
Before security forces raided the brothers' location on Friday, four explosions were heard at the site of the assault in the town of Dammartin-en-Goele, a 12 kilometer (seven-mile) drive from Charles De Gaulle Airport. Police cordoned off an industrial estate, and French news channel France 24 reported that 1,000 officers were involved.
The two brothers had been cornered by police inside a printing house in Dammartin-en-Goele. One police officer told The Associated Press earlier that the suspects told negotiators they "want to die as martyrs."
A police official earlier told reporters the grocery store gunman was believed responsible for the roadside killing of a Paris policewoman on Thursday. Authorities released a photo of him and a female accomplice but were unclear about her whereabouts.
Police have closed down a ring road that circles Paris near the kosher supermarket, which would have busy ahead of the approaching Jewish Sabbath at sundown.