Libya uprising - Sunday 6 March
Good morning, we'll be providing live updates on a highly fluid situation in Libya amid reports that Gaddafi forces have launched attacks to retake towns held by the opposition. Here are the main developments so far.
Reports say loyalist troops have retaken the town of Bin Jawad, about 110 miles east of Gaddafi's stronghold city of Sirte, which lies between Tripoli and Benghazi.
In the capital itself, gunfire erupted in the morning. The first salvoes of gunfire, which began at 5.30am, sounded far more aggressive in intent than the widespread celebratory fire and honking of car horns that later overtook it.
In a side drama, the opposition are holding a number of suspected SAS personnel who parachuted in around four days ago. They were caught near the town of Khadra, about 30km west of Benghazi. Rebel leaders yesterday claimed that the captives were being treated well and would be released as soon as the British government vouched for their identity with the rebel command.
Martin Chulov has been talking to me about the story, broken in the Sunday Times (paywall), about that SAS group being held by the rebels in Benghazi.
Martin says the SAS team were caught about 19 miles west of Benghazi and appear to be part of a British diplomatic mission to make contact with the opposition. A senior member of Benghazi's revolutionary council told Martin: "they were carrying espionage equipment, reconnaissance equipment, multiple passports and weapons. This is no way to conduct yourself during an uprising. Gaddafi is bringing in thousands of mercenaries to kill us, most are using foreign passports and how do we know who these people are? They say they're British nationals and some of the passports they have are British. But the Israelis used British passports to kill that man in Dubai last year."
(Please turn off auto-refresh button to listen to audio)
I've just been talking with Peter Beaumont about the gunfire that broke out this morning in Tripoli that initially sounded like gun battles, but then turned into celebratory gunfire. Peter makes a couple of points. First despite government reports that rebel-held towns such as Zawiyah have been retaken by loyalist forces, this is not the case. The towns are calm. He emphasises how hard it is to pin down what is going on unless you can see things for your own eyes. Second, the gunfire of this morning amounts to an attempt by the regime to prepare its troops for the coming battles in the next few weeks.
(Please turn off auto-refresh to listen to audio)
Here is the Guardian story on the SAS subplot, with its Keystone Kops element. Fox says there is a British diplomatic mission in the eastern part of the country trying to establish contact with rebel groups.
While Zawiyah, 30 miles west of Tripoli, and Ras Lanuf, further east, remain in the hands of the opposition despite government claims, reports indicate that loyalist forces supported by aircraft have pushed rebels away from the coastal town of Bin Jawad to stop their advance on Gaddafi's home town Sirte. Amid conflicting claims one thing is clear, writes Peter Beaumont.
Reuters has this on the fighting at Bin Jawad, about 100 miles from Sirte, a Gaddafi stronghold, which blocks the road to Tripoli.
Reuters quotes a rebel source in Benghazi as saying that the business about the special forces will be cleared up shortly, as the Guardian's Martin Chulov indicated earlier (11.37am). It seems the rebels are waiting to hear from the British government to confirm who these people are. The whole thing does not make the British government look a bit foolish.
It's clear from reporters in Tripoli, including our own Peter Beaumont, that the Libyan government has been telling porkies about having recaptured cities such as Zawiyah and Ras Lanuf. Wyre Davies for the BBC in Tripoli has also been on air saying that these cities remain in rebel hands. The Gaddafi regime is cranking up the propaganda that is for sure, although the opposition has also been putting out dud information as Peter wrote last week.
Security forces have detained at least 22 minority Shia Muslims who protested last week over what they say is discrimination, activists have told Reuters. The protesters want the release of prisoners held without trial. The Saudi government yesterday said it would not tolerate demonstrations and anybody taking part would be arrested. The warning comes ahead of a "day of rage" called for on Friday.
The Associated Press has this on Bangladeshi migrant workers who were in Libya taking drastic action to avoid returning to Bangladesh.
HMS Cumberland is in Benghazi harbour to evacuate any British and EU nationals. The ship is due to leave at dusk, says the Foreign Office. The foreign secretary, William Hague, told BBC1's Politics Show that he is in touch with people across Libya as he confirms that a British diplomatic team was in Libya.
He also said contingency planning is taking place about a possible no-fly zone.
The Obama administration is considering tapping into the US strategic oil reserve as a way to help ease soaring oil prices, the White House chief of staff, Bill Daley, told a US TV news show, NBC's Meet the Press. His remarks follow a jump in oil prices to $100 a barrel because of the ructions in the Middle East.
David Cameron has restated British policy on Libya. He told the Conservative party spring conference in Cardiff that Britain will intensify pressure on the regime, warn that crimes against humanity will be punished, provide humanitarian assistance and plan for every eventuality. My colleague, Andrew Sparrow, is live blogging the conference here.
The British government will put on three charter flights to repatriate 500 Bangladeshis stranded in Tunisia after they fled Libya. The planes will leave Tunisia's Djerba airport for Bangladesh's capital Dhaka today, the department for international development said in a press release. Britain says it has already evacuated 6,000 Egyptians.
The US has told American citizens to think about leaving, saying the security risk in was extremely high. Britain has also warned against travel to Yemen, advising those without a pressing need to stay to leave by commercial flights. Clashes today took place in the town of Ibb when government loyalists attacked demonstrators with sticks and stones. President Ali Abdullah Saleh has said he will not run again when his term ends in 2013, but protesters want him gone by the end of the year.
There have been more protests in the small gulf state. This from AP.
Anti-Gaddafi forces are moving on the coastal town of Bin Jawad, 100 miles east of Sirte, Reuters reports. The rebels were driven out of the town earlier in the day after taking it on Saturday.
A summary of developments so far.
Fighting is reported in the towns of Zawiyah and Misrata, to the immediate west and east of Tripoli, and positions near the oil port city of Ras Lanuf, 410 miles east of the capital. But they remain in rebel hands despite government claims. However, the town of Bin Jawad is reportedly back under government control. Heavy gunfire in Tripoli was followed by celebratory shots.
David Cameron accused Labour of doing "dodgy deals in the desert" and repeats that "it is time for Gaddafi to go". British officials confirm that a "small British diplomatic team" is in eastern Libya to try to talk to rebels, but would not comment on reports that rebels have detained special forces soldiers. Rebel sources say they will be released pending confirmation of their identity by the British government.
Saudi Arabia's senior clerics have backed a government ban on public protests ahead of a "day of rage" on Friday. Security forces have detained at least 22 Shias who have staged small protests for about two weeks in east.
The US has told American citizens to think about leaving Yemen, saying the security risk in was extremely high. Britain has also warned against travel to Yemen, advising those without a pressing need to stay to leave by commercial flights. Clashes today took place in the town of Ibb when government loyalists attacked demonstrators with sticks and stones. Thousands of protesters blocked the entrance to the prime minister's office in Bahrain but failed to disrupt a government meeting.
A Libyan rebel fighter mans a checkpoint in the rebel-held town of Ras Lanuf, about 400 miles east of Tripoli.
AP reports that at least one person died after government supporters armed with knives and guns attacked protesters in Ibb, southern Yemen. The clashes came after some 200,000 protesters in Ibb, 120 miles south of the capital, Sana'a, took part in a demonstration Friday calling on President Saleh to step down. In a separate development, suspected al-Qaida gunmen killed four soldiers from the elite republican guard forces in the central Marib province.
Anti-Gaddafi rebels fire multiple launcher rockets during fighting against government fighters near the town of Bin Jawad, which has been retaken by the regime.
Reuters has this on the fighting at Bin Jawad.
A doctor at Misrata hospital has told Reuters that at least 18 people were killed in fighting between government and rebel forces, with many wounded. Earlier, the news agency quoted residents as saying that rebels repelled a government attack backed by tanks and artillery. Misrata lies 125 miles east of Tripoli.
One of the 18 dead in fighting at Misrata was a baby, a doctor tells Reuters.
William Hague, the foreign secretary, should be relieved to hear this. The chairman of the senate foreign relations committee, John Kerry, says the US and its allies should plan for a no-fly zone over Libya, although it should not go into operation without international backing. Last week, the US defence secretary, Robert Gates, warned against loose talk of a no-fly zone, pointing out that it would involve taking out Libya's air defences.
Here's the Guardian's updated interactive map of the fighting in Libya.
It looks like the British special forces men are on their way out of Libya. Al Jazeera's Hoda Hamid saw the eight men boarding the HMS Cumberland which had come to Benghazi to evacuate British and other EU nationals. The frigate has now left, probably en route for Malta. She said she was was shown an official letter explaining seven of them were providing the security detail for the eighth, a diplomat, who was attempting to get in contact with opposition forces.
Our national security expert, Richard Norton-Taylor, has a bit more on the this outreach mission from British intelligence that could have come out of Evelyn Waugh's Scoop.
Official confirmation from the Foreign Office that the British outreach mission to the Libyan rebels has come to a rather abrupt and embarrassing end. The foreign secretary, William Hague, said:
Here is a summary of the day's events as we close this live blog.
The Foreign Office has confirmed that a diplomatic team sent to make contact with the rebels has now left Libya. The six special forces personnel and two MI6 agents were taken away by the HMS Cumberland, which had docked in Benghazi to evacuate British and other EU nationals. The foreign secretary, William Hague, said the team "had experienced difficulties", which had been resolved.
Rebels beat back an attack by government forces on the town of Misrata. Residents said at least 18 people were killed. Rebels continue to hold s Zawiyah and Ras Lanuf, despite government claims of their recapture. Loyalist troops, however, have retaken the town of Bin Jawad, about 110 miles east of Gaddafi's stronghold city of Sirte.
In Tripoli, gunfire erupted in the morning. The first salvoes, which began at 5.30am, sounded far more aggressive in intent than the widespread celebratory fire and honking of car horns that followed.
The British government laid on charter flights to repatriate 500 Bangladeshis stranded in Tunisia after they fled Libya. Britain says it has already evacuated 6,000 Egyptians and British officials say they are prepared for further surges of people who may be on the other side of the border.