4 Gaza rockets hit south Israel
Three rockets fired by Palestinian terrorists in north Gaza landed in the Ashkelon area Monday evening. There were no reports of injury or damage.
One of the rockets landed about 660 feet from one of the facilities in the southern city's industrial zone.
The "Color Red" alert system, which warns residents of incoming projectiles, was activated.
"We heard the siren and ran for cover in protected areas. We went back to work a few minutes later," a man who works in the industrial zone said. "This time we heard a loud explosion and understood the rocket landed very close to us."
Most of the area's factories were closed when the rocket hit, apart form a few which operate 24 hours a day.
The two other rockets landed within the limits of the Ashkelon Beach Regional Council.
Ashkelon Deputy Mayor Shlomo Cohen said, "Our biggest fear is a surprise attack during school hours, as most educational institutions here are not fortified."
The attack came shortly after the Palestinians reported that a 65-year-old farmer was shot to death by IDF soldiers near the security fence separating Israel from Gaza. The army has not confirmed the report.
Palestinian news agency Wafa said the farmer, Sha'aban Qarmut, was shot by soldiers manning an observation point near Beit Hanoun, which is located on the northeast edge of Gaza.
According to the report, the farmer was critically wounded and later died at a hospital in Beit Lahiya. Other media outlets in the Hamas-ruled territory said the soldiers opened fire for no apparent reason at farmers who were cultivated their fields.
There were also reports of "massive presence" of Israeli aircraft above Gaza.
Later Monday, another Qassam landed in an open area in within the limits of the Eshkol Regional Council in the western Negev. No injuries were reported.
Overnight Monday the Israeli Air Force bombed two targets in the Strip in response to rocket and mortar fire emanating from the Strip over the past week. There were no reports of injury on the Palestinian side.
The army said it holds Hamas "solely responsible for the goings on in Gaza."
Shmulik Hadad and Roee Nahmias contributed to the report