Assam terror attack: 13 killed, Bodo group denies responsibility
At least 13 people have been killed and nearly 18 injured as suspected Bodo militants opened fire at a market place in Assam's Kokrajhar district today. While one attacker has been killed, police forces are on the look out for the remaining two.
Bodo outfit NDFB denies it is behind the Kokrajhar attack and says police is trying to create communal disturbance.
"There were definitely three to four attackers. One of them has been neutralised," Mukesh Sahay, DGP  Assam told India Today.  
AK-56 and 47 series rifles along with grenades were recovered from the attack site.
The attack took place at a crowded market place 3-4 kms away from Kokrajhar town. Reports say that there were intelligence inputs about militants planning to target Kokrajhar.
The DGP and top police officials of the region have rushed to the attack site.
According to locals, five to seven gunmen, in a stolen tempo AS-16C / 6340, opened indiscriminate firing at a weekly market at Balajan Tinali area. The terrorists also lobbed a grenade, damaging several shops in the area.
Home Minister Rajnath Singh tweeted, "Spoke to Assam CM Shri @sarbanandsonwal who apprised me of the situation in Kokrajhar. MHA is closely monitoring the situation."
"This attack in Kokrajhar is unfortunate. We have to ascertain that who are the people behind this attack. It is very unfortunate that so many lives have been lost. Peace had prevailed on border line. With the joint efforts of state and central government, peace had prevailed there," Minister of State for Home Affairs Kiren Rijiju told reporters in New Delhi.
"Saddened by the attack in Kokrajhar. We strongly condemn it. Thoughts and prayers with the bereaved families and those injured. The Home Ministry is in touch with the Assam Government and is monitoring the situation closely," Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweeted to condemn the attack in Kokrajhar.
Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal has condemned the killings and directed the district authorities to provide medical aid to the injured.
He has also directed Finance, Education and Health minister Himanta Biswa Sarma to rush to the spot and review the situation in the area, where more security personnel have been deployed.
Sonowal, who was sworn in as the first BJP chief minister of Assam on May 24, said his government is committed to ensure the safety of life and property of the people of Assam.
"Our government is committed to take stern action against extremists outfit to ensure the safety of civilians," he said.
"We will not tolerate any threat from any group. The government will not bow to any pressure while tackling terrorist groups," he said, adding all deputy commissioners and superintendents of police across the state have been directed to be on high alert following the attack and in view of the upcoming Independence Day.
The CM said Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Rajnath Singh have spoken to him and conveyed their condolences. The Assam government has decided to grant an ex-gratia of Rs 5 lakh to the kin of the deceased and Rs 1 lakh to those injured, he said.
He hoped that the people of Assam will maintain peace during this critical period. "I am sure people of Assam will definitely maintain peace and harmony. This is our sincere appeal to everyone," Sonowal said.