Afghan Aid Leader Recalls Talk of Risk
Despite the violence, one of the worst attacks on relief workers in the country’s recent history, the International Assistance Mission said it had no plans to leave the country, but was suspending further medical expeditions for lack of experienced personnel.
“Two of them had 30 years of experience, local contacts and spoke Dari fluently,” Mr. Frans said. “They are irreplaceable.”
He was referring to the team leader, Mr. Little, and his longtime friend and colleague, Dan Terry, both Americans who were among the 10 workers gunned down last week in Badakhshan Province after trekking 100 miles in the Hindu Kush with portable medical facilities. The group focused on eye care but offered other medical services as well. The Taliban and other insurgents claimed responsibility, accusing them of acting as spies and missionaries.
Mr. Frans said he was unsure about the immediate fate of the workers’ bodies. Five families of the American victims have expressed a wish for the deceased to be buried in Afghanistan, but American investigators raised the possibility of returning their remains to the United States for autopsy.
A spokeswoman for the United States Embassy, Caitlin Hayden, said an a statement that no decisions had been made about how to handle the bodies.
“Under federal law, the FBI has jurisdiction to conduct investigations worldwide when U.S. citizens are killed,” she wrote. “Plans have not been finalized by the families and authorities involved, but one of several possibilities is returning the remains of the deceased U.S. citizens with dignity to the United States for autopsies.”
The International Assistance Mission released the names of all 10 victims on Monday. It repeated its denials that any had been involved in missionary work or spying.
The four other Americans were identified as Cheryl Beckett, 32, of Knoxville, Tenn.; Brian Carderelli, of Harrisonburg, Va., the videographer for the expedition; Dr. Tom Grams, of Durango, Colo., a dentist; and Glen Lapp, a Mennonite nurse from Lancaster, Pa..
The German was identified as Daniela Beyer, 35, from the city of Chemnitz, west of Dresden. Dr. Karen Woo, a British surgeon, was the eighth foreigner.
The two Afghans were Mahram Ali, a driver, and a man named Ahmed Jawed.
Mr. Jawed, 24, was the expedition’s cook and had been on previous expeditions with the aid group, which called him “well-loved for his sense of humor. He would also help dispense the free eyeglasses that the team distributed on the expeditions.
His cousin, Mualana Korban Muhammed, remembered Mr. Jawed as an outgoing, polite young man who was the primary source of financial support for his wife, three young children and extended family.
The other Afghan victim was Mr. Ali, 51, who came along on the expedition as a driver and to guard the team’s three vehicles. Rahim Majid, the operations manager at International Assistance Mission, said Mr. Ali, too, was a husband and father to three young children. One of his sons had been paralyzed by polio and another’s arm had been amputated. “He was the only person to care for his family,” Mr. Majid said.
The surviving member of the team, an Afghan driver named Safiullah, was released by the insurgents after he begged for his life as a Muslim and recited Koranic verses, according to his account to the police. He was being held for questioning by the Ministry of Interior in Kabul — where he had returned with the bodies of his colleagues Sunday, Mr. Frans said, adding that family members had been able to speak to him.
Earlier, Mr. Frans had described Mr. Safiullah as a trusted colleague who had worked with the group for four years. At the news conference, he declined to discuss what Mr. Safiullah knew about the attack because of the American and Afghan investigations.
Mr. Frans also denied accusations by insurgents that the group had Bibles in Dari or were otherwise engaged in proselytizing. The International Assistance Mission has worked in Afghanistan since 1966 and none of its personnel have engaged in missionary work, which is against the law in Afghanistan and a violation of the group’s own rules.
In addition, there was another Afghan survivor of the expedition, Said Yasin, a nurse, who left separately before the attack. Mr. Frans said Mr. Yasin had confirmed that none of the group had Bibles with them, and that he never saw them engage in missionary work during the expedition or otherwise.
“As things stand now, I.A.M. is not thinking of withdrawing from Afghanistan,” he said. However, the loss of its medical team members, particularly those with long experience in Afghanistan, made running such provincial outreach impossible, he said.
“Tom was the driving force behind much of what has been achieved in eye care in Afghanistan,” he said.