Ukraine crisis: 10 civilians killed, several wounded in attack on passenger bus at checkpoint
At least 10 civilians have been killed and many others wounded near a checkpoint in eastern Ukraine after a passenger bus came under heavy fire.
Local police said the intercity bus suffered a direct hit near a checkpoint controlled by Ukrainian government forces.
Photographs taken at the scene showed the bus and seats inside it peppered by holes.
A long trail of blood marked the road beside where it stood near the town of Volnovakha.
The bus was attacked by rebels using Grad rocket launchers while it was carrying civilians through a checkpoint, a regional Ukrainian administration spokesman said.
"Ten people have been killed and at least 13 are wounded," he said.
However rebel forces denied Ukrainian police reports that pro-Moscow separatists were likely to be responsible.
They said it was likely the shelling was from a stray rocket that was intended to hit troops guarding that checkpoint.
The war between Ukrainian forces and pro-Russian rebels broke out soon after Russia annexed Crimea last year, creating the worst crisis in East-West relations since the Cold War.
Western governments accuse Russia of backing the separatists, including by sending in troops, which it denies.
Attempts to organise a peace summit this week have been abandoned because of a lack of progress towards ending the crisis that has cost nearly 5,000 lives since April last year.
There were hopes talks involving Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France would result in a ceasefire that would actually hold, instead of the daily clashes that cost military and civilian lives.
A senior official from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) called for maximum restraint from all sides in the conflict.
"Over the past 24 hours the situation has significantly deteriorated, especially near the Donetsk airport," said Ertugrul Apakan, head of the OSCE special monitoring mission in Ukraine.
"More civilian casualties have been reported elsewhere."