'Jarabulus is completely liberated': Syrian rebels backed by Turkey 'seize' Islamic State-held town
Turkish tanks and hundreds of opposition fighters have thrust deep inside Syrian territory in a lightning operation that within hours ousted Islamic State jihadists from a key Syrian border town.
The air and ground offensive — the most ambitious launched by Ankara in the Syria conflict to date — made rapid progress towards Jarabulus with rebel fighters already proclaiming victory by late afternoon on Wednesday (local time) just 14 hours after it started.
"Jarabulus is completely liberated," Ahmad Othman, a commander of the Sultan Mourad rebel group, said from the scene, while another rebel spokesman said IS fighters had fled towards Al-Bab to the south-west.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who is hosting US Vice President Joe Biden in Ankara, said Syrian fighters in Jarabulus had "taken it back" from IS militants.
Turkey's state-run Anadolu news agency reported just one Syrian rebel fighter was killed and 10 wounded.
Local media reported about 46 jihadists were killed in the operation, but this was not confirmed by officials.
Mr Erdogan emphasised that the operation was also targeting Kurdish militia fighters (PYD) strongly opposed by Ankara — but backed by the US as a key ally against IS — who had also been closing in on Jarabulus.
Mr Biden reassured Turkey that Washington had told the Kurdish fighters under no circumstances to cross west of the Euphrates River or face the total loss of American support.
The operation — named "Euphrates Shield" — began at around 4:00am (local time) on Wednesday with Turkish artillery pounding dozens of IS targets around Jarabulus.
A dozen Turkish tanks then rolled into Syria along with hundreds of Syrian opposition fighters in pick-ups who then moved south towards Jarabulus.
US A-10s and F-16s warplanes also hit IS targets in Syria in support of the offensive, a US official said.
The speed of the advance was stunning and stood in stark contrast to the long, grinding battles required for Kurdish forces to recapture towns from IS militants in northern Syria, such as Kobane and Manbij.
Syrian fighter reconnaissance teams have begun working in the centre of Jarabulus to check for any explosives left behind by the jihadists.
Mr Erdogan reiterated that the operation was aimed against both IS militants and the Kurdish PYD — "terror groups that continuously threaten our country in northern Syria".
Ankara has in the past been accused of turning a blind eye to the rise of IS militants in Syria and even aiding it logistically, claims the Government had always vehemently denied.
But analyst now say Turkey wants to show it is serious about taking on the IS group, which has been blamed for a string of attacks inside the country — the latest a weekend attack on a Kurdish wedding in Gaziantep that left 54 people dead, many of them children.