Charlie Hebdo attack: Suspects' names, photos released
(CNN)French police say two suspects in Wednesday's terrorist attack on Charlie Hebdo magazine are still on the loose after escaping onto the streets of Paris.
In a statement on their website, French national police ask for information on the whereabouts of suspects Cherif Kouachi and Said Kouachi, warning that both could be armed and dangerous.
Police released photos of the two men, who Paris Deputy Mayor Patrick Klugman told CNN are brothers in their 30s.
Cherif Kouachi, left, and Said Kouachi, right, are suspects in the Paris attack.
Police found an ID document of Said Kouachi at the scene of the shooting, CNN affiliate BFMTV reported. "It was their only mistake," said Dominique Rizet, BFMTV's police and justice consultant, reporting that the discovery helped the investigation.
Citing sources, the Agence France Presse news agency reported that an 18-year-old suspect in the attack had surrendered to police. CNN has not independently confirmed whether the suspect has surrendered.
A tactical unit was deployed in an operation about a 144 kilometers (about 90 miles) from Paris in Reims, France, following the attack, CNN affiliate BFMTV reported. Authorities haven't revealed details about the target of the operation, but speculation surged in French media that investigators could be closing in on the suspects.
"Everything will be done to arrest (the attackers)," French President Francois Hollande said in a speech Wednesday night. "... We also have to protect all public places. Security forces will be deployed everywhere there can be the beginning" of a threat.
"We then heard them open fire inside, with many shots," he said. "We were all evacuated to the roof. After several minutes, the men fled, after having continued firing in the middle of the street."
Video shows a gunman approaching his getaway car and raising his finger in the air in what appears to be a signal, possibly to another vehicle or other people who might have played a role in the attack, a Western intelligence source briefed on the French investigation told CNN.
Charlie Hebdo Charlie Hebdo editor and cartoonist Stephane Charbonnier, known as "Charb," is among the dead in the attack, a police spokesman in the district where the office is located told CNN. At least three other well-known cartoonists -- known by the pen names Cabu, Wolinski and Tignous -- were also killed.
Police impounded a black Citroen in northeastern Paris similar to the one purportedly used by the attackers as a getaway car. Video from CNN affiliate BFMTV shows the vehicle being towed from Porte de Pantin, in Paris' 19th district.
Investigators will do a complete DNA work-up on the Citroen, including soil signatures that might suggest where the gunmen came from, a Western intelligence source briefed on the probe told CNN.
The same source said that French authorities are searching all travel records from the past 17 days to see whether any of the attackers entered the European nation over the holidays. This includes checks at Charles de Gaulle and Orly airports, as well as whatever limited information is available from train stations.
Thursday will be a national day of mourning for those killed in the attack, Hollande said. He asked for a moment of reflection Thursday and said flags will be at half-staff for three days.
Charlie Hebdo Charlie Hebdo is no stranger to controversy for lampooning a variety of subjects, including Christianity. But what it's done on Islam has gotten the most attention and garnered the most vitriol.
which has angered many Muslims around the world The magazine has a controversial history of depicting Mohammed, often in an unfavorable light, which has angered many Muslims around the world
The attack on the magazine spurred a wave of support for the publication and its practices around France and the world.