U.S., South Korea set naval exercises for Sunday
SEOUL — The U.S. and South Korea were set to begin naval exercises in the waters west of the Korean Peninsula on Sunday, a show of force that North Korea warned would bring the region to the "brink of war."
U.S. Adm. Michael Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the U.S. is trying to prevent the tensions over North Korea's attack on a South Korean island on the disputed maritime border from escalating into a more significant confrontation.
"We're very focused on restraint and not letting this thing get out of control," Mullen told CNN in an interview scheduled for broadcast Sunday on Fareed Zakaria GPS and posted on the network's website. "Nobody wants this thing to turn into a conflict."
North Korea's shelling of Yeonpyeong, which killed four people and wounded 20 more, raised tensions that flared after an international inquiry concluded that North Korea torpedoed the South Korean warship Cheonan in March and more recently following North Korean claims of advances in its nuclear program.
The U.S. called the four days of naval drills, which include the aircraft carrier USS George Washington and four smaller warships, "defensive in nature" and said they were initially planned before the Tuesday shelling of Yeonpyeong.
The nuclear-powered carrier, which holds about 85 aircraft and is served by a crew of 6,500, was last in waters off the Korean Peninsula in July as part of drills after the Cheonan's sinking, which killed 46 sailors.
Kim Jong Il's regime warned that any infringement of North Korea's sovereignty would spark another attack.
"Escalated confrontation would lead to a war," a North Korean government agency in charge of relations with South Korea said in a statement on the state-run Korean Central News Agency. "Gone are the days when verbal warnings are served only."
Shipping was warned to avoid an area of the Yellow Sea parallel to China's northeastern city of Qingdao while gunnery exercises take place from Monday to Friday, according to the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency. Qingdao lies about 615 kilometers west of Seoul.
China's Foreign Ministry warned against having the exercises in China's "exclusive economic zone" without its authorization, Xinhua News Agency reported.
The Pentagon reiterated that the U.S. military notified China of the planned exercise, as it has in the past.
President Barack Obama, along with Japan's Prime Minister Naoto Kan and South Korean President Lee Myung Bak, have called on China to use its influence to temper North Korea's actions. China is North Korea's main economic and political benefactor.
China has the most leverage with North Korea and "it's really important that Beijing lead here," Mullen said.
South Korea is considering reinstating North Korea as the "main enemy" in its defense guidelines, Yonhap News reported Saturday, citing a government official it didn't identify. The term may be restored in a Defense White Paper after North Korea's artillery attack, the Korean-language news agency said.