Muslim-Christian clashes in Central African Republic leave 21 dead
At least 21 people have died and more than 100 have been injured in clashes in the Central African Republic after a Muslim motorcycle taxi driver was murdered and his body dumped near the airport of the capital.
The death, whose motive was unknown, prompted Muslims to march from their quarter in the 3rd district of the city to the largely Christian 5th district armed with automatic weapons, machetes and grenades.
Thousands of people fled to other areas of the city and displacement camps as houses and cars as well as a church and a Muslim community radio station were torched by the raiders.
United Nations peacekeepers and troops from the former colonial power France have taken up positions around Bangui, and a helicopter was seen hovering overhead, as the violence, said to be the worst this year, spread on Saturday.
The landlocked central African nation has seen two years of violence following the removal in March 2013 of former president Francois Bozize by Muslim Seleka rebels in the largely Christian country who accused him of failing to honour an earlier peace deal. The conflict has seen thousands killed and many more forced from their homes.
Dominique Said Paguindji, the transitional government’s security minister, blamed the violence on elements of the Christian, “anti-balaka” militia, the Seleka, and supporters of Mr Bozize who want to see him return to power.
"These armed groups don't subscribe to a logic of disarmament and want to split the country," he told Reuters. "All of these people have the same interest in wanting to see the transition ruined and the coming elections halted."
Voters are due to elect a new president and parliament on October 18 to replace an interim government led by Catherine Samba-Panza. Mr Bozize, who ran the country for 10 years before he was ousted and is now in exile in Cameroon, has suggested he will run again.
However, the head of the interim parliament said the polls will likely be postponed again because of organisational delays, and analysts have suggested they should be to allow the transitional government to make further headway on disarmament of militia.