J&K unrest: Curfew lifted in valley after 52 days
SRINAGAR/ NEW DELHI: For the first time in 52 days, curfew was lifted from the entire Kashmir valley, barring three police stations, on Monday, setting the stage for the visit of an all-party delegation to the state on September 4. However, curfew was reimposed in some parts at night after fresh tension. Home minister Rajnath Singh will lead the delegation in a bid to explore dialogue as part of a political process to bring peace to the valley.The team will meet a cross-section of individuals and outfits in Srinagar on September 4 and 5. The visit could be extended by a day if it goes to Jammu as well.While there is no official word on the entities the team will talk to, indications are that it will limit itself to the brief followed by the team which went to the state in 2010. Then, LJP member and now food minister Ram Vilas Paswan had met some Hurriyat leaders separately . This time too, the team may not talk to secessionists but members will be free to interact with anybody they wish to. The opposition has demanded a political ou treach since violent protests broke out in the valley. The timing of the delegation's visit seems to have been worked out during J&K CM Mehbooba Mufti's meetings with home minister Rajnath Singh in Srinagar and PM Narendra Modi in Delhi.Singh also held a discussion with BJP chief Amit Shah, finance minister Arun Jaitley and MoS in PMO Jitendra Singh, an MP from the state, in what was described as a stock-taking exercise. It was decided at this meeting that an all-party delegation should go to Srinagar as soon as possible. The Centre has informed other political parties about the visit.Meanwhile, J&K resumed a shadow of normalcy on Monday even though a few clashes were reported from a number of places in Srinagar and parts of Budgam district. Nobody was hurt in these incidents, police said.The areas that fall under three police stations -Nowhatta and Maharaj Gunj in Srinagar, and Pulwama -remained under curfew. Miscreants emerged on the streets in these areas and tried to create trouble.Rioters pelted stones on private vehicles, erected barricades and also threw stones at vehicles of security forces, leading to clashes at multiple places. Following the clashes, the authorities imposed restrictions in these areas. Intense clashes in the interiors of Batamaloo, Srinagar, led to the authorities reportedly reimposing curfew in the area. Police said there was “minor“ stone-pelting in some areas.The 22 lawmakers nominated by Pakistan PM Nawaz Sharif as envoys to highlight the Kashmir issue in key nations have no credentials to do so, the nation's opposition parties said on Monday. Ex-cricketer Imran Khan's PTI and former president Asif Ali Zardari-led PPP have also rued the lack of opposition representation on the team. PTI's Asad Umar asked how the team would highlight the issue when most didn't even attend parliamentary debates.J&K opposition party National Conference said on Monday it would provide free legal assistance to youngsters arrested during the current spell of unrest in the valley. “The legal cell of NC in every district will provide free legal assistance to youths arrested on fictitious charges by the present government,“ party general secretary Ali Mohammad Sagar said. He added that an atmosphere of “lawlessness“ was being created in J&K.