Cairo explosion at Egypt's main Coptic Christian cathedral kills at least 25
A terrorist detonated a 12kg bomb inside a church targeting Cairo's main Coptic Christian community killing 25 people, including six children, and wounded a further 49. 
The bombing, which is the latest attack on Cairo's Coptic community, saw a terrorist enter the church and blast the female's side of the building. 
Riots have since erupted outside the building as protesters have arrived, chanting for the resignation of Egypt's interior minister and fighting with police. 
Footage from the scene shows dead and wounded victims being carried from a church beside the historic building in the centre of the Egyptian capital. 
Egypt's official news agency confirmed the bomb attack was the second to take place in the capital over the weekend. 
St. Mark's Cathedral is the seat of Egypt's Orthodox Christian church and is home to the office of its spiritual leader, Pope Tawadros II.
The attack was one of the deadliest on the religious minority in living memory. 
However, members of Egypt's Coptic Christian community have been targeted by members of the Muslim Brotherhood who supported the ousted former leader Mohamed Morsi 
Morsi's supporters accused the Christians of backing President Abdel-Fattah el-Sisi who led the overthrow in July 2013.
Commenting on the attack, El-Sisi announced a three-day state of mourning. He said: 'The pain felt by Egyptians now will not go to waste, but will result in an uncompromising decisiveness to hunt down and bring to trial whoever helped through inciting, facilitating, participating or executing this heinous crime.' 
There was no immediate claim of responsibility, however, some supporters of the ISIS celebrated the attack on social media.
One message said: 'God is great, God is great, God is great.'
Another wrote: ' God bless the person who did this blessed act.' 
A device containing about 12 kg of the explosive TNT had denoted on the women's side of the cathedral, the security sources said.
Emad Shoukry said: 'As soon as the priest called us to prepare for prayer, the explosion happened. 
'The explosion shook the place... The dust covered the hall and I was looking for the door, although I couldn't see anything... I managed to leave in the middle of screams and there were a lot of people thrown on the ground.'
The blast took place around 10am local time, 8am GMT.  
State television quoted a security official saying a bomb made of TNT appeared to have been behind the explosion.
A crowd outside the cathedral chanted: 'Tell the sheikh, tell the priest, Egyptians' blood is not cheap.' 
Bishop Angaelos, General Bishop for the Coptic Church in Britain said: 'The church is deeply loved by many Coptic faithful in Cairo and it has a regular parish presence.' 
He said services had been held in the church on Sunday morning, while the adjacent St Mark's Cathedral was being renovated.
He added: 'It's an easier target because its entrance is outside the precincts' of the cathedral.
Cathedral worker Attiya Mahrous said: 'I found bodies, many of them women, lying on the pews. It was a horrible scene.'
There was no claim of responsibility for any attack, but jihadists in Sinai have targeted Christians before, as well as Muslims they accuse of working with the government. 
The bombing was condemned by Al-Azhar, Egypt's top Sunni authority. 
Sheikh Ahmed al-Tayeb said: 'The vile terrorist explosion was a great crime against all Egyptians.' 
Copts, who make up about 10 percent of Egypt's population of 90 million, have faced persecution and discrimination dating back to the 30-year rule of Hosni Mubarak, who was toppled by a popular uprising in 2011.
Dozens have been killed in recent years in sectarian attacks and clashes throughout Egypt.
With security forces as the main target, militants have repeatedly attacked policemen and soldiers since the army overthrew Islamist president Mohamed Morsi in 2013 and unleashed a bloody crackdown on his followers.
Most of the attacks are conducted in the Sinai Peninsula by a branch of the Islamic State group, although militants have also targeted security forces and government officials in Cairo.
On Friday, six people died in a bombing next to a police checkpoint in the Talibiya area of Cairo shortly before Muslim weekly prayers when the streets are mostly empty.
Turning their sights on the Copts, Islamists in August 2013 attacked churches and homes of Copts in retaliation for the deadly dispersal by security forces of protest camps of Morsi supporters in two Cairo squares.
Enraged by the crackdown in which hundreds died, mobs of alleged Islamists lashed out at Copts in the Upper Egypt province of Minya, accusing them of backing the military.
More than 40 churches were attacked nationwide after the crackdown, with most attacks in Minya and Assiut, Human Rights Watch said at the time.
The Copts were also often targeted during Mubarak's rule.
In 2011, a suicide bomber killed 21 worshippers outside a church in the coastal city of Alexandria.