British PM broaches 'safe passage' for al-Assad
"Done. Anything, anything, to get that man out of the country and to have a safe transition in Syria," David Cameron told Al-Arabiya TV in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, in an interview aired Tuesday.
"Of course I would favor him facing the full force of international law and justice for what he's done. I am certainly not offering him an exit plan to Britain, but if he wants to leave, he could leave; that could be arranged," Cameron said.
Not long after the remarks aired, there was a bombing near the homes of government forces in Qudsaya, a town near Damascus, killing at least 11 people and wounding dozens of others, the state-run Syrian Arab News Agency said.
The rebel Free Syrian Army claimed responsibility for the attack, saying it planted four explosive devices near the residences as revenge for regime attacks in Daraya and Eastern Ghouta, both on the capital outskirts.
Cameron's statement reflects the frustration in the West and much of the Arab world over failed efforts to halt the daily violence, emblematic of the full-blown civil war that has left more than 35,000 people dead.
"My point is to make clear the we feel very strongly about accountability and believe that Assad and his regime should be brought to justice for the crimes they have perpetrated. But there is also urgent priority to stop the violence and get a political dialogue going. It is incredible to think that the opposition would accept Assad as part of that transition. But exactly how that is achieved, we will wait to see," Grant said.
The Syrian crisis began in March 2011, when the government fiercely cracked down on peaceful protests. The crisis escalated and is now regarded as a civil war, pitting the government against rebels and opposition groups fighting al-Assad.
"Brahimi is hoping that everyone will be more proactive. But the fact that Russia and China have three times vetoed efforts by the UNSC to take more coercive measures against the regime, there is a particular responsibility on them. They are supporting the Assad regime, and they have a particular responsibility as permanent members of the Council to stop this violence."
One video posted online shows large plumes of dark smoke billowing into the sky. The activists said the smoke came from an explosion at an oil pipeline in Homs as government and rebel forces battled nearby.