Egypt protests - Thursday 10 February
Good morning. Protests against the government in Egypt are entering their 17th day today. Protesters remain camped out in Cairo's Tahrir Square and outside the People's Assembly, calling for Hosni Mubarak, the president, to leave office immediately.
The US and Egypt have got into a row over Washington's call for rapid change in Cairo. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Egypt's foreign minister, has rejected a demand from the US that Cairo speed up the pace of reform. The US should not impose its will on a "great country", Aboul Gheit said.
But the White House said Egypt's plans for change did not amount to enough to satisfy protesters. Robert Gibbs, the White House press secretary, said:
PJ Crowley, a spokesman for the US state department, said:
Aboul Gheit also responded to calls by Joe Biden, the US vice-president, for Egypt's emergency law to be lifted, saying that the escape of 17,000 prisoners meant this was impossible.
Gibbs has previously hinted that Cairo's behaviour may affect US aid to Egypt.
But according to the Times today Saudi Arabia has said it would prop up Mubarak if the White House tried to force a change of regime, and would step in with financial aid if the US withdrew its assistance, which the paper says amounts to $1.5bn a year.
Some protesters slept in front of Egyptian army tanks last night in order to serve as human barricades to prevent the tanks from driving into the square.
The BBC has a good map of the area.
The government refuses to give ground on the demonstrators' main demand, although Omar Suleiman, the vice-president, has promised there will be no reprisals against the protesters for their campaign to remove Mubarak. Mubarak has promised to stand down when his term expires in September, but the demonstrators want him gone now.
Demonstrators are accusing the government of playing for time and say they will not give up until the "half revolution" has been completed.
But the protesters are now in danger of losing momentum. Tomorrow's demonstration will be the biggest test, as protesters try to bring as many people out on to the streets as they could last Friday and this Tuesday. Tuesday's was the biggest demonstration yet, while yesterday protests spread to the parliament building.
Meanwhile in China, Ma Zhaoxu, a spokesman for the foreign ministry, has expressed support for Egypt's efforts to maintain stability and rejected the idea that foreigners should interfere with the country's government. He said:
• Chris McGreal reveals allegations of detention and torture made against the Egyptian army.
• Robert Tait tells of his experiences being tied up and blindfolded by the Egyptian security services as his fellow detainees were electrocuted and beaten.
• Ian Black analyses the Egyptian regime's intentions and the role of Suleiman.
• Jack Shenker and Chris McGreal report from Cairo on the talks between the opposition and the government, the spreading of unrest, and the involvement of striking workers.
• Timothy Garton Ash says ecstatic crowds in Cairo prove there is no clash of civilisations – everyone wants freedom. The question is, how to get it?
• Ahmed Salah, a co-founder of the 6the April Youth Movement and the Egyptian Movement for Change, argues that the west has a duty to help end Mubarak's rule.
• And the Guardian's leader column looks at the two faces of Egypt.
I have just been speaking to the Guardian's Chris McGreal in Cairo. He told me that although today would probably not be a make-or-break day for the protesters in Tahrir Square, tomorrow would be much more important, as the last two Fridays have been, in determining exactly how strong opposition to the government has become.
Chris also explained a bit about the background to the diplomatic row between the US and Egypt's foreign minister Ahmed Aboul Gheit (see 9.53am).
Chris McGreal mentioned (see 10.16am) the involvement of strikes in the protests, something that has been seen in some quarters as a significant addition to the composition of the demonstrators. The Associated Press news agency reports on today's strike by bus drivers and public transport workers across Egypt:
My colleague Haroon Siddique sends this report on the April 6 youth movement.
The April 6 youth movement seems to have stepped up its online activities in the past couple of days, perhaps concerned about the degree of focus on the Muslim Brotherhood and its negotiations with the Mubarak regime. The April 6 youth movement is refusing to take part in the discussions with the government. In a couple of interesting messages sent to members of its Facebook page, it has respectively condemned the Brotherhood and Mohamed ElBaradei as "bourgeois" and warned of an impending attack by the army.
Quoting from an article entitled "The Arab revolution in danger" – and presumably therefore endorsing it, the youth movement posted this:
On the threat posed by the army, the 6 April youth movement writes:
The movement claims Suleiman's plan is to surround the square with soldiers disguised as normal civilians, attack them and then "free the place from the protesters".
My colleague Harriet Sherwood, the Guardian's Jerusalem correspondent, reports on a Facebook page urging people in the Gaza Strip to take to the streets tomorrow after Friday prayers, following a rally by several hundred students yesterday in solidarity with Egyptian protesters.
Here is a picture of demonstrators doing their morning exercises at the protests in Tahrir Square today.
Al Jazeera is reporting that the Egyptian army has entered the grounds of parliament for the first time.
Al Jazeera is now reporting live from Tahrir Square, where a great number of protesters can be seen, many of them sheltering under makeshift tents. They are chanting "Leave, leave". I should be hearing from Chris McGreal again as soon as he gets down there.
Egyptians are very dependent on public transport, AP reports.
Chris McGreal has filed a story from Cairo on the Egyptian foreign minister's rejection of US pressure on the government.
Jack Shenker, who is also in Cairo, sends me the following on what he calls "the rapidly-collapsing facade of Omar Suleiman's 'peace talks'". These talks, says Jack, have exposed the Egyptian regime's lack of genuine interest in a transition to democracy. The Guardian's stories on both this and the allegations of torture regarding the army (see 9.53am) are causing a stir in Egypt, he reports.
Ian Black, the Guardian's Middle East editor, discusses comparisons between the Iranian revolution of 1979 and the current Egyptian uprising made in a joint interactive programme involving the BBC Arabic and Persian services yesterday.
The Egyptian protests have clearly increased the power and influence of the Arabic language news broadcaster al-Jazeera and its English language sister channel. As my colleagues John Plunkett and Josh Halliday reported earlier this week, "the Qatar-based channel's acclaimed coverage of the Egyptian crisis has been referred to as the broadcaster's 'CNN moment', doing for al-Jazeera English what the first Gulf war did for CNN, pushing it to the forefront of the public's consciousness. Put simply, must-see TV."
The Associated Press reports this morning that the Egyptian government clearly ascribes significant influence to the channel – which you can watch online here – making it clear that, in the news agency's words, "it believes [the channel is] a chief culprit stoking the anti-government protests roiling the country".
AP points out that security forces have detained, and later released, at least nine al-Jazeera correspondents since the protests erupted last month. In addition, authorities have banned its Arabic and English language channels from broadcasting and revoked the press credentials of all of its journalists. The channel has continued to report despite the restrictions, disguising the identities of its correspondents on the ground. Reporters say they have removed their al-Jazeera logos from their equipment. One reporter, who did not wish to be named, said:
AP goes on: "Pro-government thugs set the Qatar-based network's Cairo offices ablaze, along with the equipment inside, as part of a broad pattern of attacks on journalists covering the unrest."
Omar Suleiman, the Egyptian vice-president, told Egyptian newspaper editors on Tuesday that "certain satellite channels" were provoking the protesters and insulting Egypt. A week earlier, he said: "I blame some friendly countries who own unfriendly channels that have fueled the youth against the country by lying and showing the situation as worse than it is."
Jack Shenker has sent me this video of the Egyptian protests so far, which he says is currently doing the rounds. As one commenter points out, "Disturbing to see how many people have been run over by security forces in vans."
On Twitter there are several reports of the Egyptian army "raising yellow flags near tanks" and many are asking what this means. In the comments, SanFranDouglas points to a tweet from Sandmonkey offering his explanation.
We can't confirm that.
Brian Whitaker, the Guardian's former Middle East editor, has also posted an email from the Egyptian embassy's press office in London. It reads:
Reuters is reporting that one of the Egyptian opposition parties has pulled out of the talks on reform with the government, saying Hosni Mubarak's administration has not responded to "the minimum level of popular demands". The Tagammu party is the first group to withdraw from the dialogue, which Omar Suleiman, the vice-president, began on Sunday in a response to the protests.
Demonstrators have dismissed the talks as irrelevant. The Muslim Brotherhood, a leading and formerly banned Islamist opposition group, said yesterday that the talks had not yet tackled the issues that triggered the demonstrations. But it has continued to take part.
Mohamed ElBaradei, the leading opposition figure who many see as a potential next president, was not invited to the talks and has said they lack credibility.
So far there has only been one dialogue session and no date has been set for another one, Reuters reports. Legal opposition parties such as Tagammu and Wafd had taken part, along with independent figures such as business tycoon Naguib Sawiris.
Explaining why it was pulling out of the talks, Tagammu criticised the government's handling of the dialogue, saying official announcements on what had been agreed were inaccurate. "Unacceptable statements" by officials had put participants "in confrontation with the popular revolution", it said.
Reuters is also suggesting that strikes in textiles, steel and telecommunications industries in Egypt suggest "a spirit of civil disobedience is spreading" in the country.
Associated Press sends an interesting report on a number of aspects of today's protests.
• The government has threatened the army could crack down on the protests by imposing martial law. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, the foreign minister, told al-Arabiya that "adventurers" take over the process of reform the military "will be compelled to defend the constitution and national security ... and we'll find ourselves in a very grave situation." This followed his comments to PBS last night that there would be chaos of Hosni Mubarak stepped down immediately. "Do we want the armed forces to assume the responsibility of stabilizing the nation through imposing martial law, and army in the streets?" As AP notes, it was the second coup warning this week, with Omar Suleiman making similar threats on Tuesday.
• In the Suez Canal city of Port Said crowds have rioted over lack of housing for a second day, setting fire to the local headquarters of state security, the main post office and the governor's office, which had already been partially burned the day before. Police and soldiers did not seem to be intervening.
• AP also has more details on Tagammu, the opposition party which today pulled out of talks with government on reform (see 12.44pm). The news agenyc describes the party as leftwing and says: "Tagammu is one of the official, government-sanctioned opposition parties that have little public support and no role in the protests, and are seen by protesters as little more than extensions of the regime."
• Youth activists plan to "up the ante" with tomorrow's protests, calling for an expanded rally in Cairo, hoping to repeat Tuesday's success.
• In Cairo, thousands of protesters are again demonstrating in Tahrir Square, where protests against Hosni Mubarak have taken place since 28 January. Meanwhile workers and union members are staging strikes and sit-ins at a series of firms and government agencies. Youth activists are hoping to make tomorrow's protests as big as those seen this Tuesday and last Friday (see 1.02pm).
• The government has threatened that the army could crack down by imposing martial law (see 1.02pm).
• A state-sanctioned opposition party, Tagammu, has pulled out of talks with the government on reform, saying Mubarak's administration has not responded to "the minimum level of popular demands" (see 12.44pm).
• Ahmed Aboul Gheit, the Egyptian foreign minister, has responded angrily to American suggestions that Cairo should pick up the pace of change (see 11.24am).
• In Port Said, hundreds of protesters demanding cheaper housing have torched a police station and at least 10 security cars (see 1.02pm).
• In Alexandria and the southern cities of Sohag and Assiut strikes and sit-ins have also taken place, according to reports.
Maplecroft, a company that analyses global risk, has sent me the following prediction of how events in Egypt could now pan out:
Blogger Sandmonkey has just tweeted that Mubarak is to appear on TV tonight.
• The business community is concerned about the economic impact of the ongoing protests and strikes.
• Reuters says the army has been "praised" by demonstrators in Cairo, where it "continues to stand by, overseeing" the protests. "Pro-democracy protesters consolidated a new encampment around Cairo's parliament building and the main focus of the opposition, Tahrir, or Liberation, Square remained crowded. Organisers were looking forward to another major push on the streets on Friday when protesters said they plan to move on to the state radio and television building."
• Yet the news agency also reports US human rights group and Egyptian activists' claims that the Egyptian army has detained dozens of protesters and "abused" some of them in custody, as the Guardian revealed today.
Reuters carries this denial from the army:
Hossam Bahgat, executive director of the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights, said:
Bahgat said the number of people detained could be higher since families may not have been informed.
Some readers have asked about Kareem Amer, the blogger who served a four-year term for insulting Murbarak before being released and detained again on 6 February. According to the Reuters report, he is still in detention.
On the righthand side of this blog, my colleague Brian Whitaker, the Guardian's former Middle East editor, picks out the best blogposts and links on the region. He has linked to this Foreign Policy piece on the rise of al-Jazeera (see 11.56am). The article says "undemocratic regimes across the region are now looking over their shoulder at al-Jazeera" and ask: could al-Jazeera threaten Saudi Arabia?
The channel was finally allowed to open an office in Saudi about two weeks ago, Foreign Policy reports. The article goes on:
Lindsey Hilsum of Channel 4 News is reporting that Hosni Mubarak is going to transfer his powers to Omar Suleiman, his vice-president, tonight. More as soon as I get it.
Hilsum reports that Hossam Badrawi, the secretary general of Mubarak's NDP party, has told her in that over three meetings yesterday and a phone call today he convinced Mubarak to stand down and hand his powers to Suleiman. He will do this in a broadcast tonight, she says.
I am also hearing conflicting rumours that Mubarak will use a speech on TV tonight to hand his powers to the army. It is unclear if this will mean martial law to clear the protests, or a permanent exit for the president. Badrawi has told BBC Arabic that Mubarak will "answer the people's demands" in the coming hours. My colleague Jack Shenker told me: "Protesters aren't certain whether they should be preparing themselves for a celebration party or a massacre."
The BBC is reporting that Mubarak "may be stepping down". It reports:
Al-Jazeera is reporting that the "supreme council" of the Egyptian armed forces are meeting to discuss the situation and an army source has said that "all the protesters' demands will be met". Of course, one of their key demands is that Hosni Mubarak resign as president. According to the TV channel the army is expected to make a statement today. Euphoria has gripped the crowd in Cairo's Tahrir Square, al-Jazeera's correspondent says.
Here is what the Associated Press has been hearing:
My colleague Jack Shenker in Cairo says he has been told by one protester that if Omar Suleiman takes over from Mubarak, "all that will happen is that everyone in Tahrir will rewrite their signs, and then carry on demonstrating".
Egyptian state TV has just been playing a statement from the supreme council of the armed forces. The army says it is going to convene regularly to safeguard the interests of the people.
Mubarak is not present at the military supreme council meeting, according to footage the military has released – something al-Jazeera claims is significant.
The crowd in Tahrir Square has been chanting "the army and the people stand together, the army and the people stand united".
The crowd in Cairo's Tahrir Square is now cheering loudly, and is now calling again for the fall of the Mubarak regime. The crowd are heading towards a giant screen in the square.
AFP is reporting an army source as saying: "We are awaiting orders that will make the people happy."
To sum up: Hosni Mubarak will meet the demands of protesters, officials from the military and the ruling NDP party have told various news organisations. The protesters' key demand is that Mubarak stand down as president.
The military's supreme council has been meeting today, without Mubarak, who is the commander in chief, and announced on state TV its "support of the legitimate demands of the people".
A spokesman said the council was in permanent session "to explore what measures and arrangements could be made to safeguard the nation, its achievements and the ambitions of its great people".
General Hassan al-Roueini, the military commander for the Cairo area, told thousands of protesters in central Tahrir Square: "All your demands will be met today."
Here is a translation of the main question in the BBC's interview with Ahmed Shafiq, the Egyptian prime minister:
I have just been speaking to my colleague Chris McGreal, who confirms there has been a sudden change in the atmosphere since the news from the military in the last half an hour. The feeling now in Cairo is "Boom: this changes everything", he said.
Reuters is reporting a CIA official as saying that Mubarak is strongly likely to step down tonight.
An Egyptian official has told the news agency Mubarak's fate will be decided in a matter of hours and "most probably" he will step down.
Here is Reuters's translation of the state news agency Mena's statement on the army council meeting:
Blogger Sandmonkey has been sending some vivid tweets on the situation:
Some contradiction of these reports from Egypt's information minister, Anas el-Fekky, according to Reuters. He said:
More unverified accounts of what is happening in Egypt. Mubarak is still in negotiations over whether to hand power to Suleiman, according to Reuters. An Egyptian official told the news agency: "It is not decided yet ... It is still in negotiation."
This is the quote from Leon Panetta, the head of the CIA:
The Associated Press notes that the army council's statement was labeled "communique number one", which the news agency says is "a phrasing that suggests a military coup".
Omar Suleiman, the vice-president, was not at the army council meeting either, the Associated Press reports.
Hossam Badrawi, the secretary general of Mubarak's NDP party, has reiterated to the BBC that he wants the president to step down, and said that is the position of the whole of the NDP. Badrawi told the BBC what he wanted Mubarak to say to Egypt:
My colleague Alexandra Topping has filed a story on the resignation rumours.
Al-Arabiya television is reporting that Mubarak has travelled to the Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh with his army chief of staff.
The prime minister, Ahmed Shafiq, says Mubarak is still in power and no decisions have been taken that would change that. Shafiq said:
The White House has said the situation in Egypt is "fluid" and they do not know anything about Mubarak's plans.
Al-Jazeera is reporting that the NDP chief reportedly stopped Mubarak making a speech handing power to Suleiman.
Egyptian state TV says Hosni Mubarak will speak to the nation from his palace in Cairo this evening.
There are rumours state TV employees are leaving the building for fear of a coming backlash.
We've embedded a live stream of Reuters pictures from Tahrir square at the top of this page. You'll need to manually refresh the page to see it.
There are reports that Mubarak left Egypt yesterday after recording a statement to be broadcast today – obviously unconfirmed.
My colleague Brian Whitaker, the Guardian's former Middle East editor, sends this analysis:
I've just been on the phone to Jack Shenker in Tahrir Square, Cairo. He said that in contrast to previous days when people have ebbed away from the square in the evening, tonight people are "streaming in". There is triumph and celebration, but also uncertainty as rumours swirl around the square. But if Mubarak stands down, there will be the "greatest street party in Africa and the Middle East" in Cairo tomorrow.
With Jack was Nour, an Egyptian activist who was arrested along with Jack a couple of weeks ago, who gave me a picture of the mood among protesters in the square. He said he had been dreaming about this moment since he was a child, but "it's only been dreams until very recently".
Sky is reporting that Mubarak will speak within two hours.
Egyptian state TV is changing its tune, according to my colleague Martin Chulov:
A senior member of the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt's biggest opposition group, said on Thursday he feared the Egyptian army was staging a military coup.
"It looks like a military coup ... I feel worry and anxiety. The problem is not with the president it is with the regime," Essam al-Erian told Reuters.
Barack Obama has been speaking. "We want all Egyptians to know America will continue to do every thing that we can to support an orderly and genuine transition to democracy in Egypt," he said. "We are witnessing history unfolding," he said.
On Sky News, the Egyptian finance minister, Samir Radwan, was asked if this was a momentous day for Egypt. He said:
But he said the opposition parties were currently too weak with "no base" and the next task was to strengthen them.
The Egyptian finance minister, Samir Radwan, has just told Sky News that Suleiman has been running Egypt for the last week.
In the US, James Steinberg, the deputy secretary of state, said Washington was committed to ensuring that political changes in the Middle East did not threaten Israel and that any Egyptian government honours the treaty with Tel Aviv.
We are ending this live blog here and continuing our coverage of events in Egypt, where president Hosni Mubarak is reported to be about to stand aside, on this new blog.
I'm handing over to my colleague Richard Adams now. Thanks for all your comments and input.
We are ending this live blog here. Our coverage of events in Egypt, where presidentHosni Mubarak is reported to be about to resign tonight, continues on this new live blog.
"The revolution will not be televised" according to Gil Scott Heron – turns out he was wrong, at least in Egypt at this point.
Hello from Washington DC, where the US cable TV networks are all focused intently on Egypt, as hopes grow that Mubarak will be gone tonight.
According to CNN – which is doing a fine job today – its sources are saying that the military will take control at some point, with a particularly droll quote from a "senior Egyptian official":
This blog has now ended. Coverage continues here
Egyptian state television is running some sort of strange patriotic promo for Mubarak's appearance tonight, scheduled for 8pm GMT, with people shaking hands with the military and waving flags.
It is remarkably reminiscent of the BBC satire The Day Today's "It's alright," a film held in reserve for times of crisis.
Now the Egyptian information ministry is saying that Mubarak is not going to stand down, according to state television.
More when we get it.
The Associated Press has just run a flash: "CAIRO (AP) — State TV: Egypt's information minister denies that Mubarak will step down."
At this point it's hard to know what to believe.
This blog has now ended. Coverage continues here