Libya accuses Nato over bombing of imams
Government claims attack by Nato on Brega guest house killed 11 imams as Gaddafi broadcast quashes rumours he had been injured in an air strike
Libyan officials have accused Nato of "barbarically slaying" 11 Islamic imams and wounding 45 others by bombing a guest house in the eastern city of Brega, where they had gathered for a peace march into rebel-held territory.
Officials in Tripoli showed video footage of up to seven corpses whom they identified as imams killed when a bomb was dropped on the building in which they were sleeping.
The group had reportedly travelled to Brega from across the war-torn country. They had appeared on state-run television on Thursday and, according to government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim, planned to move to the nearby city of Ajdabiya on Friday and then to Benghazi.
It was impossible to corroborate the government claims. However, funerals for the victims have been arranged across the country on Saturday and Christian priests joined Muslim leaders in condemning the deaths at a central Tripoli mosque late on Friday.
Nato had not offered a detailed response to the Libyan claims by Friday night. A Nato official initially said the site hit had been a "command and control centre" for the Libyan military, but did not elaborate further.
If the carnage proved to be the result of a Nato strike, it would be the most serious setback to the three-month air campaign, whose stated mission is to safeguard civilians from attacks by loyalists of Colonel Muammar Gaddafi.
The Libyan leader delivered a brief audio address on Friday night to rebut rumours he had been injured in an air strike and to condemn the "cowardly crusader aggressor attack" in Brega.
Gaddafi said he was hiding in a place "where you can't reach me", referring to Nato jet fighters that he believes are continually targeting him.
An air strike two weeks ago reportedly killed one of Gaddafi's sons, Saif al-Arab, and three of his grandsons.
The bomb that hit the house in which the imams were staying in Brega struck before dawn. Government officials identified the building as a guest house popular with western oil company employees.
Brega has been bitterly contested since clashes in mid-February erupted into violent revolution. The area of Brega where the imams stayed is still thought to be under government control – a belief supported by the fact that state-run television had filmed the gathering on Thursday as well as the aftermath of the explosion.
Further west, loyalist forces and western-backed rebels were still striving for outright control of the city of Misrata, where the worst fighting of the past three months continues.
On Friday night rebels backed away from their earlier claims of victory. If Misrata was to be wrestled from government hands, it would put the capital in striking distance.
For now, however, Tripoli remains a city under firm regime control, despite massive fuel shortages, which are causing drivers to camp out in their cars for up to three days to fill their tanks with petrol.
There is little open sign of dissent in Tripoli, with opposition supporters so far reluctant to declare their hands.