Dhaka cafe attack: Bangladeshi militants id'd in siege, officials say
Dhaka, Bangladesh (CNN)All the attackers in the deadly assault on a cafe in Dhaka were Bangladeshi citizens, and five of them were militants that police had tried to arrest previously, Police Inspector General Shahidul Hoque told CNN Saturday.
Authorities also released the nationalities of the 20 hostages who were found dead inside the Holey Artisan Bakery cafe after Bangladeshi troops stormed the cafe early Saturday morning, ending a nearly 11-hour siege.
Nine of the victims were Italian, seven were Japanese, one was from India, two were Bangladeshi and one was a U.S. citizen of Bangladeshi origin, according to the country's Joint Force Command. Eleven of the victims were male and nine were female.
Two police officers had been killed in a gunfire exchange earlier in the standoff, authorities said.
The attack in the affluent, diplomatic enclave was the deadliest and boldest act of terror in a country that has become increasingly numb to ever-escalating violence by Islamist militants.
Initially, a U.S. official told CNN it was more likely that al Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent conducted this attack because it had demonstrated a more capable presence in Dhaka through attacks over the past few months. But after photos purportedly showing the inside of the cafe and dead hostages were posted on an ISIS-affiliated website, U.S. officials said they are now focused on ISIS as the perpetrator.
The fact that the images were posted approximately 90 minutes before Bangladeshi forces stormed the restaurant suggest that several hostages had already been killed before the commandos moved in. While CNN can't verify the authenticity of the photos, the images show wall murals, glossy tables with carved legs, white chairs and other items very similar to those seen on the cafe website.
These photos don't prove that ISIS had operational control of the attack, but the website also displayed the photos and noms de guerre of five individuals, claiming they carried it out.
One of the dead was an American citizen, authorities said, but it was unclear if that victim was one of three students from universities in the United States. Two of them attended Georgia's Emory University, including Abinta Kabir of Miami, who was a sophomore at Emory's campus in Oxford, Georgia. She was in Dhaka visiting family and friends, the school said.
"The Emory community mourns this tragic and senseless loss of two members of our university family. Our thoughts and prayers go out on behalf of Faraaz and Abinta and their families and friends for strength and peace at this unspeakably sad time," a statement from the university said.
Hasini said she would form anti-terrorism committees with the police and the public to help identify potential terrorists and plots. She urged the public -- and especially parents -- to combat religious extremism by teaching children and the misguided to do "the right thing."
"For those vulnerable and young people who are being misguided, and those that are aiding them, I have one question," Hasini said. "What do you hope to achieve by killing innocent people? Islam is a religion of peace. End your killing in the name of Islam. Don't malign our holy religion."
"The guests were all lying on the ground under the chairs and tables," Reza told Boishakhi TV. And we (the employees) escaped in whichever safe way we could. Some went to the roof, others went to other safe spots."