Libya: BBC crew beaten and given mock executions
The team made public their fate at the hands of soldiers and militia after flying out of the country on Wednesday night.
Feras Killani, a journalist of Palestinian-Syrian origin for the BBC Arabic service, was treated particularly brutally, kicked and punched and beaten with a pipe on a number of occasions before being held overnight in a cage in a militia compound.
But Chris Cobb-Smith, a British national, had perhaps the most chilling moment right at the end of the three men's ordeal.
"We were lined up against the wall facing it," he said. "A man with a small sub machine gun was putting it to the nape of everyone's neck in turn. He pointed the barrel at each of us. When he got to me at the end of the line, he pulled the trigger twice. The shots went past my ear ….
"They all laughed as though it was very funny."
Libya, normally one of the most closed countries in the Middle East to journalists, has invited in scores in the past ten days in a bid to demonstrate that television reports of the crisis in the country are exaggerated. They have been handed letters saying they can report freely.
But after a series of miscalculations, once taking reporters to Zawiyah, a town still in rebel hands, officials have tightened movements, detaining scores at checkpoints around the capital, Tripoli, including The Daily Telegraph's correspondent twice.
The BBC team were first held by military surrounding Zawiyah on Monday, as a fresh government attack was under way.
Mr Killani said he thought he had been singled out because of BBC Arabic's reporting, which had been fiercely attacked by government officials the day before. A captain took him to a car park outside the barracks where they were first held.
"He started hitting me without saying anything," he said. "First with his fist, then boots, then knees. Then he found a plastic pipe on the ground and beat me with that. Then one of the soldiers gave him a long stick."
They were then driven to a militia base, after being told they would be killed if they uttered a word, where Mr Killani was set upon the minute he stepped out of the car.
"They were kicking and punching me, four or five men," he said. "I went down on to my knees. They attacked me as soon as I got out of the car.
"They knocked me down to the ground with their guns, AK-47s. I was down on my knees and I heard them cocking their guns. I thought they were going to shoot me. It was a fake execution."
He was put into a cage where he spent the night with other prisoners who were being brought in. Mr Cobb-Smith and the third member of the team, Goktay Koraltan, who is Turkish, were held separately.
They saw other captives who had been beaten, and heard the screams of people apparently being tortured. At 3am they were all crammed into a van with other inmates and taken to a third compound, where the final mock execution took place before the three were released.
"After the shooting incident one man who spoke very good English, almost Oxford English, came to ask who we were," Mr Cobb-Smith said. "When he had filled in the paper work, it was suddenly all over."
They were then fed tea and biscuits, and seven hours later were returned to the hotel where most of the media are staying. "One man said to me, sorry it was a mistake by the military," Mr Killani said. "But he said you were wrong first because you went out without permission.""