Seeking New Leadership, Millions of Egyptians Take to the Streets
"As far as they can see, Morsi had one year, but he has not doing anything," says Khaled Fahmy, a professor at the American University in Cairo. "They didn't accomplish the aims of the revolution."
The opposition is calling for the military or the country' top court to take power and oversee fresh parliamentary elections and the drafting of a new constitution that is more inclusive of minority rights and distributes power more equally between the government branches.
Both sides have held rival protests, and many confrontations have turned deadly.
At least eight people were killed and hundreds wounded in clashes north and east of Cairo in the past week. Most of the victims have been Muslim Brotherhood members, and opposition forces have attacked the party's offices in several cities. This morning, Egyptian police announced they seized more than 142 grenades and 440 rockets from two apartments in Cairo near Tahrir Square.
Three opposition protesters were killed today in Asyut in a confrontation near a Muslim Brotherhood office. A member of Al Gamaa al-Islamiya -- a group allied with the Muslim Brotherhood -- was killed in Beni Suef, south of Cairo.
But the largest opposition protests of the day remained peaceful. Egyptians came out to more than 18 locations throughout Cairo, assembling by the tens of thousands and marching on the presidential palace.
Just as those marches got underway, supporters of Morsi staged their own rallies.
Inside the Raba'a Al-Adawiya mosque in the conservative suburb of Nasr City, an old woman made rounds poking young men with a large stick, imploring them to get up and assemble in the streets. "Go to the street!," she said, "You are not here to sleep!"
Thousands of Morsi supporters have been camped out in front of the mosque, which is situated next to the Ministry of Defense, since Friday, hoping to show that Morsi is able to mobilize as many people as the opposition. But their numbers were few, and many seemed tired from the days-long stakeout.
Egyptian soldiers stood on the Ministry of Defense's balcony as hundreds of armed Muslim Brotherhood members below marched in formation.
Facing repeated attacks across the country, Morsi's supporters have developed a siege mentality.
"We will defend ourselves, but only if we are attacked," said Muhammad Zaki, a member of the Muslim Brotherhood. More than half the men at the pro-Morsi rally carried large sticks and batons, and Zaki was one of a few hundred that also sported a helmet and a shield. A former conscripted soldier himself, Zaki said he expects the military to side with Morsi. "We voted for Morsi, he should stay for four years. Is there any democracy in the world where they change the president every year?" He said Morsi made some mistakes, but he prefers to keep him in office so that the country remains stable.