UN rights chief accuses Syria of 'indiscriminate attack'
The United Nations' (UN) human rights chief has ramped up the pressure on Syrian president Bashar al-Assad, accusing his government of launching an "indiscriminate attack" on civilians.
Navi Pillay, the UN's high commissioner for human rights, said the failure to pass a Security Council resolution condemning the Syrian government "appears to have emboldened the Syrian government to launch an all-out assault in an effort to crush dissent with overwhelming force".
Syrian government forces launched renewed assaults against rebel-held areas after Russia and China vetoed the draft Security Council resolution on February 4.
Ms Pillay's speech to the 193-nation UN General Assembly also raised the possibility that the Syrian government was committing serious human rights violations that amounted to "crimes against humanity".
She said the Syrian army was implementing a "shoot to kill" policy.
"I am particularly appalled by the ongoing onslaught on Homs," she said, noting that pro-Assad forces have been using tanks, mortars and artillery in the assault on the city.
"According to credible accounts, the Syrian army has shelled densely populated neighbourhoods of Homs in what appears to be an indiscriminate attack on civilian areas."
Ms Pillay said it was difficult to establish how many people had died in the 11-month Syrian conflict, but said the figure was above 5,400 and rising every day.
"More than 300 people have reportedly been killed in the city [of Homs] since the start of this assault 10 days ago," she said.
"The majority of them were victims of the shelling."
She said tens of thousands of people, including children, had been arrested, with over 18,000 still detained; 25,000 people were seeking refuge in foreign countries; and more than 70,000 people had been internally displaced.
"Extensive reports of sexual violence, in particular rape, in places of detention, primarily against men and boys, are particularly disturbing," she said.
Ms Pillay reiterated her hope that the Security Council would refer the Syrian repression to the International Criminal Court in The Hague, as it did in the case of Libya last year.
But council envoys say veto-holders Russia and China oppose that.
"The longer the international community fails to take action, the more the civilian population will suffer from countless atrocities against them," she said.
Syrian UN ambassador Bashar Ja'afari, backed by delegates from Iran and North Korea, tried unsuccessfully to block Ms Pillay from addressing the assembly by citing procedural arguments.
Mr Ja'afari accused the Qatari president of the General Assembly, Nassir Abdulaziz al-Nasser, of political bias against Syria and rejected Ms Pillay's allegations against Damascus.
"After today, how can we trust the high commissioner for human rights on issues related to defending and promoting human rights?" he said, accusing Ms Pillay of adopting an "unprincipled" stance against the Syrian government.
He said Syria has been trying to establish security and stability "in exercise of its exclusive right to protect its citizens" and charged that some UN member states were helping Al Qaeda launch attacks in Syria against the government.
Libyan UN envoy Ibrahim Dabbashi predicted that "the Syrian despots will meet the same destiny" as Libyan leader Moamar Gaddafi, who was killed last year by rebels who overthrew his government.
He added that Russia and China's veto of the Security Council's draft resolution had given the Syria government a "licence to kill".
Russian ambassador Vitaly Churkin said the assembly meeting on Syria should never have taken place.
He reiterated Moscow's position that both the opposition and the Syrian government were to blame for the crisis, a view Western and Gulf Arab governments roundly reject.