Brussels attacks: Blast, gunfire, arrest in new police operation
Brussels, Belgium (CNN)Explosions and gunfire Friday exacerbated the uneasy mood of Belgium's capital, a city that has become the focal point in Europe's fight against terrorism following the bloody attacks here just days ago.
Residents of Brussels anxiously moved on with their lives as more police raids followed the vicious attacks in which more than 30 people were killed Tuesday.
Police operations seem commonplace now, with several taking place Friday. One was in the district of Schaerbeek, near where a taxi driver picked up three conspirators and took them to Brussels Airport before the bombings.
Witnesses told CNN that during the police activity Friday they heard two explosions, while others reported gunfire near a subway station.
One man said that his son, who has a shop inside a now closed-off area, saw an armed individual who emerged from a metro shop get shot in the leg by police.
More metro stations are open -- about half of the nearly 80 stops -- but they still close at 7 p.m. instead of the usual 1 a.m. Some trains are running through the Maelbeek station, though it is closed. Workers overnight Thursday installed screens and plastic to cover up the bomb damage from the view of passing trains.
At the Maelbeek train station a white, large wreath had been left by the Pompes Funebres Islamiques (Islamic Funeral company). The man who left the flowers said they were leaving others at other sites in Brussels. And even though he declined an interview, he told CNN, "the terrorists were not real Muslims."
There's also a growing feeling that those opposing ISIS can do more. Some of this relates to continuing military efforts in the Middle East. Some has to do with better intelligence and cooperation among allies.
Belgium, especially, has come under fire. Interior Minister Jan Jambon offered to resign after acknowledging missed opportunities to stop one of the suicide bombers, Ibrahim El Bakraoui. And Prime Minister Charles Michel said he talked with Kerry about how "to do better (and) work together to be more efficient."
Police sought out the man after they spotted him lingering on the platform with a bag, the source said. When they checked his passport they discovered he had been barred from the Schengen area, which allows for passport-free travel in 26 European countries, because of his involvement in robberies.
Authorities recovered some text messages from his phone. One of them had the name of Khalid El Bakraoui, the Brussels metro bomber. Another was sent to him at 9:08 a.m., three minutes before explosion, and stated simply "Fin."
German investigators do not know who sent the message to him. Police also found a bill on his person from a Belgium hospital dated March 18 for treatment for injuries to his torso. German investigators believe it is possible the man was injured during a raid in Brussels last week, but have not firmly established this, the source said. They found documentation indicating he had recently traveled to Germany from Belgium, the source said.
A second man arrested Thursday in Dusseldorf was also connected to El Bakraoui and his brother, Ibrahim, according to the source. German investigators have established the man took a flight from Amsterdam with Ibrahim El Bakraoui to Turkey last summer and was also arrested along with El Bakraoui in Gaziantep, near the Syria border.
Ibrahim and Khalid El Bakraoui were included in a U.S. counterterrorism watch list, a U.S. official familiar with the matter confirmed to CNN. Ibrahim El Bakraoui was on the list before the Paris attacks last November for his suspected ties to terrorism.
Authorities are looking for two other men. One appears in surveillance footage holding a large bag at a Brussels metro station, according to Belgian public broadcaster RTBF. It is possible that he, like Khalid El Bakraoui, didn't survive the subway blast.