At least 25 killed in Syria's crackdown on protesters

Update at 4:27 p.m. ET: Here's how the "independent," pro-government Champress news agency is reporting today's bloodshed:
Syrian Army troops on Monday entered the city of Daraa to prevail security and stability in the city. According to sources, no violence or bombardment has accompanied the army's progress in the city. Armed criminal groups and instigators of protests were absent. The "Syria News" TV Channel quoted sources from al-Nouaima village near Daraa that the army was the target of an ambush in which ten members of army troops were martyred. ...
Update at 4:06 p.m. ET: Read the official Syrian News Agency's complete coverage of the day's assault:
In response to the calls for help from the citizens of Daraa and their appeal to the Armed Forces as to intervene and put an end to the operations of killings, vandalism, and horrifying by extremist terrorist groups, some Army Units entered Sunday morning, April 25th 2011, to the City of Daraa to restore tranquility, security and normal life to the citizens, an official army source declared. The official source added that the Army Units, with the participation of security forces, are now chasing the said groups adding that the Army Units were able to arrest several members from the groups and confiscated huge quantities of weapons and ammunitions. The sources pointed out that the confrontations caused the martyrdom of several martyrs and wounded from the army and security forces as well as the death and injury for some members of the extremist terrorist groups.
Update at 3:42 p.m. ET: The Agence France-Presse news agency reports that an activist in Daraa, Abdullah Abazid, said by telephone that Syrian forces were bombarding the town near the Jordanian border with heavy artillery and that "at least 25 martyrs have fallen."
"There are still bodies sprawled in the streets," he said as loud explosions and shooting could be heard in the background.
"They are pounding the town with heavy artillery and machine guns," Abazid said, adding that snipers posted on rooftops were also shooting.
Update at 1:23 p.m. ET: Reuters news agency quotes a prominent anti-government activist as saying at least 18 people have died in the Syrian crackdown today.
Update at 11:16 a.m. ET: The death toll in the crackdown in Syria rose to at least 11, according to witnesses, the AP reports.
Update at 10:59 a.m. ET: The White House says sanctions against Syria are possible, the Associated Press reports.
Update at 9:14 a.m. ET: In Geneva, the United Nations human rights chief, Navi Pillay, says Syria has turned its back on international calls to "stop killing its own people," the Associated Press reports. "Instead, the government's response has been erratic, with paper reforms followed by violent crackdowns on protesters. ... The killings must stop immediately," Pillay says.
Update at 8:16 a.m. ET: CNN reports that the military operation began around 4:30 a.m., sending fear and panic through the city of 300,000.
CNN quotes several witnesses as saying bodies of the dead and wounded lay on the streets unattended.
"Ambulances could not help the injured because of the snipers and army officers who are deployed all over the city," one witness told CNN. "They shoot on anything that moves.
Original post: Syrian military forces backed by tanks have swarmed into the southern city of Daraa, killing at least five people today, according to witnesses and human rights activists.
Rights activists told Agence-France Presse that tanks have taken up positions in the town center and that snipers have been deployed to rooftops.
As the major security operation unfolds, Syria has closed the land border crossing with Jordan, according to Al Arabiya TV.
Syria TV denies the report as "baseless," but Reuters quotes a Syrian senior official in the Jordanian capital as confirming the move, saying the "timing is related to what appears to be a major security operation that is taking place right now."
Syria has charged that arms are being smuggled into Daraa, a major center of the revolt against the authoritarian regime of President Bashar Assad.
Witnesses reported that thousands of troops backed by armor swept into Daraa, killing and injuring an unknown number of people and leaving bodies lying in the streets.
Human rights groups reported that more than 300 protesters have died over the past several days in a crackdown by Syrian security forces on a five-week popular uprising.
In today's clashes in Daraa, a witness told the AP that he saw at least five corpses after security forces fired on a car in the city.
Other rights activists reported security force raids in the towns of Douma and al-Muadamiyah near Damascus.
Al-Jazeera says the British Foreign Office advises all British nationals to leave Syria "while airlines are still flying."