Andreea Cristea dies in hospital after terror attack
THE Romanian woman injured in London’s terror attack has died in hospital.
Andreea Cristea, 31, was pictured falling into the Thames River during the terrifying attack in which Khalid Masood drove a car into pedestrians and through the gates of parliament.
She is the fifth victim to have died.
Attacker Khalid Masood was also killed after being shot by police.
Ms Cristea was in London to celebrate her boyfriend’s brithday at the time.
Romanian Ambassador Dan Mihalache told Realitatea TV that the woman sustained serious head injuries and had badly damaged lungs.
She died after life support was withdrawn on Thursday, April 6.
It’s not yet known for certain if she was thrown off the bridge on impact of the crash, or whether she jumped of her own accord to avoid the carnage.
However, a Port of London Authority spokesman told the Standard it was believed she had fallen during the attack.
Her boyfriend Andrei Burnaz suffered a fractured foot in the attack. It’s believed he was preparing to propose to her at the time.
A joint statement from her family and partner thanked police and hospital staff for their help.
“After fighting for her life for over two weeks, our beloved and irreplaceable Andreea - wonderful daughter, sister, partner, dedicated friend and the most unique and life loving person you can imagine - was cruelly and brutally ripped away from our lives in the most heartless and spiritless way,” it said.
“She will always be remembered as our shining ray of light that will forever keep on shining in our hearts.”
The family also announced the money donated for her recovery will go to charity.
“She would not have it any other way,” the statement said.
“There are no words to even begin to describe the crushing pain and emptiness that is left in our hearts.
“Our family, together with Andrei, are deeply touched and eternally grateful for the unimaginable efforts and never-ending dedication provided to her and us by the entire medical personnel of each and every hospital involved. Their kindness and empathy are beyond compare.”
Four others were killed in the attack including police officer Keith Palmer, Spanish teacher, Aysha Frade, American tourist Kurt Cochran and south London pensioner Leslie Rhodes, a south London pensioner.
Attacker Khalid Masood was shot by police and 50 others were injured.