Sky Sports presenters Andy Gray and Richard Keys say sorry after mocking lineswoman during Liverpool victory
The pair had thought their observations on Sian Massey and her understanding of the offside rule during the match at Molineux were being made in private, but their microphones were still on. A transcript and tape of the conversation was leaked to the media.
Although no part of their exchange was broadcast, their comments provoked outrage when made public on Sunday and Sky, which has the broadcast rights to the women’s FA Cup final, was quick to castigate Keys and Gray.
The men were said to have apologised, although it was unclear whether their apology had been made to Massey. “The comments reported are not acceptable,” Sky said.
“They were not made on air but we have spoken to Richard and Andy and told them our views. They have apologised and expressed their regret.”
Keys and Gray made their remarks after Massey refused to penalise Raul Meireles for being offside before he set up Liverpool’s first goal.
Television replays showed that she was right to allow Fernando Torres’s goal in the 36th minute, but that did not stop Keys and Gray berating the 25 year-old.
“Somebody better get down there and explain offside to her,” Keys said.
“Can you believe that?” Gray responded. “A female linesman. Women don’t know the offside rule.”
“Course they don’t,” Keys replied. “I can guarantee you there will be a big one today. Kenny [Dalglish] will go potty. This isn’t the first time, is it? Didn’t we have one before? Wendy Toms?”
Keys was referring to Dorset postmistress Toms, the first female to run the line in the Football League and Premier League. Gray is overheard on the recording saying “she was ------- hopeless as well”.
Keys later criticised Karren Brady, the West Ham vice-chairman, who had written a newspaper column about sexism. “The game’s gone mad,” he said. “Did you hear charming Karren Brady this morning complaining about sexism? Do me a favour, love.”
Brady branded the remarks as “absolutely abhorrent” while Kelly Cates, the daughter of Liverpool manager Dalglish and a former Sky Sports News presenter now working for ESPN, ridiculed Gray and Keys.
“Phew am exhausted,” she wrote on Twitter. “Just read about something called 'the offside rule’. Too much for my tiny brain. Must be damaged from nail polish fumes.”
The Football Association reiterated its “wholehearted and continuing support” for female match officials.