London 2012 Olympics ticket website crashes after last-minute surge
Would-be customers who had pre-registered to buy tickets faced long delays to complete their transactions after the official Ticketmaster site failed to cope with the rush for tickets..
Problems struck for about 20 minutes from 10.30pm, as the clock ticked down to the 11.59pm deadline for the 6.6 million tickets.
People were greeted with the message: “We are experiencing high demand. You will be automatically directed to the page requested as soon as it becomes available. Thank-you for your patience.”
The problems eased closer to the deadline, though many people posted messages on Twitter to say they had given up with their applications.
London 2012 ambassador and former javelin thrower Steve Backley, tweeted: “Anyone else struggling to register for tickets for the Games?”
London 2012 extended the deadline to 1am. A spokesman said: “Some people experienced temporary delay in accessing the Olympic ticketing site following a surge of applications around 10.30pm this evening. This surge has now evened out and the system is working normally. Applications were still being processed during this period.
“We apologise for any inconvenience this delay may have caused and the ticketing system will remain open until 1am.”
Sports fans were told that the six-week ticket application was a marathon, not a sprint, and that they would have the same chance of getting a ticket on the first or the last day of the process.
There are 650 sessions across 26 sports and 17 days to choose from and people will be limited to a maximum of 20 events each.
Meanwhile, Locog confirmed that people without sufficient funds in their bank accounts to pay for tickets will not have their orders cancelled immediately.
A Locog spokesman told The Daily Telegraph yesterday that the organisation would “attempt on more than one occasion” to get funds from any rejected Visa card accounts, which may occur if people do not have enough money in their bank account if paying by a debit card or if the ticket orders exceed a credit limit.