Rio 2016: Paralympics come to an end with festive closing ceremony
Rio de Janeiro has closed the first Paralympics on South American soil in a blaze of fireworks and Samba for what will be remembered as the people's Games.
The closing ceremony took place at Rio's famed Maracana stadium on Monday (AEST), with festivities highlighted by a giant conga-line of athletes snaking its way around to the cheers of thousands of fans, who danced in the stands to Brazilian funk music.
Retiring Australian co-captain Kurt Fearnley took centre stage as his election to the International Paralympic Committee Athletes' Council was announced.
Fearnley had ended his Paralympics career earlier in the day, with the wheelchair racing veteran finishing second in the men's marathon, missing out on a fairytale gold-medal finish by one second.
Curtis McGrath, who won gold in the KL3 canoe sprint last week, was given the honour of carrying the Australian flag into the stadium, while Ricardinho, who scored the winning goal for Brazil in the five-a-side football final, did the same for the host nation.
After being booed in his brief appearance at the opening ceremony, Brazil's interim President Michel Temer did not attend.
And Tokyo governor Yuriko Koike took the Paralympic flag in a symbolic handover to the next host city.
A minute's silence was observed to mark the death of Iranian para-cyclist Bahman Golbarnezhad in the men's road race, the first tragedy of its kind in Paralympic Games history.
It overshadowed a Paralympics that dealt with both a funding and doping crisis to be a success, saving the Games experience for the Brazilian public after the scandal-marred Olympics.
Four weeks ago ticket sales stood at 12 per cent, but a late surge made Rio the second-best attended Games in history, behind London with 2.1 million tickets sold.
Affordable prices for a recession-battered country and the #FillTheSeats social media campaign to buy tickets for local disadvantaged children that even Prince Harry got behind has made Rio a Paralympics for the people.
Organisers shrugged off a doping controversy that left Russia banned from competition on the eve of the Games, and last minute private sponsors also ensured the cash-strapped event could go ahead.
Snapping up 22 gold medals, 30 silver and 29 bronze, Australia has now achieved a top five finish at every Games since Barcelona 1992.
Australia's gold medal effort was fifth behind China's tally of 107, Great Britain's 64 gold medals, Ukraine's 41 and USA's 40.
Fearnley was not the only Australian athlete to be making their Paralympics farewell, with Evan O'Hanlon hanging up his spikes after he was denied a hat-trick of sprint gold medals.
O'Hanlon passed the baton on to young bucks like Scott Reardon, Isis Holt and James Turner.
Teenagers carved up the Rio pool, with rookies Tiffany Thomas Kane and Lakeisha Patterson and 17-year-old London Paralympian Maddison Elliot all clinching gold.
Wheelchair tennis star Dylan Alcott became one of a handful of Australians to win gold medals in two sports after switching from wheelchair basketball.
And sport-hopping para-cyclist Jessica Gallagher became Australia's first athlete to win a medal at both a summer and winter Games.
Australia's men's wheelchair rugby team extended their golden Paralympic reign when they beat world number one America by a single point, 59-58, in a double overtime thriller final.
The Steelers flew the flag for team sports after the Rollers, the widely fancied men's wheelchair basketball team, crashed out in a shock quarter-final loss to Great Britain.
Australia won gold medals in the Games' two debut sports para-canoe and para-triathlon, and took the final two titles in sailing's Paralympics farewell.
Legally blind Katie Kelly and her sighted guide and Sydney 2000 Olympics silver medallist, Michellie Jones, teamed up to take victory in the inaugural women's para-triathlon on Rio's iconic Copacabana beach.
Veteran sailors Liesl Tesch and Dan Fitzgibbon became the first sailors to win back-to-back gold medals and sonar trio Russell Boaden, Jonathan Harris and Colin Harrison also secured a final victory before the sport is dropped from the Paralympics program ahead of the Tokyo 2020 Games.