Retired N.F.L. Players File Complaint, Complicating Talks
“Both sides are saying, ‘We’ll decide what’s in your best interests.’ ”
Whether the complaint could throw a wrench into negotiations that are to resume Tuesday in New York will be determined by the court. It would first have to decide if retired players have standing to bring an antitrust complaint, because they are not active participants in the marketplace of the N.F.L.
The complaint seeks an injunction to halt discussions between the league and current players related to retiree issues, and it asks for a declaration that the players association cannot represent the interests of retired players in settlement or prosecution of the antitrust suit. If the court does not think an injunction is appropriate, the retired players are seeking treble damages.
But the real goal of the complaint is to have Judge Susan Richard Nelson, under whose orders the mediated negotiations are being held, instruct the mediator, the league and the current players to allow representatives of the retired players to be active participants in the negotiations.
Nelson, though, may be reluctant to do anything that could hinder the chances of getting a deal between current players and the N.F.L. completed, especially at this late date. An agreement among three parties is undoubtedly more difficult to achieve than one between two parties, and it is not unusual in multiparty cases to not have all parties in the room during negotiations.
The N.F.L. declined comment Monday. One of the lawyers for the players, James Quinn, said Monday night that he did not know about the complaint and could not comment.
Negotiators made some progress toward a settlement last Thursday and Friday. But negotiators probably have only until mid-July to reach an agreement in principle that would allow a condensed free-agency period if training camps are to open on time at the end of July and preseason games are to begin on time next month.
The league estimates that it will lose $200 million in revenue for each week that preseason games are missed, money that would be part of the salary cap in a new deal.
Retired players have grown increasingly frustrated in recent weeks that their benefits have not been addressed as negotiators have pressed to complete a deal to end the lockout. Parts of the complaint underscore the fissures between retired and current players, some of which have simmered for years.
Although the group of retired players filed its own lawsuit, which was combined by District Court with the Brady suit, representatives for retired players have not been involved in the most recent negotiations, which began in early June, despite public statements by current players and the league that they intend to provide improved disability and pension benefits for retired players in the new labor agreement.
The complaint says that in connection with proposals that the mediator, Judge Arthur Boylan, asked to be submitted in May, lawyers for the current players wrote an e-mail to lawyers for retired players proposing that the current players would negotiate the economic system issues like the salary cap and free-agency rules while lawyers for retired players would make the proposal on the retired-player issues.
The complaint also says that at least one former N.F.L. player who serves in a position with the association has complained privately about representatives for retired players being excluded from recent negotiating sessions.
Retired players were persuaded to file the complaint when lawyers for current players balked at setting aside money inside the salary cap — money that is allocated annual revenue for current players — for retired player benefits, arguing that anything inside the cap should belong to current players only.
The league has offered $320 million outside the salary cap — from the total revenue pool the league would contribute that would not come out of current players’ designated annual revenue share — and $320 million inside the salary cap. That would be a total of $640 million for the 10-year deal, or about $64 million a year toward future retiree benefits.
Retired players are angry with current players and the league. The figures the league proposed are less than what advisers to retired players say is necessary to pay for appropriate benefits and pension adjustments; they say it would take closer to $200 million to $300 million a year just to bring the myriad benefits programs up to where they should be. (The complaint notes that as of last December, only 3,154 former players received pension benefits, for an annual outlay of $63.7 million.)
And the retirees are furious that current players want to keep for themselves the money the league is offering under the cap.
Retired players took this step reluctantly, Hausfeld said. They are mindful of the fragile state of negotiations and the short time left to complete a deal before parts of the season will be lost.
“On the one hand, they feel badly about this,” Hausfeld said. “On the other hand, if this opportunity passes, many of them won’t live long enough for another opportunity.”
To streamline the process — and, Hausfeld said, to avoid holding up the completion of a deal that would start this season on time — retired players have offered to negotiate a dollar figure with the league and current players, based on what the retirees say are realistic projections of future costs. The retirees would then devise the programs in conjunction with the league after a new collective bargaining agreement is reached.
Retired players also want to be represented by their own organization — the Retired Players Association — that would be separate from the league and the current players association.