North Carolina crushes Orange
HOUSTON — There have been far more No. 1-ranked teams than usual this college basketball season, six in all, but the pre-season No. 1 will be playing for the national championship on Monday night.
North Carolina made sure of that on Saturday, preventing No. 10 Syracuse from becoming the first double-digit seed to make the title game with a workmanlike 83-66 victory to improve to 33-6.
North Carolina already was the 29th pre-season No. 1 to make the Final Four. The 2009 Tar Heels were the last of the 14 that went on to win the championship.
This edition stuck to its usual playbook, mixing stout defence with a punishing inside game (a 50-32 advantage in the paint).
Syracuse tried its best to keep the bigger, longer Heels out of the paint and it worked for a time early on, but eventually, Brice Johnson and Kennedy Meeks proved too much to handle as the lone remaining No. 1 seed at this tournament advanced to meet No. 2 Villanova.
Joel Berry II was excellent across the board, compiling an eight point, 10-assist, seven-rebound evening in front of a crowd of 75,505 at NRG Park, the second-highest total for a semi-final game ever.
Johnson and Justin Jackson added 16 each, Kennedy Meeks 15 and Marcus Paige 13.
There was little surprise that not a lot separated the two ACC rivals in the first half, since a pair of regular-season contests had been tight affairs (84-73 and 75-70).
North Carolina led just 20-18 when a timeout was called. The Tar Heels heated up from there, going on a 13-6 run. Even though the Tar Heels didn’t hit a shot from beyond the arc (0-for-10) in the first half, the team still led by 11 points, because Syracuse went 3-for-10 from both the free throw line and three-point range and 35.5% overall from the field.
In the end, Trevor Cooney (22 points on 50% shooting) and Malachi Richardson (17, also on 50% shooting) were strong, but they didn’t have enough help. The rest of the team shot 11-for-34 (32%).
This was no offensive masterpiece. The Orange forced North Carolina into a lot of bricks, thanks to the trusty 2-3 zone, making it hard to get entry passes into the low post, but when UNC did get inside, good things happened.
Out of desperation, Syracuse pressed, but head coach Jim Boeheim admitted it was a Hail Mary.
“Well, I don’t think we can press this team. We were going to, because that was the only way to get back in it,” Boeheim said.
“But it’s kind of like, you know, ‘if I’m on top of the Empire State Building, I don’t have to jump to know it’s going to hurt.’ I don’t need to press North Carolina to know it’s going to hurt. They’re veteran guys. They’re good against pressure. They like pressure. They score against pressure.
Syracuse had needed some miraculous finishes to get this far after being counted out for months, so a nine-point half-time deficit wasn’t a huge deal to them. The never-quit group had rallied in the second half of its previous two games.
As expected, the Orange went on a run, but Marcus Paige answered to quiet the raucous Syracuse supporters at least a little bit. Theo Pinson followed, making it two straight three-pointers after 12 North Carolina misses to start the game. The Tar Heels found the range just in time, hitting 4-of-5 treys to finish the game to put away the pesky underdogs.
“I told the players after the game that I’m more proud of this team than any team I’ve ever coached (and) I’ve always been pretty proud of our teams,” Boeheim said at the podium when it was over.
“Obviously it’s tough right now, but I’m still proud of these guys. I mean, coming into the tournament, we weren’t even supposed to be in there, what you guys said. We just kept battling, fighting. We were down in so many games throughout this tournament.”
But in the end, despite a valiant run, the Orange could not do what the 1986 LSU Tigers, 2006 George Mason Patriots and 2011 VCU Rams could not — win at the Final Four after shocking the world to get that far.
Two of the three teams that beat the double-digit pretenders went on to win it all.
North Carolina had won half of its trips to the semi-finals — nine of 18 — and has emerged victorious in five of its nine title game appearances.
The great Dean Smith won two championships. His protege, Roy Williams, now has a chance to surpass him.
After 10 straight wins, now, only Villanova stands in North Carolina’s way.