Nine Australian athletes fail doping test 23/10/2010
ASHLEY HALL: A dramatic spike in positive drugs tests among Australian athletes has prompted the anti-doping authority ASADA to send out an urgent warning to all sporting bodies. ASADA has confirmed that nine Australian athletes have recently tested positive for the prohibited stimulant methylhexanamine. The authority is warning sporting organisations about the stimulant, saying it fears athletes could be using it inadvertently. Barbara Miller reports. BARBARA MILLER: There may have been just a hint of schadenfreude in Australia when the Nigerian runner Osayomi Oludamola was stripped of her Commonwealth Games gold medal after testing positive to the banned stimulant methylhexanamine. The athlete had only been awarded the top prize after the Australian Sally Pearson was disqualified for a false start. But any sense of smugness about Australian sport has been blown away by news that a number of athletes have tested positive for the same stimulant: AURORA ANDRUSKA: We've just had recently nine cases of Australian athletes testing positive for the prohibited stimulant methylhexanamine and what we're trying to do is to get out on the front foot and warn athletes to carefully consider their use of supplements. BARBARA MILLER: Aurora Andruska is the CEO of the Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority ASADA. AURORA ANDRUSKA: Look, this is very unusual for is. Just to put it into context. Over the last year - so, '09-'10, we would have had 19 positive tests for a range of substances. So for us to get 9 cases in a really short space of time for the one substance, it meant that we really want it to get out to the public, make people aware and we're working very closely with the national sporting bodies to also help them in informing their athletes of the risks. BARBARA MILLER: I guess the sceptics would say 'A new drug has been found, is beginning to be detected here'. AURORA ANDRUSKA: It's not a new drug. It also has been marketed under the trade name of Geranamine. And Geranamine is a concentrated extract of Geranium oil and it's been credited with you know, stimulant and fat-burning properties. So I think Geranium oil, this has been around for years so it's not a new substance. BARBARA MILLER: How would you describe, then, this quite dramatic spike? How would you explain, sorry, this quite dramatic spike? AURORA ANDRUSKA: Well, we're concerned that it is in supplements and that people are inadvertently doping. The main thing here is that we ensure that athletes are aware of the strict liability principle under the World Anti-Doping Code and under that they are ultimately responsible for any substance found in their body regardless of how it got there. So they really do need to be vigilant. They need to be working with their medical team with anything that they're taking, and checking on the website as well. BARBARA MILLER: And could you just outline what you've done with regards to warning the national sporting bodies. AURORA ANDRUSKA: We've sent a communication package out to all the national sporting bodies and that contains a number of things, including a letter that they can send to all their athletes, emails and also information sheets warning of the issue around methylhexanamine. BARBARA MILLER: ASASDA says it cannot comment on the identities of the athletes or sports involved. The nine who have tested positive in the A and B sample could face a maximum penalty of a two year ban. And if that were enforced it could possibly impact upon the 2012 Olympic Games. ASHLEY HALL: Barbara Miller.