Juventus, PSG reach Champions League quarter-finals
Juventus avoided any slip-ups against Celtic, finishing off the Scottish team with a 2-0 win Wednesday in Turin, Italy to seal a spot in the Champions League quarterfinals 5-0 on aggregate.
Holding a 3-0 lead from the away leg, Juventus withstood some early pressure from Celtic before Alessandro Matri essentially clinched the series when he put the Italian side ahead in the 24th minute.
Celtic's best chance came minutes later but Juventus goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon pulled off a one-handed stop to keep out Kris Commons' deflected effort.
Fabio Quagliarella doubled Juve's lead in the 65th minute by slotting into an empty net from close range after being unselfishly set up by Arturo Vidal.
It is the first time Juventus has reached the quarterfinals since it was demoted to Serie B in the 2006 match-fixing scandal.
Juventus extended its unbeaten streak in Europe to 18 matches, having lost just one in its last 30 — including qualifying. The Italian club has not conceded a goal in its last five.
With the series all but decided already, Juventus rested midfielders Stephan Lichtsteiner and Claudio Marchisio, who were both one booking away from a suspension, while defender Giorgio Chiellini and striker Mirko Vucinic were kept on the bench.
Celtic created a lot of pressure in the opening stages but failed to trouble Buffon. The closest it went was in the 21st minute when a fierce, long-range shot by Joe Ledley flew just past the top right corner.
Juventus took the lead just three minutes later. Andrea Barzagli robbed Gary Hooper in midfield and raced forwards before threading it through for Quagliarella. His effort was parried by Celtic goalkeeper Fraser Forster but Matri was on hand to tap in the rebound for his fifth goal in nine games in 2013.
Celtic almost levelled immediately when Commons' effort was deflected by Hooper, but Buffon pulled off a good reaction save.
Juventus was in complete control and could have extended its lead but Arturo Vidal spooned his shot over the bar from the edge of the area.
Celtic had one of its best chances of the match 10 minutes from halftime when Giorgos Samaras fired just past the right upright. Hooper slid in but was millimeters away from connecting to tap it into an empty net.
Halftime substitute Efe Ambrose went close again for Celtic but his header from Charlie Mulgrew's corner bounced down and over the crossbar.
Juventus doubled its lead shortly after. Vidal controlled a delightful long pass from Andrea Pirlo on his chest before rolling the ball across for a completely unmarked Quagliarella to tap into an empty net from three yards out.
With Vidal also a booking away from a suspension, the midfielder was immediately substituted. Key playmaker Pirlo followed him two minutes later.
Ezequiel Lavezzi scored the equalizer as Paris Saint-Germain drew 1-1 with Valencia on Wednesday to reach the Champions League quarterfinals for the first time since 1995.
PSG had won the away leg of their last-16 match 2-1 and seemed content to sit back in a dull first half in which the visitors mustered two tame shots on target. The match came to life in the 55th minute when Brazilian forward Jonas profited from PSG midfielder Blaise Matuidi to pick up the loose ball and score with a fierce shot from 20 metres for his fourth goal in three games.
The goal seemed to rattle PSG and coach Carlo Ancelotti brought on substitute Kevin Gameiro shortly after and his direct style and pace immediately caused problems for Valencia's defence.
Gameiro's surging run led to Lavezzi's equalizer in the 66th, as the Argentina winger knocked the ball in after his teammate's initial shot had been saved by goalkeeper Vicente Guaita, prompting wild celebrations on the PSG bench. The last time PSG reached the last eight it went on to lose to AC Milan — Ancelotti's former club as player and manager — in the semifinals.
In Wednesday's other match, Juventus beat Celtic 2-0 to qualify for the last eight 5-0 on aggregate.
Both sides were missing key players with PSG's top scorer Zlatan Ibrahimovic suspended and Valencia without injured centre half Adil Rami, scorer of Valencia's late goal in the first leg, forcing left back Jeremy Mathieu to switch to the centre of defence.
With Marco Verratti also supsended, Thiago Motta returned from a six-week injury layoff to take his place in PSG's midfield alongside Matuidi, with former England captain David Beckham as an unused substitute on the bench.
Ancelotti also decided against starting Gameiro, leaving PSG without a recognized centre forward as Lavezzi and Brazil winger Lucas formed a makeshift and largely unimpressive partnership up front.
Valencia striker Roberto Soldado had the first shot of the match in the 15th, breaking free down the right after playing a neat one-two with right back Jonas, but his shot was too close to 'keeper Salvatore Sirigu's body.
PSG's midfield was stretched at times because Valencia kept an extra man in the middle, with Soldado alone up front. Jonas forced the only other shot on target in a poor first half close to the break, which Sirigu fumbled away clumsily for a corner.
Valencia's frustration grew as time ran out and PSG's players were on the receiving end of some heavy challenges, but the Spanish side failed to test Sirigu again.
Beckham paced up and down on the touchline in a seemingly endless warm-up routine, but Ancelotti decided against bringing him on, choosing instead to shore up his defence with centre back Mamadou Sakho for the last 10 minutes.