ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) has confirmed the second positive test for banned substances from a Nigerian athlete in as many days.
Hurdler Samuel Okon tested positive to Methylhexaneamine, a banned stimulant, and has requested his B sample be examined.
Okon's fate will be known on Thursday but the outcome will have no bearing on the medals from the hurdles as he finished in sixth place.
"We've had approximately 1,200 tests done up until last night, and I again regret to inform you that we've had a second anti-doping violation," CGF president Mike Fennell told reporters today.
He said the CGF had been advised that Okon was waiving the right to have his B-sample tested, but this was yet to be confirmed.
Despite the two positive results for the same substance in the same team, Fennell said there was no need to perform drug tests on the entire Nigerian team.
"We already have had discussions with the leadership of the Nigerian team, who are themselves very, very concerned about this matter," he said.
"This is something that they take extremely seriously.
"They haven't posited any position on [why the athletes have tested positive to Methylhexaneamine]. They are very concerned about it."
He said Methylhexaneamine was found in supplements which athletes have continuously been warned to avoid.
"The supplement industry is by and large an unregulated industry worldwide," he said.
"It's an industry that is a cause of great concern not only for the fight against doping but also the protection of the athletes."
The announcement comes just 24 hours after the announcement that Nigerian sprinter Oyasomi Oludamola's A sample tested positive to the same substance.
Oludamola was awarded gold in the 100 metres sprint on Friday night after Australian Sally Pearson was disqualified for a false start.
Oludamola has kept her medal for the moment, but a provisional hearing held on Monday afternoon by the CGF court decided that her provisional suspension would continue until the result of the B-sample is known. It is not expected for about 48 hours.
Nigeria is sixth on the medal table, behind Games powerhouses Australia, India, England, Canada and South Africa.
It has won 26 medals - eight gold, seven silver and 11 bronze.