Haynesworth charged in road incident
Posted at 10:49 AM ET, 02/ 4/2011
Redskins defensive lineman Albert Haynesworth has been charged with simple assault for an alleged road rage incident with another motorist on the Fairfax County Parkway in Reston, Fairfax police said.
Haynesworth, 29, has not been arrested but is planning to turn himself in next week, Officer Shelley Broderick said.
Haynesworth did not return text and phone messages left by Redskins beat reporter Jason Reid. But Haynesworth's agent told Reid there was no assault and the allegations were "ridiculous."
A Redskins executive said the team was unaware of the incident or the charge. "This is the first I'm hearing about this," Tony Wyllie, Redskins senior vice president, told Reid. "At this time, we need to gather information."
Wyllie and team owner Daniel M. Snyder are at the Super Bowl in Dallas.
The episode occurred Wednesday morning, and involved a 38-year-old man driving a 1994 Honda Civic and another driver, allegedly Haynesworth, both driving south on the Fairfax County Parkway, Broderick said. The driver of the Civic reportedly felt that a pickup truck following behind him was tailgating, and issued a "non-verbal hand gesture" to the pickup driver, Broderick said.
About 9:16 a.m., at the intersection with New Dominion Parkway, near the entrance to Reston Hospital Center, the two vehicles came to a stoplight. Broderick said the driver of the pickup truck emerged from his vehicle, had a brief exchange of words, and then struck the Civic driver.
She declined to be more specific about the circumstances of the assault.
ESPN.com identified the Civic driver as Joel Velazques, 38, of Leesburg.
Velazques told ESPN that after their vehicles jockeyed for road space, a person he recognized as Haynesworth got out of a Ford truck with Tennessee license plates. Velazques said Haynesworth came to the driver-side window of his car, and after Velazques rolled down his window, Haynesworth said to him twice, "You're not so tough now," and then punched him in the side of his nose, ESPN reported.
Velazques said he followed Haynesworth but lost him along the way. He told ESPN he called 911 and gave a statement to a Fairfax officer.
Fairfax Chief Deputy Commonwealth's Attorney Ian M. Rodway said an officer assigned to the incident compiled a photo lineup and showed it to the man, who identified Haynesworth as his assailant.
Velazques said he was treated at a local hospital, where it was determined he suffered a contusion to his nose but it was not broken.
Police could not obtain a misdemeanor warrant because an officer did not witness the incident. So on Thursday night, the Civic driver and the Fairfax officer went to a magistrate and obtained a warrant for simple assault, with the driver as the complainant. The warrant was not immediately available, and typically is not made public until the warrant is served, so the driver's name was not public record.
Broderick said police had been in contact with Haynesworth's lawyer, that Haynesworth was out of town and was making arrangements to surrender next week. Rodway said the charge was the equivalent of a traffic ticket, and that Haynesworth must merely sign a summons acknowledging he has received the charge, a court date will be set and he will not be booked into the county jail.
Simple assault in Virginia is a Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by up to 12 months in a county jail and a $2,500 fine, though a maximum sentence is rarely imposed for altercations such as this unless the defendant has a lengthy prior record.
Haynesworth's agent, Chad Speck, said that "Albert has yet to speak to the authorities at all on this matter. So only one side of this story has been told at this point in time. If contacted by the authorities, Albert will certainly cooperate in any way. This man, who actually provoked the situation himself, recognized Albert and is now simply trying to turn it into his 15 minutes of fame and get, we can only assume, some money. Albert did not assault this man and looks forward to his day in court to refute these ridiculous allegations."
Haynesworth, who was suspended by the team for the final four games of the season for insubordination, has had previous troubles on the road. In December 2008, he pleaded guilty to driving 103 mph in a 70-mph zone on Interstate 65 south of Nashville and was placed on 30 days probation. Four days after that plea, he was speeding on the same stretch of Interstate 65, in a 2008 black Ferrari, when he allegedly swerved across two lanes and slammed into another car, driving it into the concrete median.
The driver of the other car, Corey Edmondson, was seriously injured and needed a hip replacement. He has filed a civil suit against Haynesworth, which is pending. In July 2009, shortly after he had signed a $100 million contract with the Redskins making him one of the highest-paid defensive players in NFL history, Haynesworth pleaded no contest in Brentwood City Circuit Court to a reckless driving charge. He was placed on three months probation, ordered to perform 25 hours of community service, attend an eight-hour driving school and make a $5,000 contribution to an organization that provides counseling to emergency responders.
And in 2006, while a member of the Tennessee Titans, Haynesworth was charged and later cleared in a road rage incident that occurred near Interstate 40 in Cookeville, Tenn. A woman and her son-in-law claimed that Haynesworth, in a Ford F-650 pickup truck, tried to run them off the road as their vehicles crossed paths, and the pair traveled to two counties to take out warrants against Haynesworth. Haynesworth said he was the victim of the road rage, that he had tried to let the two cars pass him but they kept following him. Prosecutors in both counties investigated and dismissed all charges.
Haynesworth's temper also gained him notoriety on the football field in 2006. During a game against the Dallas Cowboys, an opposing lineman's helmet came off while he was on the ground, and Haynesworth stomped on the opponent's head twice with his cleats, opening up a wound which required 30 stitches. Haynesworth was ejected from the game and suspended without pay for five games, then the longest suspension in league history for an on-field incident.
Haynesworth also picked up a speeding ticket in Reston last month, court records show. He allegedly was driving a sport-utility vehicle, with Florida tags, 64 mph in a 45 mph zone on Baron Cameron Parkway at Lake Fairfax Drive in Reston on Jan. 4. The ticket was issued at 10:41 a.m., and has not been paid, with a court date set for next month.
This item has been updated to include reaction from Haynesworth's agent and Haynesworth's prior traffic charges.