Muguruza upsets Williams for French Open title
Paris (CNN)A Spaniard was crowned champion at the French Open -- but it wasn't Rafael Nadal.
Garbine Muguruza upset Serena Williams 7-5 6-4 on Saturday to win the first grand slam of her career, while also depriving the American of tying Steffi Graf's Open Era record of 22 majors.
Garbine Muguruza of Spain stunned Serena Williams in the French Open final Saturday to win her first grand slam title.
A win at Roland Garros would've seen Williams claim a 22nd grand slam title and pull level with Steffi Graf as the most successful female player in the history of the majors.
Williams makes her way onto court on an overcast afternoon in the French capital.
New world No. 2 Muguruza showed nerves of steel to serve of the match to love.
While Nadal is considered the greatest clay-court player of all time -- he owns a record nine titles at Roland Garros but had to withdraw with a wrist injury last week -- Spain hadn't produced a women's champion at the French Open since Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario in 1998.
"We were so sad when Rafa had to pull out," Conchita Martinez, Spain's Fed Cup and Davis Cup captain, told reporters. "If you know Rafa you know how much he wanted to play here.
"It was a sad day but the way Garbine was playing, you could see that she would have a chance to win this tournament, so Spain is very lucky to have these unbelievable tennis players," added the 2000 French Open finalist.
Muguruza tallies victories in dissimilar fashion, crushing balls from the back of the court. Her serve, when working, is a weapon. It came to the 22-year-old's aid more than once in the final, particularly when facing break points in the first set, although she also double faulted nine times.
Her ability to change direction in rallies and hit down the lines troubled Williams, who had downed Muguruza in the Wimbledon final last July but lost to her at the French Open in 2014.
Williams kept the press waiting for two hours Thursday. On Saturday it was the opposite. Williams, unusually, went virtually straight from the court to the interview room. She didn't want to hang around.
"You can't play a grand slam final for history like any other, even though one grand slam final is a lot," he told reporters. "So it's going to take the time it's going to take. But we're going to do it.
Questions surrounded Williams' health ahead of the finale, with an adductor injury the issue. The world No. 1 appeared sluggish in the first set of her semifinal against Kiki Bertens on Friday and in the quarterfinals Thursday against Yulia Putintseva, when Williams was two games away from defeat in the second set.
"I'm not one to ever make excuses and say, 'Oh my adductor was hurting or whatever,'" said Williams. "At the end of the day I didn't play the game I needed to play to win and she did.
"I think she has a bright future, obviously. She knows how to play on the big stage and she knows how to ... clearly she knows how to win grand slams."
The first momentum swing in mostly cloudy conditions in Paris -- but there was no rain, for a change -- came in the fourth and fifth games. Muguruza saved two break points, one with an ace, and broke in the ensuing game when Williams double faulted.
Muguruza registered the telling break of the second at 1-1 and held on to the advantage, despite Williams bravely saving four match points at 3-5.
Mouratoglou suspected Muguruza would crack, like others have done when trying to close out Williams, but she didn't. On a fifth match point, with Muguruza serving at 40-0, she struck the brilliant backhand lob that Williams thought would go long.
"She deserved to win," said Mouratoglou. "When you are able to finish like the way she did in the last game, it's a second reason to say she deserved it."