Togo Drops Out of African Tournament After Fatal Attack
But before they landed in Cabinda on Saturday morning, one of the patients died. Lamond said that another man was expected to arrive at a Johannesburg hospital on Saturday afternoon.
Lamond said that his “condition is serious but stable and he will be going to a trauma facility.” Lamond did not know if the man was a player.
Angola’s Information Minister Manuel Rabelais said Friday that eight team members and one Angolan were injured. In Togo, the government said the Angolan driver was killed.
Togo’s bus, in a convoy from Congo, was six miles across the border in Angola when it came under fire. The bus driver died in the 30-minute ambush, according to Adebayor, who was not hurt.
The African Football Confederation condemned the attack against the Togolese delegation and held an emergency meeting. A delegation of Angolan officials and a delegation from the confederation were headed to Cabinda, while the Angolan prime minister will meet the confederation president Issa Hayatou “to take decisions to guarantee the smooth running of the competition.”
“Despite this, the championship will go on,” Angola’s sports minister, Goncalves Muandumba, said.
Kaba Kone, the general manager of Ivory Coast, said on Saturday that his team was “shocked and are living through very hard times,” but never considered pulling out of the tournament.
He said the players visited the Togo team late Friday to express their sympathy.
There were no visible security forces guarding the Ivory Coast team’s hotel in Cabinda on Saturday, but Kone said the confederation and tournament organizers were stepping up their measures to guarantee safety.
“This event can still be a big party,” he said.
The wounded were taken to a hospital in Cabinda, and Portugal’s state-run Lusa news agency said it received a communication from the region’s main separatist group, FLEC, claiming to have carried out the attack.
Rabelais said Angola’s government was blaming the separatist group for the attack. He said the attackers came from the Republic of Congo into Angola and fled back after the attack.
Gabriel Ameyi, the Togo Football Federation’s vice president, said the team should have flown to Angola instead of traveling by road. He said defender Serge Akakpo and the backup goalkeeper Kodjovi Obilale were among those hurt.
DONOVAN’S DEBUT IN ENGLAND Landon Donovan made his debut for visiting Everton on Saturday, setting up one goal in a 2-2 draw with Arsenal on a day when snow disrupted the English Premier League.
Donovan, who is on loan for 10 weeks from the Los Angeles Galaxy, sent a corner kick in the 12th minute to Leon Osman, whose header put Everton in front.
The lead lasted only 16 minutes. Denilson charged down a clearance, and the ball fell to Andrei Arshavin on the edge of the penalty area. Arshavin fed Eduardo da Silva, who touched a pass back to Denilson, and his low strike deflected off Osman past the American goalkeeper Tim Howard.
With snow blowing around the stadium, Donovan came close to restoring Everton’s lead at the start of the second half. He weaved into the penalty area, but his curling shot drifted wide.
Everton replaced Donovan with Diniyar Bilyaletdinov in the 68th minute.
Five of Saturday’s seven scheduled top-tier games, including Chelsea at Hull, were postponed because of snow. Sunday’s two games were also called off because of Britain’s coldest weather in more than 30 years.