Michael Schumacher out of coma: 7-time world Formula One champion leaves Grenoble Hospital
Formula One champion Michael Schumacher is out of a coma and has left the French hospital where has been receiving treatment since his devastating ski accident in December, his spokeswoman said Monday.
In the surprise announcement, the retired racing star's spokeswoman, Sabine Kehm, said he had been transferred to a facility in Switzerland where he will continue his recovery.
"Michael has left the CHU Grenoble (hospital) to continue his long phase of rehabilitation. He is not in a coma anymore," Ms Kehm said.
"His family would like to explicitly thank all his treating doctors, nurses and therapists in Grenoble as well as the first aiders at the place of the accident, who did an excellent job in those first months."
The 45-year-old was transferred to a hospital in the Swiss city of Lausanne, hospital spokesman Darcy Christen later said, where the seven-time world champion will undergo further treatment.
"For the future we ask for understanding that his further rehabilitation will take place away from the public eye," Ms Kehm said.
No further information was released about Schumacher's condition, which has been kept under a tight lid since his accident in the French Alpine resort of Meribel on December 29.
He underwent two operations to remove life-threatening blood clots, before being placed into a medically induced coma.
His family announced at the end of January that drugs used to keep him in his deep sleep were being reduced with a view to bringing him back to consciousness, but few other details had filtered out since then.
Schumacher is well known for his love of adrenaline sports, and even after retiring from the high-risk world of racing, he kept pursuing other high-thrill hobbies as a pilot, an accomplished motorbike rider, parachutist, skier and mountain climber.
He survived a motorbike accident in Spain in 2009, during which he suffered head and neck injuries but was released from hospital after just five hours.
The accident on December 29 proved near fatal, but in several statements released to the media, his wife Corinna and two children said they remained confident that the man who defied death more than once on the track would pull through.
In Monday's statement, Ms Kehm said Schumacher's family wanted "to thank all the people who have sent Michael all the many good wishes".
"We are sure it helped him."