ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Pakistan Test captain Salman Butt and opening bowlers Mohammad Aamer and Mohammad Asif face possible life bans after they were charged under the International Cricket Council's anti-corruption code.
They are accused of conspiring to arrange for no-balls to be bowled at specific points in the fourth Test against England last week as part of a betting scam.
The ICC said in a statement that the trio had been provisionally suspended from all forms of cricket and related activities until an investigation into the alleged scam was concluded.
They have 14 days from the receipt of the charges to appeal to an independent tribunal.
"We must be decisive with such matters and if proven, these offences carry serious penalties up to a life ban," ICC chief executive Haroon Lorgat said.
"It is important that we do not pre-judge the guilt of these three players. That is for the independent tribunal to decide."
The players had already withdrawn from the tour, which continues with one-day and Twenty20 cricket.
They attended a meeting in the high commission in London amid chaotic scenes in which photographers, camera crews and reported jostled for positions.
"The three players have said that they are extremely disturbed by what has happened in the past week, especially in regard of their alleged involvement in the crime," Pakistan High Commissioner Wajid Shamsul Hasan said.
"They mentioned that they are entirely innocent in the whole episode and shall defend their innocence as such.
"They maintain that on account of the mental torture which has deeply affected them, they are not in the right frame of mind to play the remaining matches.
"Therefore, they have requested that the Pakistan Cricket Board not consider them for the remaining matches."
Asked later if he believed the trio were innocent, Hasan replied: "Yes, I believe in their innocence."
He also claimed they were victims of a set-up.
Hasan told the BBC that an undercover video shot during an investigation by Britain's News of the World newspaper could have been filmed after the incidents under suspicion.
"You (the media) are jumping to conclusions, because no-balls are not taped like that," Hasan said.
"We are not seeing on the video what the date is or what the time is.
"The video wasn't timed or dated. It could have been filmed before or after the match, or at a different time."
Asked specifically whether he believed the players may have been framed, he replied: "Yes, I would say that. Yes."
A spokesman for the News of the World said the paper would "refuse to respond to such ludicrous allegations".
The news that Butt, Aamer and Asif had been dropped was announced by team manager Yawar Saeed before play began in a one-day warm-up match against Somerset on a sun-drenched day in Taunton.
ECB chairman Giles Clarke said the board welcomed the decision.
While the news was breaking, a large crowd at the Somerset county cricket ground was enjoying the sun as Shahid Afridi, returning to action as the one-day captain, led his team to victory by eight runs.