Why Jens Voigt and a new group of cyclists want to break the Hour record
Voigt’s new record of 51.115km in 60 minutes has breathed new life into one of sport’s greatest challenges. If Sir Bradley Wiggins takes on the Hour, he will be competing against many of the greats in one of cycling’s simplest and most brutal contests
51.115km. There’s a perfect symmetry to the number that represents the new Hour record. It is as memorable as the rider who set it. Jens Voigt cycled around the Velodrome Suisse in Grenchen, Switzerland on a Trek Speed Concept time-trial bike that was modified for the track, with its clock-face disc wheels as nice a touch as the hardman jokes – “Jens Voigt doesn’t normally ride in velodromes, because he doesn’t like to lap himself” – inscribed on his frame. Fabian Cancellara and Tony Martin are expected to throw their aero helmets into the ring sometime soon and Sir Bradley Wiggins has already announced his intention to rejuvenate the event. The Hour, it seems, is having a moment.
It’s partially down to a rule change by the UCI that unifies the “athlete’s hour” and “best human performance” records and standardises rules on legitimate equipment for the attempt – a rule change that seemingly scuppered Cancellara’s much mooted attempt on the Eddy Merckx inspired “athlete’s hour” – and partially because, as ex-holder Graeme Obree puts it, the record is “low-hanging fruit” for any fast man on a fast bike. And, for a rider such as Wiggins, who is looking to move back to the track after his successful adventures on the road, it’s perhaps the ideal stepping stone to one last gold medal in Rio.
Once the record for the great road champions – Eddy Merckx, Fausto Coppi, Jacques Anquetil, Miguel Indurain and Francesco Moser have all engraved the Hour on their palmares – it hasn’t always been at the forefront of cycling’s consciousness, experiencing peaks and troughs even as the Grand Tours and the Classics have grown in reputation and interest.
The first official Hour recordholder was Henri Desgrange, the father of the Tour de France and a lifelong opponent of technical innovation, who reached 35.325km at the Buffalo velodrome in Paris in 1893. In the same year, Hélène Dutrieu – the “Girl Hawk” who left home at 14 to become a professional cyclist for the British Simpson Lever Chain team, and later became Belgium’s first female pilot and the first woman to fly a seaplane – took the women’s paced Hour record over the magic 40km mark.
But interest in the record wasn’t piqued again until 1912, when Oscar Egg, the great Swiss pistard, took the record from Marcel Berthet and sparked a two-year rivalry that saw the Hour trade hands between the two riders five times. Between them they pushed the mark by 2,727m in a fascinating contest of style and attitude. Berthet was all about precision, preparation and planning; while Egg was youthful – at 22 he was three years younger than the Frenchman – and relied on his huge gears and audacity. The exchange might have gone on until either man was physically incapable of pushing the barrier any further, but 10 days after Egg had set a mark of 44.247km, the first world war was declared and the record was shelved indefinitely.
At 8.5kg, Egg’s record-breaking bike was 10kg lighter than the machine Fausto Coppi rode in 1942 when setting his Hour mark of 45.871km. Coppi took the record from Maurice Archambaud on one of the most iconic tracks in the world, the Vigorelli in Milan. Opened in 1935 with Giuseppi Olmo’s Hour attempt – where he broke the 45km barrier for the first time – it saw an unmatched run of 10 successive Hour records. But none of them was finer than Coppi’s.
With virtually no training, clad in a heavy woolen jersey and battered leather skullcap, Coppi clawed his way to a new mark that would stand for 14 years until a young French hotshot called Jacques Anquetil broke it on the same track. More than 150 records, both men’s and women’s were set on the pista magica, which was renowned for its smoothness and sheer speed.
But in 1942, when Coppi set his mark, it was being used as a clearing house for the Italian Army and Il Campianissimo had to snatch his practice time when he could – the track was constantly buzzing with the nervous energy of new recruits undergoing their army induction. Throughout 1942 the Allies ramped up their bombing raids on Milan, droning flights of Lancasters destroying the Bianchi bike and Caproni aircraft factories and killing 171 people. The night before Coppi’s attempt, the Vigorelli was caught in yet another raid. Shaken to its foundations, the huge amphitheatre – which was capable of seating 9,000 spectators – survived to see Coppi fly to the record.
Unlike Anquetil in 1956, who rode a custom-built Masi bike after his own proved unsuitable for handling the particular banking of the Vigorelli, Coppi took the Hour to 45.871km on a heavy and cumbersome scratch bike. But Coppi had class and, in the words of Prime Bergomi, who set his own records at the track: “If you don’t have class, the Vigorelli is like pedalling in a vacuum.”
Anquetil would ride the Hour at the Vigorelli again, after his compatriot Roger Rivière set back-to-back records in 1957 and 1958. Rivière would not make it back to the track of dreams again. In the 1960 Tour de France, while wearing the leader’s Yellow Jersey, he crashed into a ravine and was paralysed. He had been trying to follow Gaston Nencini, Italy’s demon descender, down the Col de Perjuret when he braked too hard, hit a low stone wall and was catapulted headfirst into a ravine. The leaves that broke his fall saved his life. His team manager Raphael Geminiani had it right when he said: “The only reason to follow Nencini downhill would be if you had a death wish.” There were painkillers in his jersey pocket and he admitted to taking amphetamines to set the Hour record. He never rode again and was dead at 40, from throat cancer.
Anquetil’s attempt at the Vigorelli in 1967 was never ratified as he had skipped the newly mandatory doping control. When the roof of the Vigorelli caved in after heavy snowfall in January 1985, it was the beginning of the end for the track they dubbed the “La Scala of cycling’. The last Hour at the pista magica does not belong to Francesco Moser’s attempt on the sea level record in 1986 but to Jeannie Longo, who pushed her own record to 43.587km. But the boards have not echoed to the slap of rubber since 1999.
The famous velodrome in Milan was not only a place for men to set records. Though Alfonsina Strada had set an unofficial Hour mark in 1911, the earliest official records tumbled at the Vigorelli when France’s Renée Vissac (1957), Britain’s Millie Robinson (1958) and Luxemburg’s Elsy Jacobs (1958) pushed the record beyond the unofficial mark of 39.735km set by Jeanine Lamaire in 1955.
Vissac would go on to a string of national pursuit podiums and titles. Robinson had won the first Grande Boucle Feminine in 1955; in a race dominated by British riders she took a thrilling solo victory on stage four and then wrapped up a decisive victory with a win in the time trial. Jacobs came into her attempt as the first ever women’s world champion and set a mark that wouldn’t be broken for 14 years.
But the Hour moved inexorably onwards, and upwards, to the thin air of Mexico City’s Olympic velodrome, where, two days before the 1968 Games opened, Denmark’s Ole Ritter pushed the mark towards the 49km barrier that Merckx would smash through four years later.
Merckx had wanted to ride in the Vigorelli, to compare himself directly to the greats who had gone before, but the old lady was showing her age and the track was flooded. Besides, Ritter had shown that humans were capable of extraordinary things at altitude; instead of comparing yourself to your peers, why not establish your legend beyond doubt?
The Cannibal took the record in 1972, claiming to have been untroubled during his ride. But Ernesto Colnago, the mastermind behind the bike Merckx rode, knew the truth. He heard Merckx’s hoarse whisper: “Basta... that’s the last time I’ll ever do the hour record. The pain was incredible...” Merckx rode himself to the very limit of his endurance, his face darkening with effort. He called that hour in the Mexico City velodrome “the longest of my career”. But the record was his: 49.431km. It would stand for the next 12 years.
Or 26 years. Because this is where time divides. Where the Merckx Hour stands as the pinnacle of human achievement, a moment caught in the pale grey light of a Mexican morning. This is the moment when the UCI pins the “athlete’s hour” like a butterfly in a specimen cabinet. The moment when all possible futures of the sport diverge through the prism of technology.
Because the Hour record is beaten, in 1984, by Francesco Moser. And it is beaten not by human effort alone but by technology. Moser used disc wheels, a specially designed aerodynamic bike with low profile frame. He used every marginal gain possible – there were tales that the track was specially varnished, that the rear wheel was weighted to produce a flywheel effect and increase momentum. And where Merckx had collapsed into the arms of Colnago, Moser broke the 50km barrier and then broke it again four days later, extending the record to 51.151km. Though his second attempt was hardly an easy ride – Moser’s 5km speed dipped and rose dizzyingly – it put the record far beyond reach. It was the last men’s record set in Mexico City.
Jeannie Longo had followed the men to altitude and improved her own record of 44.933km, set in Colorado, by a huge 1,419m in 1989. This was the era of the “best performance” Hour record, where riders used any technological advantage at their disposal to push the limits of what was possible in a hour. Longo was formally cleared of involvement in EPO trafficking in 2011 but the pall has been cast forever over her phenomenal career. Moser admitted to using blood transfusions, which were perfectly legal at the time, in setting his “best performance” record. His support team, under professor Francesco Conconi of the University of Ferrara, included a young Italian sports physician called Michele Ferrari. Though Conconi revolutionised commonly accepted approaches to training – introducing heart-rate monitors and interval training – he was also an advocate of blood doping. In his pomp, Lance Armstrong often flirted with the idea of the Hour record, going so far as to claim that it was the reason for his collaboration with Ferrari. He never attempted the record and Ferrari is now banned from life from the sport. The “best performance” had truly outstripped the realms of the purely physiologically possible.
And then the scene shifts again, from the thin blue skies above Mexico’s open velodrome and back down to sea level, to the Velodrome Bordeaux Lac in one of France’s greatest cities. Not only did the Hour come back to earth but it also went undercover. The vagaries of wind, rain and air pollution that had made Mexico City untenable were now nullified, and conditions were always perfect for an attempt at the record. The place was also hugely underutilised, its owners preferring to funnel more glamorous events to their other venue at Paris Bercy. But, starting with the attempt of a British pursuiter who had taken gold in extraordinary fashion at the 1992 Olympics on a remarkable monocoque machine fashioned from featherlight carbon fibre, the Bordeuax Velodrome saw a series of Hour records that would ignite the imagination in a way that hadn’t happened since the glory days of the Vigorelli.
It started in Norway. On 17 July 1993 a little-known Scottish cyclist did the unthinkable. On the Hamar track – fashioned after a Viking ship and designed by the renowned German company Schurmann – Graeme Obree, climbed aboard his homemade bike, dubbed “Old Faithful” by the media, tucked into the egg position and simply willed himself past Moser’s mythical mark. Floating over the pale Norway spruce of the Vikingskipet track, he did it with 30 seconds to spare and L’Équipe went crazy, declaring that there were “no phrases capable of capturing that hour in time; no clichéd superlatives worthy of this man’s fight against all odds. Obree, we wanted you to carry on riding, always, forever, until an indelible furrow had been ploughed into that wooden track in the Hamar velodrome.”
The product of a deeply unhappy childhood and prone to fits of the blackest, deepest depression, Obree knew how to suffer. The Hour is all about pain and the ability to endure that pain, to ride the stations of the cross as the endless repetitions slowly crucify the body. Obree bore the pain and conquered it. The Hour was his.
But not for long. Boardman set the new benchmark of 52.270km just six days later, and then, in eight glorious months in 1994, the Hour record fell four times. First Obree, the newly minted world pursuit champion who had beaten Boardman to the title, reclaimed the crown from his arch rival by 443m. Then the smooth and polished doussie boards saw Miguel Indurain – whose performance in the 60km time-trial from Perigeux to Bergerac had netted him a fourth consecutive Tour de France that July – push the record beyond 53km.
Indurain’s ability to generate enormous power from a less than optimal aero position – he carried his head and shoulders much higher than Obree and Boardman – was tailor-made for a successful attempt. And finally came Tony Rominger, who had conquered that year’s Vuelta a España for a record third time. The Swiss smashed through 55km in a way that would have had Oscar Egg on his feet and cheering. It was a far cry from the Rominger who had slid so ungracefully down the banking on his first moments on the piste, unable to keep himself upright through sheer lack of momentum. But with the aid of Ernesto Campagnolo’s wizadry and a pair of aerobars conceived by Ferrari, the ugly duckling was soon swanning round the velodrome and setting a mark that would surely not be bettered. Bordeaux had seen its last – and perhaps most extraordinary – Hour.
Obree would never hold the Hour record again; the UCI decided to ban his riding position and his bike in a shortsighted attempt to curtail the pace of inevitable change. The balance between the humanly achievable and the technological innovation had tipped too far off-kilter. He found another position – the “Superman”, in which his arms were fully extended in front of his body – and he took another world pursuit championships, but the UCI banned that position too, in 1996. Then UCI president Hein Verbruggen declared: “We want riders to win because they are the best, rather than because they have the best equipment.” Verbruggen had clearly never attempted to hold one of Obree’s super aerodynamic positions for an hour – had he done so he might have come to a different conclusion. Obree had a short-lived professional career, curtailed by his stubborn refusal to dope, and he disappeared from view. The appetite among the professionals had been sated by that summer and autumn in Bordeaux. But there was one man standing, and that man was Chris Boardman.
Boardman would set his final Hour marks in his home velodrome in Manchester. But this time the women would get there first. On 17 June 1995 the slight figure of Yvonne McGregor, a one-time international runner and triathlete, spun through a 15-minute warm-up on the 333m track, then settled into the position she would hold for the next hour pushing a 54x14. The 34-year-old held the black line as if it were magnetic, only an occasional movement of the head betraying the intense effort involved in challenging the Hour. After 30 minutes she was down on her target of 47.750km but, crucially, nearly two laps ahead of the record set by Catherine Marsal in Bordeaux that April. But that target started to drop. Through the second half of her ride, she stopped gaining on the record. But like the Duracell bunny, she pushed on and through, breaking Marsal’s record with a lap to spare. The new Hour record stood at 47.411km, beating the Frenchwoman’s record by 299m. A thousand revolutions of the pedals. But on such fine margins is the Hour record balanced.
Among the crowds that day was another woman from Yorkshire, arguably the greatest female cyclist ever. Despite never holding the Hour record, Beryl Burton was the first woman to ride 40km in less than an hour on the road. But her two attempts on the track ended in failure, a word that didn’t often feature in the Burton vocabulary.
There were suggestions that she was underprepared, mentally more than physically. Perhaps she simply preferred the rigours and challenges of the road to the track – the changing tarmac under her wheels rather than the endless smooth perfection of a wooden track. That she still holds the women’s 12-hour record – a distance that outstripped the men’s when she set it over 40 years ago – is a testament to Burton’s prowess in those longer disciplines. But she could lay it down on the track too. When McGregor went on to become world pursuit champion in 2000, on that same Manchester track, she was the first British holder of the title since Burton grabbed glory in that annus mirabilis for British sport, 1966.
McGregor’s record stood for just over a year until Longo went back to altitude and broke it in 1996. She would return again one final time to Mexico City, this time to set an “athlete’s” record in 2000. Gone was the African hardwood surface crafted from doussie alzeiba, but the concrete ribbon that replaced it was fast enough for Longo – at 42, the most decorated woman in the sport, multiple world champion and oldest woman to hold the Hour record.
Only Leontin Van Moorsel has ever gone further in an hour, setting a mark of 46.065km in 2003, again in Mexico City. And this is where the women’s unified record sits, waiting for an athlete of the calibre of Van Moorsel or Longo to pluck that low-hanging fruit.
McGregor’s Hour would serve as a blueprint for Chris Boardman’s next attempt at the Manchester velodrome in 1996. Peter Keen, the quiet genius of the track who had guided McGregor to her record, would spend years coaching the reserved Mancunian, the willing monster to Keen’s mad scientist, and the stars aligned that evening in September 1996.
The study of climatology inside indoor velodromes is now an important part of the British Cycling arsenal with minutely accurate measurements of air pressure and density, temperature and humidity all impacting on a track cyclist’s ability to gain vital tenths of seconds. But that night in Manchester, when marginal gains were in their infancy, the air pressure was low, forcing up air density (the denser the air the harder it is to push through) and the temperature cool and dry. In London in 2012, the track was kept at a constant 28 degrees.
Boardman looped the track on his road bike then mounted a bold blue Eddy Merckx carbon fibre machine that echoed the blue of his GAN strip and began to crank up his speed, climbing out of the saddle to master the single gear that he would churn repeatedly for the next 60 minutes. When he settled back into the saddle he adopted the Obree “Superman” position that he would hold until the test was over.
Lean forward over your desk. Stretch your arms in front of you and grip the edge. Don’t move. Now stay in that position for the next 3,600 seconds. Count them in your head if you want. Now imagine cranking your legs, fluidly, effortlessly, with what the French call souplesse for every one of those seconds. Is your back hurting yet? Are the muscles in your arms beginning to scream with fatigue?
Boardman held that position throughout the hour, consistently beating Rominger’s time, spooling out kilometres at a metronomic pace: loop after loop after loop. And then he hits it. The record is his and he is out of the saddle again, smashing the next two kilometres. Pedalling through a wall of sheer noise, with 3,000 voices united in one long roar of encouragement, Boardman lifted his own personal mark from the 52.270km he had set in Bordeaux to an astonishing 56.375km on his home turf.
Eddy Merckx stood there trackside and raised Boardman’s arm in triumph. Peter Keen said the real story behind the 56 km Hour was “incredible form coming off the suffering of being battered in the Tour... it was a perfect day, a great crowd, the form of his life.” This is the mark that the UCI set as the “best performance” Hour record in 1996. The realchallenge, they implied, was to try and best Eddy Merckx, on his terms, in what they called the “athlete’s Hour”.
So Boardman threw all that precision, perfectionism and preparation out of the window and rode the Hour of his life in the same velodrome in 2000. You could see that it hurt when he pulled across to the trackside, his face a grimace of pain, his foot unable to release itself from the pedal. Roger Legeay, the man who had given Boardman his professional career, embraced him as he half-fell, half-stumbled off his bike. It had been Legeay’s idea to tackle the “athlete’s Hour” after deciding not to select Boardman for the 2000 Tour de France. Riding on sheer guts, racing against time and history, Boardman pedalled his “standard” Look road bike to 49.441km, just 10m beyond Merckx’s longest hour. Maybe the UCI were right – perhaps the spectacle of the athlete’s record was far more compelling than watching riders contort on machines that broke the longstanding diamond geometry. A standard road bike was all you needed – that and the sheer power and will to pedal relentlessly and remorselessly around a wooden oval for an hour.
Except that the UCI’s reasoning was based on a fallacy. The bike that Merckx rode that day in Mexico City was anything but “standard”. It was Ernesto Colnago who took on the challenge and the risk of building a superlight bike for the powerhouse that was Merckx: “I lightened everything: the cranks, drilled out the chain, because we wanted the lightest material and well, you couldn’t buy a Regina Extra chain with holes drilled in it! So the bike ended up weighing just over 5.5kg.” Colnago sought out the lightest tubular tyres, went to America to have the ultra lightweight titanium stem welded. “No one else could have put this bike together” he said. At 5.75 kg it was over a kilogram lighter than the bike Moser would use to fly through the 50km barrier, lighter than “Old Faithful”, or the Corima Cougar Boardman used in Bordeaux, or any of the bikes on which the “best performance” Hour was set. And considerably lighter than the 6.8kg minimum weight limit set for modern racing bikes by the UCI.
Every rider who has ever pitted himself against the Hour has sought to master the variables using altitude or a particular velodrome to gain an advantage over those 60 minutes of pain. Obree, whose innovation bought down the wrath of the UCI, rode a 4’20” pursuit in a standard tuck position, indoors at sea level and a 4’22” at altitude, outdoors, in the “Superman”.
Despite modern sports science and its microscopic understanding of marginal gains, the supreme effort that is the Hour may simply be greater than lap splits and climatology and aerodynamics. In the end it is more than just a race against time. It is a race against the space between yourself and the shades of all those who have held the record before you. There can only ever be one rider who has conquered the Hour. Yet when Ondrej Sosenska took the “athlete’s” Hour to 49.7km in Moscow in July 2005, the cycling world said “who?” It seemed that the Hour, thanks to meddling from a UCI unable to strike the balance between the purists and the technophiles, was dead.
But on Thursday 18 September 2014, Voigt breathed new life into that challenge and rode one final hour - the longest hour of his life. Sixty minutes to scream his last “shut up legs!” It was an Hour for the digital age with its own hashtag #shutupHour and its own playlist: from AC/DC to the Final Countdown.
Bobby Julich said it was an opportunity to look to the future of the record. The Hour starts here. His Trek team finally settled on a 55x14 to strike the ideal balance between cadence and power. Pitting himself against Merckx just as Boardman had done, in a virtual contest played out through the ticking away of seconds and the beating of your heart.
The Hour is as simple as it is beautiful as it is vicious. You ride your bike as fast as possible for 60 endless minutes. You don’t drink, or take a gel, or move from that relentless black line unless you want to know how it feels for the Hour to beat you. The first 10 minutes comes free, said Boardman, and in the last 10 minutes the world comes crashing down on you said Magnus Backstedt, who wept as his friend sped through those last metres. You celebrate glory or spit out the bitter taste of defeat.
For Voigt it was champagne and a chorus of Happy Birthday, then a moment of quiet stillness as the national anthem played. Voigt has his legacy; he has made his mark on the ages – the next man to line up against the Hour will be lining up against his 51.115km, a hair’s breadth from Moser’s mark.
The men are lining up to attack this new Hour. But can Marianne Vos, Lizzie Armitstead or Emma Pooley be persuaded to step up to breathe new life into the women’s record? The clock is ticking.
• This article appeared first on 100 Tours 100 Tales• Follow Suze Clemitson on Twitter• Follow Guardian Sport on Facebook