$2 Billion Dodgers Price Tag Shatters Records
WSJ's Matt Futterman breaks down the deal that awarded the Los Angeles Dodgers to a group of investors led by basketball legend Magic Johnson. Photo: GABRIEL BOUYS/AFP/Getty Images
Basketball legend Magic Johnson led a group that won an auction for the Los Angeles Dodgers baseball team Tuesday night, marking the final chapter in a soap-opera-style saga for the legendary franchise.
With a bid of $2.15 billion, including the surrounding land, Mr. Johnson, controlling partner Mark Walter and partners Peter Guber, Stan Kasten, Bobby Patton and Todd Boehly beat out a group of some of the wealthiest businessmen in the country to land a team that is one of Major League Baseball's flagship franchises. The sales figure shatters the previous record sales price for a U.S. sports franchise, Steve Ross's purchase of the Miami Dolphins for $1.1 billion three years ago.
But buying the Dodgers now comes with a unique opportunity to launch a potentially lucrative regional sports network in the country's second-largest market, or sign a new local broadcast deal with the current broadcaster, News Corp.'s Fox unit, which has already offered the team a 17-year extension valued at nearly $3 billion. (News Corp. also owns The Wall Street Journal).
The sales process was led by Blackstone LP, the New York-based investment advisory firm, which held the auction Tuesday evening, just hours after Major League Baseball approved three finalists in the bidding, allowing current owner Frank McCourt to accept the highest and best offer.
Mr. McCourt filed the team for bankruptcy protection in June amid a deepening cash crisis and an ongoing feud with Major League Baseball Commissioner Bud Selig.
The deal allows Mr. McCourt to enter into a joint venture with the new owners on the land surrounding the stadium.
In a statement, the Los Angeles Dodgers stated, "This transaction underscores the Debtors' objective to maximize the value of their estate and to emerge from Chapter 11 under a successful Plan of Reorganization, under which all creditors are paid in full."
Mr. McCourt said the agreement "reflects both the strength and future potential of the Los Angeles Dodgers, and assures that the Dodgers will have new ownership with deep local roots, which bodes well for the Dodgers, its fans and the Los Angeles community."
In a statement, Earvin Magic Johnson said, "I am thrilled to be part of the historic Dodger franchise and intend to build on the fantastic foundation laid by Frank McCourt as we drive the Dodgers back to the front page of the sports section in our wonderful community of Los Angeles."
The other bidders who survived until the final round were a partnership that included hedge-fund billionaire Steven Cohen and Los Angeles biotech billionaire Patrick Soon-Shiong. A spokesman for Mr. Cohen declined to comment.
The other bidder was Stan Kroenke, the billionaire developer and husband of a Walton family heir. Mr. Kroenke already owns the NFL's St. Louis Rams, the NBA's Denver Nuggets, the NHL's Colorado Avalanche, the Colorado Rapids of MLS and English soccer club Arsenal.
According to a person involved with the process, the auction had been expected to take place Wednesday. Blackstone had asked the parties to submit sale contracts last week and deliver their initial offers by Tuesday morning, since approval of the bidders from Major League Baseball was expected to come easily on Tuesday afternoon. When the offers arrived, the bid from the Johnson-Walter group was so much higher than the competing offers, it essentially took the franchise off the block almost instantly.
The person said the other offers, which were perceived as opening bids, were in the range of $1.5 billion, some 25% less than the Johnson-Walter bid. As a result, the other bidders were never given a chance to match, and the deal was wrapped up by Tuesday evening.
The bid was described as a "100% cash offer." Mr. Walter is making a significant personal contribution to the purchase price, with Guggenheim Partners, of which he is chief executive, playing a substantial role in financial contribution.
The deal is preliminary and still has to go through a complicated closing process and receive approval from the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Delaware. However, Mr. McCourt is under pressure to complete the deal by April 30, one day before he owes his ex-wife a $131 million payment as part of their divorce settlement.
If the sale goes through it will bring to a close the McCourts' stormy eight-year stewardship of what had been one of MLB's model franchises.
A developer and owner of parking lots, Mr. McCourt bought the team in 2004 from News Corp. in a highly leveraged deal valued at about $420 million. A native of Boston, Mr. McCourt and his former wife quickly inserted themselves into the Los Angeles social scene and were a constant presence at Dodgers games in marked contrast to the team's previous owners and the O'Malleys, the low-key family that moved the Dodgers from Brooklyn after the 1957 season and built the team into a Southern California institution during the next 41 years.
However, during the divorce proceedings, it was revealed that the McCourts had used more than $100 million from the team to finance their lavish lifestyle, including the purchase of several luxury homes. As the team's performance declined, fans soured on the McCourts, as did Mr. Selig.
The previous record sale for a baseball team was $845 million for the Chicago Cubs in 2009 by the Ricketts family, founders of TD Ameritrade Holding Corp.
In an interview earlier this month, former owner Peter O'Malley said watching the team become an object of ridicule had been painful.
"It's been tough," said Mr. O'Malley, who explored a bid to reacquire the team before dropping out. "But I am prepared to help the new owner in whatever he needs. I'm not looking for a job."