Bruce's homer helps Reds top Astros, clinch NL Central
CINCINNATI — Chris Johnson is exactly 100 games into his major league career, and he’s already tired of watching what he saw Tuesday night: the raised arms, the human pileups, the jubilation of the home crowd that comes with a win to clinch a playoff berth.
“It sucks,” Johnson said. “It’s two years in a row I’ve seen it, and it’s getting old.”
One year after the Phillies clinched the NL East with a home win over the Astros when Johnson was a September call-up, the Cincinnati Reds celebrated the NL Central title with a 3-2 win over the Astros on Jay Bruce’s game-winning home run in the bottom of the ninth.
Apparently not one to waste anger for anger’s sake, Johnson wants to do something about it.
“Our goal for next year is to be doing what they’re doing right now,” the third baseman said.
It’s ambitious, but the Reds, who clinched their first playoff berth since 1995, represent exactly what the Astros hope to be.
Cincinnati’s young, homegrown core, embodied by Bruce, MVP candidate Joey Votto, Drew Stubbs and Johnny Cueto, is supplemented by low-cost veteran acquisitions like Scott Rolen, Orlando Cabrera and Jonny Gomes.
With such a process, there are lean seasons, and there were a lot of them in the 15 years since Barry Larkin and Pete Shourek led the 1995 club to the playoffs.
But Votto was signed in 2002, Cueto in 2004, Bruce in 2005, and Stubbs in 2006, and they have come of age together, with the essential veterans added to the mix like good seasonings, not overwhelming ingredients.
And when 15 years of frustration ended with Bruce’s drive to center on the first pitch of the ninth from Tim Byrdak, what a release. The 30,151 fans, already standing, exploded into cheers. Bruce, a Beaumont West Brook graduate and member of the Chronicle’s 2005 All-Greater Houston team, shot up his arms in jubilation as players poured from the dugout.
Nearly an hour after it ended, the fans were still chanting in the concourses as the champagne baths poured out from the clubhouse onto the field. And Byrdak was still regretting his only pitch of the night.
“It’s a pitch I left over the middle of the plate,” said Byrdak, who wanted to work Bruce outside. “It’s a mistake that I didn’t want to make right there.”
The Reds took a 1-0 lead before much of the roughly 8,000-strong walkup contingent made it to their seats. Wandy Rodriguez walked the first two hitters of the game and got a double play and another ground ball, but Johnson bounced a long throw to Brett Wallace as the play went for an RBI single and error on Johnson, allowing the batter Rolen to take second.
The Astros grabbed the lead with a two-run fourth highlighted by a Jason Castro RBI single and a successful squeeze bunt by Rodriguez to score Angel Sanchez.
Rodriguez would cruise from his initial struggles to the sixth, when he allowed his second hit of the night. Back-to-back singles by Cabrera and Votto and Rolen’s comeback from an 0-2 count to work a walk got the Reds in prime position. But Rodriguez survived what could have been worse as he got a foul pop from Gomes, a game-tying infield hit by Brandon Phillips and a double play off the bat of Bruce.
“The guys battled really well, and Wandy did a great job of getting out of that jam with the bases loaded, nobody out and giving up one run,” manager Brad Mills said.
Rodriguez remained at 11-12 in his next-to-last start of the season, giving up the two runs on four hits and four walks while fanning eight.
Beyond the second, the Astros had few chances against Edinson Volquez. Their best came on Carlos Lee’s long drive to center field in the third, which Stubbs pulled back from what appeared to be a trajectory over the fence 404 feet from home plate.
Six innings later, Bruce’s ball cleared the fence in nearly the same spot.
Some Astros remained in the dugout to watch what ensued. Some didn’t witness a minute of the celebration.
The Astros were beaten by a better team Tuesday, and now the hope is that they were beaten by the model of where they are someday headed.