Packers Head to Super Bowl
Hanie sandwiched those scores around one of his two mistakes — a short pass into the arms of Green Bay’s B. J. Raji, a 337-pound defensive tackle who rumbled 18 yards for what proved the clinching touchdown.
With 47 seconds left and the tying touchdown in reach, on fourth-and-5 at Green Bay’s 29, Hanie was intercepted by cornerback Sam Shields at the 12.
One snap later, the Packers (13-6) kneeled to run out the clock and became the second No. 6 seed to reach the Super Bowl, after the 2005 Steelers. They have won three Super Bowls but lost their last time there, at the end of the 1997 season.
Green Bay’s Aaron Rodgers completed 17 of 30 passes for 244 yards and was intercepted twice. He led the Packers to touchdowns on their first possession and again early in the second quarter.
Still, Green Bay’s 14-0 lead seemed frozen in the 20-degree temperatures for much of the afternoon.
There were 17 punts and the teams combined to convert only 3 of 24 third downs. On a third-and-goal at Chicago’s 6-yard line, Rodgers was intercepted by Chicago linebacker Brian Urlacher. He chased Urlacher down 39 yards later, perhaps saving a game-altering touchdown.
Handed momentum and the ball, Collins entered for Cutler and threw three consecutive incomplete passes.
It was Hanie who re-energized a well-bundled and restless crowd of 61,171. Early in the fourth quarter, his 32-yard throw to Johnny Knox moved the Bears to Green Bay’s 1. Chester Taylor’s touchdown run cut Green Bay’s lead in half, 14-7, with 12 minutes 2 seconds to play.
After Hanie’s interception gave Green Bay another 14-point lead, his 35-yard touchdown pass to Earl Bennett with 4:43 remaining cut the lead to 21-14.
The Bears, their defense buzzing, got the ball back at their 29 with 2:53 remaining. Hanie completed a third-down pass to Greg Olsen, Chicago’s first third-down conversion of the day after 10 failures. Hanie threw his second interception moments later.
“I didn’t really know a whole lot about the third one,” the Packers’ defensive coordinator, Dom Capers, said of Hanie’s status as a third-stringer.
It was the 182nd meeting between the Bears and the Packers, but only the second in the postseason. The other was on Dec. 14, 1941, when the Bears won, 33-14, at Wrigley Field.
On Sunday, the video boards showed black-and-white clips of past games between the franchises, separated by about 200 miles of highway and 90 years of bitter competition. Amid the pregame jet flyovers and set against a backdrop of Chicago’s glassy skyline, the clips imbued a sense of nostalgia and history to the biggest game played in the league’s deepest rivalry.
The Packers wasted little time quieting a vociferous crowd. Rodgers completed 22- and 26-yard passes to Greg Jennings on the game’s first two plays from scrimmage. Bounding downfield like children playing hopscotch, the Packers scored when Rodgers faked a handoff and ran around the left end from the 1.
The lead doubled on James Starks’s 4-yard touchdown run with 11:13 left in the second quarter.
But the Bears’ defense slowly solidified, beating back every other Green Bay possession.
Pressure for a comeback fell quickly to Cutler, the mercurial quarterback with the big arm. He moved the Bears to Green Bay’s 41 in the final minute of the half, but soon threw a deep pass that was intercepted at the 3 by Shields.
Fans booed the Bears as the teams jogged to the locker rooms. The Packers, leading, 14-0, had outgained the Bears, 252-103, and had 17 first downs to Chicago’s 6.
During the break, Cutler’s left knee was examined and treated. After one third-quarter series, he was pulled in favor of Collins and watched glumly from the sideline.
Cutler finished 6 of 14 for 80 yards and an interception. Hanie completed 13 of 20 passes for 153 yards, all in the fourth quarter, with a touchdown and two interceptions.
“That’s tough, 14-0, and you lose your starting quarterback,” Chicago Coach Lovie Smith said. “But our guys just continued to fight, giving ourselves the chance to win the game at the end.”
The result left the Bears wishing they had vanquished the Packers when they had the chance three weeks earlier. On Jan. 2, the Packers needed a victory to make the playoffs. They edged the Bears, who had nothing tangible to gain with a victory, 10-3.
But by failing to knock out the Packers before the postseason began, the Bears were faced with the task of doing it when the stakes were highest. The Packers came to Chicago and took the Halas Trophy. Now they hit the road again, this time to Texas, in search of a prize named after someone on their side.