It's all White on the night as Wallabies stun All Blacks
Andy Friend says it's a shame Australian Rugby will lose Nic White to France. He immediately landed a booming penalty goal before scoring the winning try as the Wallabies made it three in a row and keep their hopes of retaining that most elusive piece of silverware next weekend amid the daunting surrounds of Eden Park. When debutant Nehe Milne-Skudder scored the second of his tries deep in the second half, it appeared the old masters, Richie McCaw and Dan Carter, would preside over yet another triumph in the trans-Tasman grudge match. But a determined Wallaby outfit, re-energised and re-focused under Michael Cheika, would prove the masters of escape again. Just as they did against the Springboks a month ago, they would finish over the top and fire a timely shot in this World Cup year. Wallaby coach Michael Cheika said he was proud of the effort but fully understood the task that lay ahead next weekend.
"It's probably the biggest challenge in world rugby, going to Eden Park. We've got to be level. We've got to try and improve every day because this is the path we have to go on if we are to be competitive consistently," Cheika said. "It's nice to have on that but we want to test ourselves over more and more and more games." Battle scars: David Pocock will get a break from rugby in 2017. It wasn't pretty by any stretch but none of them would care a lick. The line-out was a shambles at times, the handling was poor and there will be fresh questions over nine and 10, with the Wallabies looking a far better outfit when Matt Toomua took over at 10 and White at nine.
David Pocock was herculean at number eight and there were plenty of unsung heroes in the pack, with Michael Hooper, James Horwill and Scott Fardy all playing themselves to a standstill, while Sekope Kepu set the Wallabies in motion with his maiden Test try. The bench again delivered and Cheika and his team will now stare down 13 years of history as they try to complete what has become the impossible in New Zealand, where the All Blacks are sure to rise after being stung by an uncharacteristically scrappy performance. The Wallaby scrum was a rock and the selection of a pair of opensides had no impact, although Rob Simmons was badly missed in the line-out, which almost proved exceedingly costly on a number of occasions. But Cheika will love the way his team knuckled down and toughed it out when they could have folded up as the All Blacks made their run late in the contest. Pocock was on song from the start. He had a pair of pilfers after five minutes but it wasn't an ideal beginning, with Kepu being marched for 10 minutes by referee Wayne Barnes for offside play.
The damage was only 3-0 during the danger period and it took 22 minutes for the Wallabies to earn their first penalty. A dominant scrum would do the trick and Giteau, who had goal-kicking duties, would level scores, only to see Carter once again edge his side ahead. Hooper's stop on Julian Savea right on halftime would be pivotal, as would be Aaron Smith's sin-binning at the start of the second for a high shot on Adam Ashley-Cooper, who was groggy but able to continue in the contest. Milner-Skudder's try at the 56 minute mark made it 14-10 to the visitors but the Wallabies held their nerve, with Toomua's pin-point grubber setting up Ashley-Cooper in the corner. A second to the young All Blacks winger made it 20-19 to the Wallabies with 10 minutes to play before White, spotting the gap, pounced to slice through and give the Wallabies a memorable victory. It would be Richie McCaw's 141st Test cap, equalling the record of Ireland's Brian O'Driscoll. But on a rare night, he would leave a contest against the Wallabies with a loss against his name and facing a backs to the wall assignment on home soil.