Scottish football reconstruction shows no sign of consensus with SPL, SFA and SFL at loggerheads
On Monday the Scottish Premier League clubs met at Hampden in order to rubber-stamp their proposal for two top tiers of 12 members, operating under their own tattered and leaky umbrella.
Since they had unanimously supported this proposal only last week, a further meeting seemed about as pointless as elections in North Korea but there remains opposition to their plans.
In a difference of opinion which rivals that between the Judean People’s Front and the People’s Front of Judea, the Scottish Football League support an elite division of 16 clubs, a second tier of 10 and a third level also consisting of 16 teams.
The Scottish Football Association’s president, Campbell Ogilvie, meanwhile, is at loggerheads with the ruling body’s chief executive, Stewart Regan, about the way forward.
Regan has said he hopes to see reconstruction in place in time for next season but Ogilvie believes it would be unfair and unwise to move the goalposts halfway through a campaign.
“If you’re bringing in any change, then you start the season knowing what you're playing for,” he said. “That's my personal opinion - and that's No 1.
“The other [issue] is that, whatever reconstruction we're looking at, it has to be something that satisfies - or takes care of - all 42 clubs.
“It's fair to say that there are two top professional leagues in the country. You can argue over where that's 22 or 24.
“Then there are semi-pro leagues. All 42 clubs are working closely in community schemes but the current SFL 2 and 3 teams are buying more into our worthwhile community programmes. I want to see all clubs taken care of.”
Under the SPL’s proposals, 12 SFL clubs will be invited to join their breakaway movement but Ogilvie expressed his opposition to Rangers, or any other lower league club, being catapulted into the second tier.
"Whatever model we agree on, then it has to be on sporting merit,” he said. “I believe you play for your place in the top two leagues - there isn’t a definitive line that says this club is professional or not.
“There has to be promotion and relegation, which brings us back to the pyramid, which the SFA strongly back. That has to be opened up to the bottom tier of the professional leagues.”
Ogilvie also believes that the SFA is ahead of schedule regarding the appointment of a replacement for Craig Levein as manager of the national team.
“The process is presently underway with that, we are not sitting back doing nothing,” he said. “That process is well underway. I can't say too much more.
“We did say at the outset that we would look to have a manager in place before the next competitive game [in March] but I would hope it’s sooner than that.”