In Glasgow, the Old Firm Derby Plays Out With No Violence, and No Goals
The attempted attacks were the latest in an escalation of tension within Scottish soccer centering on the two Glasgow clubs. Celtic and Rangers are traditionally divided between Catholics and Protestants. Lennon, a Catholic, played for Northern Ireland and had already been a target of sectarianism.
In February, a Scottish Cup quarterfinal between the teams ended with Rangers having three players sent off — one after the final whistle. Celtic won the game, 1-0.
Although tensions remained high for the sixth Old Firm match of 2011, there were no repeat incidents.
COSTLY LOSS FOR ARSENAL Arsenal’s slim hopes of winning the English Premier League were virtually extinguished on a last-minute goal by the Bolton substitute Tamir Cohen in a 2-1 loss.
Cohen, an Israeli midfielder who entered the game in the 85th minute, scored on a glancing header to the near post from a corner kick.
The loss leaves third-place Arsenal nine points behind league-leading Manchester United with four matches remaining.
“Of course the chances are very minimal now,” Arsenal Manager Arsène Wenger said.
Robin van Persie, who scored in a seventh straight away league game, had brought the Gunners back in the 47th minute after Bolton forward Daniel Sturridge scored from close range seven minutes before halftime.
Arsenal, which has not won a trophy in six years, is now struggling to finish second — Chelsea is three points ahead. It was the Gunners’ first defeat in 17 league games.
“It’s hard to lose a game like that; it’s hard to swallow, but we gave everything,” Wenger said. “We had the chances to win it.”
United, which beat Everton, 1-0, on Saturday, is at Arsenal on Sunday, then hosts the reigning champion Chelsea on May 8 in key matches. Chelsea defeated West Ham, 3-0, on Saturday.
HOPE FOR MALLORCA Mallorca beat Getafe, 2-0, to keep itself out of the Spanish league’s relegation zone, and Málaga and Hercules each won to improve their hopes.
José Carlos Nuñes and Akihiro Ienaga took advantage of poor defending to head home corner kicks as Mallorca moved nine points out of the relegation zone.
Nacho Novo’s 71st-minute goal gave Sporting Gijon a 1-0 win over Espanyol to remain a point behind Mallorca, and Júlio Baptista scored a 32nd-minute opener before creating Sebastián Fernández’s goal in Málaga’s 2-1 win over Racing Santander.
Málaga’s fourth win in six games moved it three points ahead of Hercules, which is in the relegation zone with Zaragoza despite a 1-0 win over Deportivo La Coruña.
DEJAGAH SPARKS WOLFSBURG Ashkan Dejagah scored twice as Wolfsburg beat Cologne, 4-1, giving Coach Felix Magath his first win in five games since returning to Wolfsburg, the 2009 Bundesliga champion.
Mario Mandzukic opened the scoring in the 14th minute, and had a goal in the 39th that Dejagah helped create.
Lackluster defending allowed Dejagah to score Wolfsburg’s third goal in the 58th minute — after Sebastian Freis scored for Cologne — and the 24-year-old Dejagah added a fourth with two minutes remaining in Magath’s 450th Bundesliga game as a coach.
With three games left, Wolfsburg is in the relegation playoff place — three points behind Cologne, which dropped to 14th.
INJURIES HIT M.L.S. STARS David Ferreira of Dallas, the reigning most valuable player of Major League Soccer, sustained a double fracture in his right ankle during a 2-1 win at Vancouver on Saturday.
Ferreira, a Colombian midfielder, was injured on a hard tackle by Whitecaps defender Jonny Leathers.
It was the second serious leg injury in two days to an M.L.S. star. Seattle Sounders midfielder Steve Zakuani fractured his right tibia and fibula Friday in a match at Colorado.