Clemens indicted for lying to Congress about drug use, 'in a lot of trouble'
Roger Clemens, considered the greatest pitcher of his generation, now faces the possibility of becoming the first baseball player to be sentenced to prison for his role in the game's steroid scandal.
Clemens was charged on Thursday with six counts of allegedly lying to Congress about using performance-enhancing drugs and faces up to 30 years in prison and a $1.5 million fine if convicted. He told the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform in February 2008 that he never used steroids or human-growth hormone, contradicting what former trainer Brian McNamee said to the committee, federal agents and investigator George Mitchell.
THE CASE AGAINST CLEMENS: How his statements got him in hot water
Earl Ward, one of McNamee's attorneys, called the indictment a "vindication." Clemens, a seven-time Cy Young winner, said it is an injustice, according to his verified Twitter account.
"I look forward to challenging the government's accusations," Clemens tweeted, "and hope people will keep an open mind until trial."
Clemens' attorney, Rusty Hardin, said federal prosecutors made Clemens a plea offer but he rejected it. Hardin declined to comment on details of the proposed plea deal, which ordinarily involves admitting to a crime while avoiding the scenario of a multiple-count indictment as happened in the Clemens case.
Hardin said that although many have argued that Clemens should simply admit he took steroids, "the problem is nobody ever talks about what he should have done if he didn't do it."
Yet, the indictment may have only confirmed what most people believe.
"I figured this (indictment) would happen," said David Segui, a former workout partner of McNamee's, who testified this year in front of the grand jury investigating Clemens. "I told them I didn't know what Roger did. I never saw him do it. But I do know what (McNamee) told me. We talked about it a million times. And I know he kept the needles that he used (on Clemens). He told me all of that before their falling-out, which, I think, was a key for the timeline in this.
"Everyone feels bad about this, especially (McNamee). He begged Roger to stop. Now, it's reached the point where it's going to ruin people's lives."
Clemens joins home-run king Barry Bonds as baseball's biggest stars to be indicted for allegedly lying under oath about the use of performance-enhancing drugs. Bonds was indicted in 2007 on making false statements before a grand jury investigating the Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative (BALCO). Bonds, who with Clemens retired in 2007, is scheduled to go on trial in March 2011.
"The case against Clemens is far stronger than the case against Barry Bonds," said Victor Conte, founder and president of BALCO. "Brian McNamee is an eyewitness who will testify against Clemens and there appears to be strong physical evidence against him as well. The government simply does not have this type of evidence against Bonds. I believe Roger Clemens is in a lot of trouble."
No date has been set for Clemens' initial court appearance, according to the U.S. attorney's office in Washington. The case was assigned to U.S. District Judge Reggie Walton, who presided over the perjury and obstruction trial of Vice President Dick Cheney's former chief of staff, I. Lewis "Scooter" Libby.
In his testimony to congress Clemens said, "I've been accused of something I'm not guilty of. ... I have never taken steroids or HGH."
But longtime friend and former teammate Andy Pettite told congressional investigators that Clemens confided to him that he had used HGH. Clemens said Pettite was wrong.
"I believe Andy has misheard" the conversation, Clemens responded.
"When a witness, such as Roger Clemens, lies, as I think he did, he should be held accountable," said Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif., the House committee's chairman at the time of the baseball star's testimony.
Former Rep. Tom Davis of Virginia, who was the top Republican on the House panel, called the indictment "a self-inflicted wound" by Clemens.
"Clemens was not under subpoena. He came voluntarily. He wanted to come to the committee and clear his name," Davis said. "And I sat there in the office with (committee chairman) Henry Waxman and said, 'Whatever you do, don't lie.'"
Earlier this year, Rangers president Nolan Ryan said he felt for Clemens.
"I've talked to him a few times," baseball's all-time strikeout leader told USA TODAY. "He tries to put up a brave front, but it's so tough on him with this turn in his life creating all of this unrest for him. What he's accomplished in baseball, and his status as a sports celebrity, it's sad to see him in this position."
Clemens won his seven Cy Young Awards during a 24-year career with Boston, Toronto, the Yankees and Houston. He went 354-184 and stands third on the all-time strikeout list with 4,672. The former University of Texas star helped the Longhorns win the College World Series and also won World Series crowns with the Yankees in 1999 and 2000.
Clemens last pitched in 2007 after he returned to the Yankees following three years with the Astros. He hasn't played since Game 3 of the first-round series against Cleveland when he left after 2 1/3 innings with a sore hamstring.