High Peaks, High Drama in 2011 Dakar Rally
After driving nearly 6,000 miles over frigid high Andean plains and coastal dunes, up rock-gorged gullies and across boundless grasslands, a hearty cadre of truckers, four-wheel A.T.V. drivers, motorcyclists and car pilots were fêted with confetti and champagne on Sunday in Buenos Aires, having wrapped the 2011 Dakar Rally‘s 15th and final stage on Saturday, just outside the Argentinian capital.
The endurance race, long considered the premiere contest of its kind, previously had been run between Paris and the Senegalese capital, Dakar. But the so-called rally raid was relocated to South America in 2009 after a rash of negative news reports and safety concerns, both for competitors and spectators.
The Dakar’s relocation introduced challenging new environmental features to a race whose primary obstacle in Africa was the desert itself. Passing between Argentina and Chile, racers breached 15,000 feet amid looming cinder cones and stark-white salt flats.
Competitors must withdraw from the field if their vehicle — or their bodies — sustain sufficient damage. Marcos Patronelli, an Argentine quad A.T.V. racer who won his class in 2010, withdrew early this year after injuries sustained in training became too much to bear. His brother Alejandro, who finished second in the quad class to Marcos last year, cruised to victory on Saturday nursing a broken hand.
The Qatari racer Nasser Al-Attiyah fended off the 2010 winner, the Spaniard Carlos Sainz, to claim victory in the car class, the highest-profile race category. Mr. Al-Attiyah is the first Arab to ever win an overall Dakar class.
Podium ceremonies were held during a break in a violent rainstorm on Sunday at Buenos Aires’s central fairgrounds, known as la Rural.
Much like the hosts of Olympic games and FIFA World Cups, Chileans and Argentines are split regarding the rally’s benefit to their countries. Opponents cite safety concerns, which were given credence when a truck driven by a resident of the northwest Argentina province of Catamarca was struck by the car of an Argentine racer, killing the Catamarca native. Others worry about the race’s impact on fragile high-altitude ecosystems as well as on unexcavated pre-Colombian ruins and unexhumed dinosaur fossils.
The rally is nonetheless expected to return to South America next year, though race organizers haven’t yet made an official announcement.