Nasser Hussain: Dhoni hands Strauss the advantage
By Nasser Hussain for the Daily Mail
This was a sloppy day for India - and, so early in the series, a big one for England. When Mahendra Singh Dhoni won a very important toss, you wondered what lay in store for the hosts' batsmen under grey skies and against a swinging ball. To finish on 127 for two felt like a small triumph.  
Make no mistake: Dhoni will have been a relieved man to call correctly. Had India batted first in these conditions - remember, the tourists have had only one three-day game against Somerset in the build-up to this Test - they could have been in real trouble against Jimmy Anderson. 
But having done the important part, Dhoni then watched as his bowlers wasted their opportunity. They just weren't full enough with the new ball, which should have been pitched up repeatedly to entice the drive. Too often they dropped short and wide.
The India captain did not have his best day in charge, either. He's set himself high standards by winning just about everything he turns his mind to. But he missed a couple of tricks in the field and didn't get a glove on a chance from Trott that flew between him and Rahul Dravid at first slip.
It was noticeable when India came out after lunch that he failed to post a third slip for Trott, who duly flashed one through that very gap off Ishant Sharma.  
And why didn't Dhoni give Sharma a short leg when Kevin Pietersen was lunging at him?  If Dhoni had been more switched on, England could easily have been 60 for four and it would have been game on for  the Indians.
It all felt a bit clumsy from a team who have prided themselves on smart cricket during their rise to the top of the world rankings. But in some ways it's not too much of a surprise.
There's been a piecemeal feel to the start of India's tour. Some have arrived from the Caribbean, some haven't played any first-class cricket since January, some have been playing in the IPL. It felt a bit like they were making  it up as they went along yesterday.
The Zaheer Khan injury was an interesting one. Although he clearly remains a very skilful bowler, he seems to be ageing quickly and it was always asking a lot for a guy who has barely bowled with the red ball in recent months to come through unscathed here.
It's why I believe this England side will eventually overtake India in Test cricket. Their bowlers are always well-prepared, they get the right amount of rest and they don't play in the IPL. England know how to peak.  
That's not to say India won't win this series, because they still have loads of quality in their team, but this is not the start they needed.
They weren't helped by the fact that Sharma was clearly struggling with the slope. My fellow Sky commentator Michael Holding has said he never enjoyed bowling here because he felt the slope added an element of chance to proceedings, whereas he liked to stay in control.
Yesterday you could see Sharma starting it wide outside off stump when he bowled from the Pavilion End in the hope the slope would bring the ball back in to the right-handed Trott and Pietersen. But it just wasn't  happening for him.
India will be fretting over Zaheer's fitness now, because he again showed what a streetwise bowler he can be. I didn't think Strauss changed his approach to batting against left-arm seam much and, although he continues to struggle against the breed, we shouldn't forget what a class act Zaheer can be.
He will have stored away in his memory bank the way he got Strauss out at The Oval in 2007 and repeated the trick here, using the bouncer as a surprise weapon and sending it down wide outside off stump so that Strauss had to fetch it across.  
And he was canny against Cook, dragging him across his stumps, then slipping in the straighter one. If his injury is serious, India will be very worried indeed.
The first day of the series may have produced fewer than 50 overs, but it belonged squarely to England.