ICC uphold spot-fixing suspensions on Pakistani duo
DUBAI (Reuters) - Pakistan players Salman Butt and Mohammad Amir had their provisional suspensions over allegations of spot-fixing upheld by the International Cricket Council (ICC) on Sunday.
Butt and Amir were appealing for their bans to be lifted. Team mate Mohammad Asif was also suspended over the same allegations but withdrew his appeal earlier this month in order to give his lawyers more time to prepare a detailed challenge.
“I have decided to dismiss the applications ... all three players accordingly are still for the time being unable to participate in cricketing activities,” the head of the ICC’s code of conduct commission Michael Beloff told reporters after a two-day hearing.
The innocence or guilt of the players, who have all denied any wrongdoing, will be judged at an independent tribunal, the date of which has yet to be set.
“Their cases will go forward to the anti-corruption tribunal who will adjudicate as soon as practical upon whether the several charges made against them are proved,” Beloff said.
The hearing in Dubai was solely concerned with determining whether the ICC followed the correct procedures in imposing the bans.
Lawyers Khalid Ranjha and Aftab Gul, both acting for former test captain Butt, said the hearing was fair but they were disappointed with the decision.
When asked by reporters whether he thought he would play cricket again, Butt replied: “Yes, definitely”.
Fast bowler Amir declined to comment when he left the hearing.
Butt, Amir and paceman Asif were suspended by the ICC on Sept. 2 after being charged with various offences under cricket’s anti-corruption code.
The bans followed allegations in a British newspaper of spot-fixing during the recent test series against England.
The British newspaper report alleged Amir and Asif deliberately bowled no-balls to order in a test against England at Lord’s in August, with the involvement of Butt who was then Pakistan captain.
British police are also investigating the spot-fixing allegations against the trio.