NHL opens season with daylong TV schedule
Fans across North America will be able to watch the NHL all day Saturday as the 2012-13 season gets under way.
It starts with NHL Tonight's #HOCKEYISBACK preview show, which airs from 2-3 p.m. ET on NHL Network in the United States and Canada and will be streamed on NHL.com.
One of the better rivalries in the League will get things going on the ice: The Philadelphia Flyers play host to the Pittsburgh Penguins at 3 p.m. ET. The game will be shown on NBC in the United States and RDS2 in Canada. The Flyers ousted the Penguins in a wild first-round matchup during the 2012 Stanley Cup Playoffs.
Also at 3 p.m. ET on NBC, the Los Angeles Kings begin their defense of their first Stanley Cup championship when they play the Chicago Blackhawks at Staples Center.
Each of the 3 p.m. games also can be seen online at NHL.com and NBCSports.com. The Stanley Cup Championship banner-raising ceremony at Staples Center will be part of the NBC broadcasts.
Meanwhile, the Winnipeg Jets battle the Ottawa Senators at the MTS Centre (CBC and RDS in Canada).
At 5:30 p.m. ET, NHL Network will present "NHL Tonight," which also will be streamed on NHL.com. That will be followed by the New York Rangers at Boston Bruins on NHLN-US.
Three other games get under way at 7 p.m. ET, including an Original Six matchup between the Montreal Canadiens and Toronto Maple Leafs from Bell Centre. That game can be seen on CBC and RDS in Canada. Other games at 7 include the defending Eastern Conference champion New Jersey Devils at the New York Islanders, and the Washington Capitals at the Tampa Bay Lightning.
Jordan Staal makes his debut with the Carolina Hurricanes at 7:30 p.m. ET, when they visit the Florida Panthers. Three more games begin at 8 p.m. ET: Jaromir Jagr dons the Dallas Stars sweater for the first time against the Phoenix Coyotes; the Nashville Predators play host to the Columbus Blue Jackets; and the Detroit Red Wings visit the St. Louis Blues.
Speaking of debuts, Zach Parise and Ryan Suter will play for the Minnesota Wild for the first time when they play host to the Colorado Avalanche at 9 p.m. ET.
The final game of the night gets under way at 10 p.m. ET, when the Vancouver Canucks face the Anaheim Ducks in a game that can be seen on CBC in Canada.