PM Malcolm Turnbull says 'everyone' should be united in condemnation of terror following Saudi football team minute's silence snub
Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull has addressed the Saudi Arabian football team's refusal to honour a minute's silence for the two Australian victims of the London terror attack, saying "everyone" should be united in condemnation of terrorism. "The whole world, the whole free world is united in condemnation of that terrorist attack and terrorism generally and in sympathy and love for the victims and their families," Mr Turnbull said, adding he has not yet watched video of the minute's silence. "The heartbreaking loss of young Australians in London, of course in Baghdad and just this week in Melbourne to these murderous terrorists. Everybody, everyone should be united in condemnation of the terrorists and love and sympathy and respect for the victims and their families," he ended. Earlier, the Socceroos addressed the incident saying they had "no control" over the Saudi Arabian football team's actions."
"More importantly for us as a team we wanted to show our respects for the two that lost their lives and make sure that we did the right thing and what they did we don't really have any control over that," player Ryan McGowan said.
"We just wanted to make sure that we did it and we observed it properly."
The Saudi Arabian Football Federation has apologised for the behaviour of some of its players, who ignored the minute’s silence held before kickoff at the World Cup qualifier at Adelaide Oval last night.
Several of the Saudi players wandered away while the Socceroos observed the silent tribute in honour of two Australians killed in Saturday’s London terror attack.
Some of the Saudi team continued jogging and passing the ball between each other during the tribute. One player stood facing the Australian team.
"The Saudi Arabian Football Federation deeply regrets and unreservedly apologises for any offence caused by the failure of some members of the representative team of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to formally observe the one minute's silence in memory of the victims of the London terrorist attack on 3 June 2017, prior to the World Cup Qualifying match against Australia in Adelaide," a holding statement by the federation reads.
"The players did not intend any disrespect to the memories of the victims or to cause upset to their families, friends or any individual affected by the atrocity.
"The Saudi Arabian Football Federation condemns all acts of terrorism and extremism and extends its sincerest condolences to the families of all victims and to the Government and people of the United Kingdom."
A Football Federation Australia spokesperson earlier told News Corp the Saudi team notified them they would not be honouring the tribute in advance of the pre-match ritual.
"Both the Australian Football Confederation and the Saudi team agreed that the minute of silence could be held," it was quoted as saying.
"The FFA was further advised by Saudi team officials that this tradition was not in keeping with Saudi culture and they would move to their side of the field and respect our custom whilst taking their own positions on the field."
3AW radio host Neil Mitchell told the TODAY Show the team should "apologise and get out".
"If it's not in line with their culture then they should have honoured our culture and done the right thing. They've insulted Australia, they've insulted Australians, they've insulted the British victims as well.
"It was disrespectful, it was insulting."
TODAY co-host Sylvia Jeffreys noted "I would be required to wear a headscarf if I were to travel to Saudi Arabia and they can't stand still for one minute to observe something that has no cultural, no religious background, no meaning in a faith or religious respect, it is simply honouring people who have lost their lives."
"This isn't about culture, this is about a lack of respect," he said.
Some users defended the team, saying a minute silence was not observed in Saudi culture, or Islam.
However, a domestic Saudi team al-Ahli Saudi FC was photographed last year observing a minute's silence before a Qatar Airways Cup match in Doha against Barcelona.
The Socceroos went on to score a 3-2 win against Saudi Arabia, earning themselves a place in the upcoming World Cup.
Two Australian women were among the seven victims of the deadly weekend terror attack.
Tributes have flowed for Brisbane 21-year-old Sara Zelenak, who had been working in London as an au pair, and South Australian nurse Kirsty Boden, 28.
They have been remembered by friends and loved ones for the joy they brought to the lives of others.
Two other Australians are recovering from injuries sustained in the attack.