World Cup 2018: Prime Minister David Cameron 'frustrated' by BBC documentary screened ahead of vote
The Prime Minister will fly to Zurich on Tuesday to lobby on England’s behalf, but revealed on Friday that he had already attempted to ease concerns within Fifa about scrutiny from the British media in general, and Panorama in particular.
The England 2018 bid has described the BBC’s decision as “unpatriotic” amid fears that the programme will simply rake over existing allegations against potential supporters of the bid.
“I’ve obviously spoken about these issues with Fifa delegates, but what I’d say is you know, this is a free country, we have a free media.
“Is it frustrating that Panorama’s doing this programme a few days before? Of course it is. But it’s a free country and you have to roll with that,” Cameron told the BBC’s Football Focus, in an interview to be screened on Saturday.
“I think Fifa will understand that and I think we also have to try and convince them, yes we’ve got a robust and independent media, but our media love football and when it comes to the World Cup in terms of audience, in terms of the press coverage around the world, actually the media will give it a fantastic boost here in this country.”
Cameron’s comments came as Fifa vice-president Jack Warner, a potential subject of the documentary, said Panorama had “a death-wish for the English FA”.
“I hope that they fail because it isn’t too correct what they’re trying to do,” he said.
Warner said he would decide who he and his Concacaf colleagues will vote for on Monday: “We have not decided how we’re voting in the CONCACAF.
“I know that, in some ways, our votes are key to what’s happening. And when I go to CONCACAF on Monday, I’ll meet my team and then we shall decide.”
Cameron is hopeful of winning Warner’s support when they meet in Zurich, and said he would press the natural virtues of England’s bid.
“I will just have as many meetings as I can, with all the key decision makers and I’ll be as passionate as I possibly can be about what England can bring for a 2018 world cup that’s not just good for football but also good for FIFA and good for the world over, and I think that’s the case we’ve got to make, I think we’ve got a really strong case, so it won’t be difficult, I’m looking forward to it.”
Prince William, who will also be in Zurich next week, has urged supporters to get behind the bid in a message that will be carried in every Premier League match programme this weekend.
“Our defining ambition is that 2018 must inspire young people the world over to play football and benefit from all that this great sport offers - team spirit, health, a focus in life, the values of sportsmanship and fair play and, above all, just the sheer thrill and excitement of playing the game,” he said.
“This would be our legacy. That is why I want so desperately for the FIFA World Cup to come here. So, I urge every one of you to take pride in our bid. If we are successful, I know you will join me in welcoming back to our shores the greatest show on earth.”