Giro d'Italia: Richie Porte, Alberto Contador favourites for Grand Tour cycling race
Can Tasmanian cyclist Richie Porte take out a maiden Giro d'Italia title, or is it Alberto Contador's to lose?
Ahead of the start of the 2015 Giro in San Lorenzo al Mare on Saturday night with a 17.6km team timetrial, look at the top five contenders for Italy's Grand Tour.
Tasmanian cyclist Richie Porte has never really kicked on since an impressive seventh-placed finish on his Giro debut in 2011.
He has more often than not disappointed in Grand Tours, yet his form in one-week stage races is impressive, particularly this season.
He won Paris-Nice for the second time and also triumphed at the Volta a Catalunya.
Back in 2013, Porte was second in the Criterium du Dauphine despite riding as a domestique for team leader Chris Froome, who won.
But it remains to be seen if the 30-year-old can transfer that to the three-week format.
Spain's Alberto Contador has the experience and ability to romp to a seventh Grand Tour victory but two elements may work against him.
Contador is also targeting July's Tour de France, which is arguably a greater aim, and he is no longer the force he once was - primarily prior to his doping suspension.
Even so, he proved in winning last year's Vuelta that he is still one of the best climbers in the world and if he can avoid losing too much time to superior time-triallers in the 60km stage 14 race against the clock, it is hard to look beyond the 32-year-old as favourite for the Italian title.
Sardinia's Fabio Aru is only 24 but he had a breakout season in 2014 where he finished third at the Giro and fifth at the Vuelta, taking three stage wins along the way.
Seen as the natural successor to compatriot and Astana team-mate Vincenzo Nibali, the Tour de France champion, much is expected of Aru.
But his preparations have been upset by a stomach virus in April and he has only 15 race days in his legs this year.
Having finished second the last two years, Rigoberto Uran should be there or there abouts and a top five finish, or even podium finish is a near-certainty.
But there are question marks over his ability to actually take the next step and win a major race.
Too often the 28-year-old comes close, like the 2012 London Olympics, but without ever claiming the cigar.
High finishes seem to be Uran's speciality, winning is not.
A week ago 25-year-old Ilnur Zakarin was an almost unknown quantity but his stunning victory at the Tour de Romandie, beating the likes of Chris Froome, Vincenzo Nibali and Nairo Quintana, has catapulted him into the pre-Giro limelight.
His three-week Tour capabilities are totally unknown but his Romandie win suggests he should be considered a contender.
However, having already served a two-year doping suspension earlier in his career, his sudden rise has obviously raised eyebrows and he will be under as much scrutiny for his results as for his biological passport readings in Italy.