John Higgins seals fourth world title in poignant win over Judd Trump
John Higgins came from behind to claim his fourth world championship title as the most harrowing 12 months of his life ended in triumph.
It was a poignant triumph in the aftermath of the death in February of his father, John Sr, who had been a constant backstage presence at his previous Crucible appearances. When this was mentioned in the traditional arena interview he dissolved into tears as he hugged his wife and their three children.
Only Steve Davis with six and Stephen Hendry with seven have won more world titles in the modern era, dating from BBC's first coverage from The Crucible in 1977.
"It's an unbelievable moment to win it again," Higgins said. "It's been amazing, I wouldn't be here if it wasn't for [the support of his family]. It's just an unbelievable 12 months but it's been great."
"John played the better snooker over the two days," said the 21-year-old loser, smiling through his disappointment. "The whole experience has been incredible, all 17 days of it. Every game has just built and built with the fanbase and support from everyone."
But Higgins argued that "Judd was the better player. He was playing a brand of snooker I've never seen in my life. The amount of long pots he made was incredible. We've got a new sensation in the game."
He attributed his success to "tough matchplay. I played great to get back into it and made Judd think about it [his three- frame lead]".
"Judd lit the tournament up but John goes home with the spoils," Davis summed up.
The 35-year-old Scot had looked tired, almost spent, in losing Sunday's closing three frames but produced his best sustained form of the championship, twice narrowing the gap to two before, from 12-9 down, ending the afternoon on a four-frame winning streak.
This advantage increased to two frames when an in-off on 38 that Trump should have avoided allowed Higgins in for 62. Trump levelled by taking the next two frames but his failed black after potting the last red left Higgins in a position to clear the colours he needed to regain the lead at 15-14.
Higgins won a tight frame for 16-14 and led 45-0 in the next but his red to a distant baulk pocket failed and Trump sprang to renewed life with 70. But he could not sustain this recovery as leads of 39-0 and 60-0 turned to dust in the two remaining frames.
Higgins thus ended what had in many respects been a trying season in memorable fashion.
Suspended for six months and fined £75,000 for failing to report an illegal betting approach, he returned on 1 November and in six months won five titles, including the UK Championship by recovering from four down with five to play against Mark Williams in the final.
Only a few days after the death of his father from cancer he demonstrated his iron will by winning the Welsh Open. It was remarkable to play so well for so long in such circumstances but when he came to The Crucible there were signs of burnout.
Rory McLeod's caution and 30-second shot average made his 13-7 second-round victory more draining than the score might suggest and certainly did nothing for his rhythm.
He had to come from 8-5 behind to beat Ronnie O'Sullivan 13-10 and from 9-5 adrift to beat Williams 17-14 in the semis.
On the first day of the final it seemed his reserves had run dry but he was to prove this perception emphatically mistaken.