Connecticut Huskies win 90th straight to match own NCAA record
HARTFORD, Conn. -- Connecticut still stands alone when it comes to college basketball win streaks -- even if one group of Huskies is no longer without equal.
With a 102-37 victory over No. 20 South Florida on Tuesday, No. 1 UConn matched its own NCAA record, set a little more than six years ago, with 90 consecutive wins.
The current streak began following a loss at Stanford on Nov. 17, 2014, and encompasses national championships in the 2014-15 and 2015-16 seasons. It now matches Connecticut's original 90-game win streak, which began with the opening game of the 2008-09 season and ended on Dec. 30, 2010, also at Stanford. That streak also included two national titles.
South Florida was the 27th ranked team defeated by the Huskies during the current streak.
From the outset, smiles pervaded among UConn players on the court, not to mention the applause and even a couple celebratory raised arms from Geno Auriemma. With history on their racket, there wasn't even a hint of feeling the weight of the moment from the Huskies. It was more like they were enjoying the moment -- not as the effect of a rout but as its cause. As much as the domination that followed, which was almost embarrassing in its scope, that sense of joy said a lot about how a team that wasn't supposed to continue this streak has done just that.
A schedule such as the one UConn has played this season, without Moriah Jefferson, Breanna Stewart or Morgan Tuck, with games against Baylor, Florida State, Maryland, Notre Dame, Ohio State and Texas, was going to test a young team. But the rest of the country still can't come up with any answers. These Huskies earned this night, earned their place as part of the record. Why wouldn't that be fun?
There will be more to come from Hartford on a record-equaling night, but here are some thoughts at the final buzzer on both a forgettable game and a historic achievement.
Turning point: Does the tipoff count? What about not getting stuck in traffic on the way to the arena? Similar to in win No. 89 against East Carolina, UConn's first possession produced an open 3-point look for Saniya Chong, who was likely fifth among starters in terms of South Florida's defensive concerns. As in the UCF game and nearly 50 percent of her attempts this season, Chong knocked down the shot. It's as if UConn just wants to underline that its opponents have no chance. In the blink of an eye, the lead grew to 9-0, and the rout was on.
Player of the game: Chong. It wasn't just the first shot. When she checked out of the game for the first time late in the opening quarter, Chong led all UConn players in the early blitz with eight points. She totaled 13 points, seven assists and no turnovers in the first half and finished the game with 20 points and eight assists. The points matched her career high, which was set in the Stanford loss.
Gabby Williams had people checking on triple-doubles in program history. She finished just shy of one, with 11 points, 13 rebounds and seven assists, but Chong owned the night.
Stat of the game: UConn recorded assists on 21 of 26 field goals in the first half, good for 80.8 percent and even better than its eye-popping 69.5 percent entering the game. By the time South Florida recorded its first assist with a minute to play in the first half, Connecticut led 60-17. The Huskies finished the first half with more assists (21) than South Florida had points (19) and maintained an advantage into the fourth quarter.
Stat of the game II: Chong's point production was a surprise but perhaps no more so than the 10 points off the bench from Natalie Butler. UConn isn't a deep team (it hasn't much mattered, clearly), and this was the first time all season that six players reached double digits in points.
The most invincible: What has happened since UConn lost a game? In terms of people and teams often thought invincible, Serena Williams lost two Grand Slam finals, Ronda Rousey lost two MMA bouts, the U.S. women's national team lost a penalty shootout against Sweden in an Olympic soccer quarterfinal, Alabama lost twice in the college football playoff, and the Golden State Warriors lost the NBA Finals after setting a record for wins. Even Katie Ledecky settled for a silver medal in the 2016 Olympics, albeit in a relay event.
Been there, done that: Those fans who showed up Tuesday night made themselves heard -- it wasn't difficult to cheer what seemed like an extended layup line. But while most schools would love to draw a crowd that size (10,109), it was hard to miss the empty seats in the XL Center on a night when a foregone conclusion wasn't the reason to show up. There was a time not so long ago when tickets to UConn games could be had only on the secondary market. During the undefeated 2001-02 season, all 18 home games in either Hartford or Storrs were listed with capacity crowds (from personal experience, that doesn't seem like creative bookkeeping).
What's next: First comes the chance to break the record when UConn plays at SMU on Saturday (ESPN3, 3 p.m. ET). Beyond that is the march to triple digits. The Huskies have yet to lose a game in the American Athletic Conference -- ever -- so there is every chance that they will be playing for their 100th consecutive win when No. 5 South Carolina visits Storrs, Connecticut, on Feb. 13.