Bubba Watson wins the US Masters
Playoff: Bubba Watson v Louis Oosthuizen. Second playoff hole (10th, par-four). Watson putts for the title... and misses. But it's just a tap-in for the title. He hugs his caddie, sobbing with joy and relief. It takes a few moments before his loved ones can get in on the act, then he congratulates Oosthuizen. The emotional Watson is not surprisingly in tears as the gallery continues to applaud. Playoff: Bubba Watson v Louis Oosthuizen. Second playoff hole (10th, par-four). Third shots. Watson has a birdie chance to take the title. Oosthuizen faces a challenge just to make par from his difficult position below the hole. Oosthuizen chips up respectably to within three metres. He will now putt out before Watson putts for the title. It's no gimme - a downhill shot from the fringe of the green, and it curls superbly, but just misses to the right. Bogey for Oosthuizen. A par will do it now for Watson. Two putts to a green jacket for the likeable American leftie.
Playoff: Bubba Watson v Louis Oosthuizen. Second playoff hole (10th, par-four). Second shot. Louis Oosthuizen ended up on the fringes of the fairway, 231 metres to the hole. He ends up way short, 25 metres-plus down the slope from the pin. Watson is in the woods, with a decent lie, but facing huge overhanging trees. He has fussed over the shot for five minutes. He curls his hig iron to within a couple of metres of the hole, surely the winning shot. Matt Kuchar is one of the more colourful contenders, not scared to show his emotions. Playoff: Bubba Watson v Louis Oosthuizen. Second playoff hole (10th, par-four). Watson goes way right with his left-handed iron. Oosthuizen goes way right with his right-handed iron! We're off to an ad break while these balls are located amongst the timber.
Playoff: Bubba Watson v Louis Oosthuizen. First putts: Oosthuizen's putt is agonisingly close, but slips by to the right. He slumps to his haunches, hvaing thought he had nailed it. Watson for birdie, and for the title: It is from no more than two metres... he misses! Watson taps in comfortably, but the birdie putt wasn't that close. The playoff will continue, at the tenth hole. That was Watson's second chance to putt for the title, but Louis' effort was better, from further way. Louis Oosthuizen of South Africa hits his tee shot on the third hole.
Playoff: Bubba Watson v Louis Oosthuizen, for the US Masters title. Second shots: Oosthuizen is on solidly, mid-green, five or six metres from the hole. Watson's iron sucks back down the slope to within three or four metres. The massive gallery is right behind the American, and offering a trickle of grudging, polite applause for his rival. But when both men stride to the green together, there is warm applause. Playoff: Bubba Watson v Louis Oosthuizen, for the US Masters title. Watson's drive hits the mark down the middle, in the growing shadows - it is past 7pm now in Georgia. Oosthuizen's drive flirts with fairway bunkers but stays safe. Watson has previously lost a major playoff at the US Open. Oosthuizen's previous experience was a rollicking seven-shot win at the British Open. At the moment, Watson seems to be striking theball to more favourable spots, but the South African is nervelessly consistent. Steadiness or brilliance - what will win this shootout? With the final group of Mickelson and Hanson having completed their rounds, the playoff will commence shortly, on the 18th hole. It will be Louis Oosthuizen v Bubba Watson for the title, as it was for most of the back nine. It took Watson until te 16th hole to catch his playing partner, after being as much as five shots behind him during the early part of their rounds. They remained locked together over the final three holes.
Bubba Watson putts for the tournament, missing tothe right, but he taps in for a par, a good feeling with his rival for the title facing a tricky one metre putt for par. The unflappable Louis Oosthuizen rolls his par putt into the middle of the hole. In all likelihood, that means we will be off to a playoff. It would take a miracle from Phil Mickleson for anything else to eventuate. Leader Louis Oosthuizen's long first putt on 18 finishes within a metre. The tounament is there for co-leader Watson to take, if he can nail this gettable five-metre putt for birdie.
Oosthuizen's first putt on the 18th. Does he go for it, with co-leader Watson a big birdie chance? Or does he play percentages, nail the par and hope Watson misses? Approach shots on the 18th for the leaders. They are are fcaing a massive gallery behind the green, and both are taking their time over club choices. Oosthuizen is maybe a club too far, on the green but fifteen metres away from the hole, with a ridge to negotiate. Watson goes high, taking a big divot and fires to within five metres, adjacent to the hole. He had perfect length. The American has the box seat to win the tournament now and strides to the green to a rapturous ovation.
Matt Kuchar ends with a par to finish the tournament at eight-under. He got to within a shot of the lead at the 15th, but the dropped shot at the 16th cost him. Kuchar has a six-metre putt for birdie on the 17th. Watson's tee shot on 18 was straight down the middle. Oosthuizen looks happy with his drive as well. He looks like he is enjoying the pressure, smiling quietly, while Watson is more keyed up, tense-looking and fierce of eye. Watson has made more brilliant shots on the back nine, but the South African has been ultra consistent, and has not faltered. His brilliance came early, when he nailed that albatross to leapfrog from third to first on the second hole. he hasn't dropped the lead since, as the challenges have just kept coming.
Bubba Watson, co-leader at 10-under, takes several deep breaths before addressing his ball on the 17th green. For birdie... it lips out! Hanson's short birdie putt lips out on 16! Oosthuizen now, for par, to retain a share of the lead. A teaser of about a metre... Yet again, the South African holds his nerve, putting truly, and the Masters remains up for grabs. Watson taps in and we're offf to the 18th hole with co-leaders, two shots clear of the chasers. Bubba Watson reaches the green from an awkward lie behind trees and shed with his second shot on the par-four 17th. Peter Hanson has a birdie chance at 16 to go to 8-under. Mickelson's "near-impossible" birdie putt on 16 lives up to its billing, but he should be able to par. Oosthuizen is within range for a par on 17. Par only for Matt Kuchar at 17. You'd think needs a birdie on the last to remain a chance at the title. Mickelson's tee shot at 16 refuses to drop off the ridge and stays ten metres from the hole.
Oosthuizen's birdie putt seemed to roll past the hole, but he coverage was truncated by One HD, so we can't be sure. Here's Watson's putt, though - and it's straight in, to give the leftie a share of the lead at ten under. Oosthuizen did miss his birdie - he now rolls in the par to retain a share of the lead. And Kuchar could not get out of trouble at the 16th - he dropped a shot to fall to 8-under. You'd think it's between the pairing of Oosthuizen and Watson now. High tension with them playing together. The shoot-out at the top of the leaderboard is brilliant, with Watson firing to within two metres on the par-three 16, and leader Oosthuizen rolling right in behind him, facing a putt of perhaps three and a half metres. One HD just put an ad break between the approach shots and the putts. They really don't care about sport.
Matt Kuchar sprays his tee shot after joining the lead, and faces a challenge to par at the 16th. Co-leader Oosthuizen faces a two metres tester for birdie at the 15th. Watson mishots his gettable eagle putt on 15. Kuchar's long recovery putt on 16 leaves him with three metres of work to do to save par. Matt Kuchar joins the lead! The smiley American has eagled the 15th, leading to a huge roar from the gallery. Co-leader Oosthuizen has placed himself awkwardly at the same hole, but Bubba Watson, one shot behind, is well placed to challenge for an eagle himself.
Huge hole here for Watson and Oosthuizen, the par-five 15th, the last big chance for an eagle. The hot Watson is down the middle with his drive. Ian Poulter has finished at 5-under after missing his birdie chance at the 19th, then bogeying. Louis Oosthuizen rolls home his par putt nervelssly, and he holds on to his two-shot lead. But not for long! Moments later, Watson slides home his second consecutive birdie to go to 8-under. Harrington (6-under) and Westwood (7-under) narrowly miss birdie chances at the 16th and 17th holes. Oosthuizen is solid, down the middle as well. The South Africam, a runaway winner of the 2010 British Open, had not previously made the cut here in three attempts.
Bubba Watson hits an amazing approach shot to set up a birdie chance on 14. Oosthuizen faces a par putt of about two metres. Matt Kuchar has a putt of less than a metre to birdoe the 15h hole and go a clear second at eight under. Louis Oosthuizen was grinning as he hit his approach shot on the 14th, But now he is grimacing, after he left it well short. He faces a challenging up and down from beneath the hole, facing a tricky undulation. Mickleson has tickled the edge of the hole on the 13th, recording a birdie, not an eagle, to grab a slice of second place. There are more ads on One HD's Masters coverage than golf, despite the drama unfolding on the back nine at Augusta. Every golf company in existence will know that advertisements of its products interrupted golf fans when they were most transfixed by the sport that employs their prodcts.
7.46am Bubba Watson birdies the 13th to move to 7-under, bouncing back immediately after dropping a shot at the 12th. But he's still two shots behind the lead, because the indomitable South African Louis Oosthuizen lands his birdie putt at the same hole to go to 9-under. he set up his round with an albatross on the second hole. 7.43am Louis Oosthuizen makes a remarkable recovery on the 13th, lipping out on a long eagle putt. He faces a putt of about a metre for a crucial birdie to give him a two-shot lead. 7.41am Leader Louis Oosthuizen is "long and Left" on the par-five 13th after two shots. The 13th is one of the holes the long-hitters have been exploiting to get themselves moving on the leaderboard. Peter Hanson will need to make hay on the 13th after dropping a shot at the 12th to fall to six-under.
7.21 Bubba Watson (2nd, 7-under) is on the edge of the green on the 12th hole, a part-three just birdied by Matt Kuchar. He faces a putt of four metres for a birdie. Kuchar is in good position on the par-five 13th, and is looking as likely as any player to get a charge going on the back nine. 7.17am Matt Kuchar birdies the 12th hole to go to six under, holing a putt of almost three metres. That puts him two off the pace set by Louis Oosthuizen, sharing third with Phil Mickelson. The tournament was turned on its head from this point onwards last year, when Aussies Adam Scott, Jason Day and Geoff Ogilvy were gazzumped by a feat of birdie-making from South Africa's Charl Schwartzel. 7.00am As we begin the final nine holes, South Africa's Louis Oosthuizen leads at eight under by a shot from Bubba Watson and Curtis Hanson. Phil Mickelson is six-under, with Ian Poulter, Padraig Harrington and Matt Kuchar at five-under. Australia's Adam Scott is in the clubhouse at four-under, as is Justin Rose. Lee Westwood and Hunter Mahan are on course at four-under.