Cavaliers vs. Raptors
LeBron James advances to the NBA Finals for the sixth straight season, as the Cavs put away the Raptors in Game 6 113-87. (2:05)
TORONTO -- For LeBron James, it's six straight trips to the NBA Finals.
Maybe this one will end Cleveland's long wait for a championship.
James scored 33 points, Kevin Love had 20 points and 12 rebounds, and the Cavaliers advanced to their second straight Finals by beating the Toronto Raptors 113-87 in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals Friday night.
The Cavs will be seeking to end Cleveland's 52-year championship drought, the longest by any city with at least three professional teams. No Cleveland team has won it all since the Browns blanked Baltimore 27-0 to win the NFL championship in 1964.
"This city has been craving a championship," coach Tyronn Lue said. "We have the right team and we have the right talent."
James, who grew up in nearby Akron, is well aware of what a championship would mean to Cleveland.
"I know our city deserves it, our fans deserve it," James said. "But that gives us no sense of entitlement. We've still got to go out and get it. We've still got to go out and prove ourselves."
Kyrie Irving had 30 points and J.R. Smith added 15 for the Cavaliers, who will face the winner of the Golden State-Oklahoma City series on Thursday.
Cleveland would open at home against the Thunder but would be on the road against the 73-win Warriors, who trail 3-2 against Oklahoma City heading into Saturday's Game 6.
"We're still not satisfied at all," Irving said. "There's still a goal at hand that we have to accomplish, and I know these guys are going to be ready for it."
It's the third Finals appearance in team history for the Cavaliers. Cleveland lost to Golden State in six games last year and got swept by San Antonio in 2007.
James broke the 30-point barrier for the first time this postseason and finished with 11 rebounds and six assists.
"We needed LeBron to set the tone for us early, and I thought he did that," Lue said.
James played in four straight Finals with Miami before returning to Cleveland. He will be the eighth player in NBA history to appear in six consecutive Finals and the first who didn't play for the Boston Celtics.
"He's just a great player," Lue said. "He's a proven winner. He's always won over the course of his career. To go to six straight Finals is unbelievable."
James got there by taking down a Toronto team that set a franchise record with 56 wins and reached the conference finals for the first time in 21 seasons.
After a second-quarter dunk, James shared some verbal barbs with rapper Drake, the Raptors' global ambassador and the man who popularized the nickname "6ix" for Toronto.
Kyle Lowry scored 35 points and DeMar DeRozan had 20 as the deepest playoff run in Raptors team history ended, much to the disappointment of a sellout crowd of 20,605 dressed in red and white T-shirts that formed a maple leaf pattern on either side of the court. Fans stood and cheered, "Let's go, Raptors! Let's go, Raptors!" throughout most of the final three minutes.
Raptors coach Dwane Casey said reaching the conference finals was "a tremendous learning experience" for his young team, one that's "a step ahead" in its process of becoming a championship contender.
"We're learning," Casey said. "We're not where (the Cavaliers) are right now. We're going to be."
Casey and the Raptors are expected to soon begin talks on a contract extension, league sources told ESPN's Marc Stein. Casey has one season left on his current contract at the Raptors' option for $4 million next season.
A dejected Lowry said it was hard to see the positive side of Toronto's best season ever.
"Of course you're going to look back at some point, but right now I'm disappointed," he said. "Simple as that, I'm disappointed."
Toronto prolonged the series with back-to-back home wins in Games 3 and 4 but never mounted much of a challenge to the conference champions in Game 6, falling behind by 21 in the third quarter.
The Cavaliers came in 0-4 at Air Canada Centre, counting the regular season and playoffs, but looked much more like the team that handed the Raptors a trio of lopsided losses in Cleveland this series.
The Raptors trailed 88-78 on a jumper by DeRozan with 10:23 remaining, but James scored six points in a 14-3 run that gave the Cavs a 102-81 lead with about six minutes left.
James scored 14 in the first, and five of Cleveland's nine field goals were from long range; the Cavaliers led 31-25 after one quarter.
After video review, the officials waved off a basket by Biyombo with 3:18 left in the period and gave him a flagrant foul for knocking down Love.
Tempers flared again early in the second, when Richard Jefferson reacted angrily to catching an elbow from Jonas Valanciunas as the two battled for a rebound. Patrick Patterson came over and shoved Jefferson out of the way. Both Patterson and Jefferson were given technical fouls.
The Cavaliers made 10 of 15 3-point attempts in the first half, while Toronto was 2-for-12.
The Cavs led 78-57 after a 3 by Love at 3:53 of the third, but Lowry scored 15 points as Toronto closed the quarter with a 17-8 run, cutting it to 86-74.
Clutching the Eastern Conference trophy in his arms, J.R. Smith broke up his teammates' postgame news conference by joking, "Can we go? This thing is kind of heavy."
Toronto Blue Jays outfielder Jose Bautista and Montreal Canadiens defenseman P.K. Subban watched from courtside seats, while actor Jamie Foxx sat in a private suite.
Raptors: Finished their playoff run by playing every other day from April 29 onward, a 15-game run that started with Game 6 of the first round against Indiana.
The Associated Press contributed to this report.