FIFA Emergency Committee confirms friendly matches involving clubs and representative teams of Kosovo
Under article 83 of the FIFA Statutes, the FIFA Executive Committee has the right to authorise FIFA members to play matches against non-member associations, in this case the Football Federation of Kosovo (FFK).
Following various meetings that have taken place since 2012, the FIFA Emergency Committee has today, 13 January 2014, confirmed a set of modalities of friendly matches involving clubs and representative teams of Kosovo.
The proposal was submitted to the FIFA Emergency Committee following a meeting between the President of the Football Association of Serbia (FSS), Tomislav Karadzic, and the President of the FFK, Fadil Vokrri, held at the Home of FIFA on 10 January 2014, which was chaired by FIFA President Blatter.
The following modalities of friendly games involving clubs and representative teams of Kosovo have been approved and enter into force immediately: - FIFA member associations are allowed to play international friendly matches with clubs and representative teams of the FFK. - Clubs and representative teams of the FFK may not display national symbols (flags, emblems, etc.) or play national anthems. However, they are allowed to wear or display kit or equipment bearing the name 'Kosovo' as well as the symbol of a star of the size of the letter 'o' in the name 'Kosovo'. - Clubs and representative teams of the FFK may not play official or qualification matches while the FFK is not a member of FIFA. - Clubs and representative teams of the FFK may not play matches against clubs and representative teams of countries of the former Yugoslavia until further notice. - International friendly matches involving clubs and representative teams of the FFK may be played on the territory of Kosovo provided that FIFA is informed in writing at least 21 days before each match. FIFA will in turn inform the Football Association of Serbia. - Any breach of this agreement will be referred to FIFA and the agreement will automatically come to an end.
“The decision taken by the FIFA Emergency Committee represents a major boost for football development in Kosovo and it once again confirms the extraordinary power of our sport to bring people together,” said FIFA President Blatter.