Premier League players call on Uefa to remove Israel as European U-21 hosts
The statement, which was released by the Palestinian Campaign for Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions, claims the decision to stage the tournament – in which England will play the hosts, Italy and Norway – in Israel is “yet another stain on the world’s conscience”and expresses “solidarity with the people of Gaza who are living under siege and denied basic human dignity and freedom”. The players then go on to highlight the bombing of a football stadium in Gaza which the Israeli military said had previously been used by Hamas as a rocket launching site.
“We are informed that on Nov 10, 2012, the Israeli army bombed a sports stadium in Gaza, resulting in the death of four young people playing football, Mohamed Harara and Ahmed Harara, 16 and 17 years old; Matar Rahman and Ahmed al-Dirdissawi, 18 years old,” the statement said. “We are also informed that since February 2012 two footballers with the club al-Amari, Omar Rowis, 23, and Mohammed Nemer, 22, have been detained in Israel without charge or trial.
“It is unacceptable that children are killed while they play football. Israel hosting the Uefa Under-21 European championship, in these circumstances, will be seen as a reward for actions that are contrary to sporting values.”
Uefa president Michel Platini has resisted previous pressure to take the tournament away from Israel, with former Manchester United and France forward Eric Cantona writing to Uefa earlier this year to condemn the detention without trial of Palestinian footballers.
Having qualified for the tournament following a stormy play-off game against Serbia, England will play in next June’s competition, with fixtures taking place in Tel Aviv, Netanya, Jerusalem and Petah Tikva.
Some players who had been said to have signed the statement have sinced denied having done so.
Both Didier Drogba and Yohan Cabaye said they had not endorsed the letter, as had been claimed, while Eden Hazard has also denied endorsing the move.
Writing in French on his Twitter page, Drogba said: "Please note I did not sign this petition or give my support to this initiative. I have never got involved in any conflicts, even in my own country."
Cabaye wrote on his website that he had simply expressed his "sadness and compassion" over the situation when asked by a teammate.
"Yohan Cabaye has never desired any way whatsoever to give a political message in this action," he said.
But Frederic Kanoute, writing on Twitter, confirmed he had signed the letter, and claimed "some people" are trying to silence footballers over the issue.
He wrote: I received the statement on Palestine from friends, asking if I am willing to sign - I, along with many other footballers, agreed to sign it as a gesture of solidarity with an occupied people.
"Thank you all for the thousands of messages of support you sent. Unfortunately, there are some emails and comments on social media criticising us footballers, for expressing views that are shared by many European and world citizens. It is very sad that some people are pressurising us and our clubs to silence the signatories and censor our freedom of thought.
"Freedom of speech and the rule of law are key components of a democratic society, this is what we in Europe advocate to the rest of the world."