Anand remains king of world chess as Gelfand's time runs out
Viswanathan "Vishy" Anand, the Indian-born world chess champion, retained his crown on Wednesday when he narrowly beat Boris Gelfand in a series of rapidplay games in Moscow.
Anand has been world champion since 2007, and this is his third successive title defence. "I simply hung on for dear life," said the urbane Anand after the match. "It just comes down to nerves in the end. The only feeling I have right now is relief. I feel too tense to be happy." At 42 and with a host of immensely talented twentysomethings snapping at his heels, Anand is unlikely to hold the crown for many more years, but his place in chess history is now secure.
A key part of his legacy is that he has inspired a chess boom in his native India, where tens of millions followed the match online.
The world championship match has been in progress for a fortnight and the 12 games played at classical time controls, with up to six hours for a single game, were largely turgid. Each player managed a single win, with 10 games drawn, often rather bloodlessly, to the disappointment of the online audience.
But Wednesday's four rapidplay games, where the players had around half an hour each for all their moves, were dramatic and unpredictable. Anand secured the only win, when Gelfand ran into severe time trouble in game two, but both players had winning chances as fortunes seesawed.
"Congratulations to both players," said Russian grandmaster Peter Svidler as the match, played at the Tretyakov art gallery in Moscow, ended. "Today has been a magnificent struggle. Not without mistakes, of course, but both players showed lots of fight and lots of interesting ideas."
Gelfand, who was born in Minsk but emigrated to Israel in 1998, admitted afterwards that time trouble had been a perpetual problem, denying him the opportunity to exploit several promising positions. Also a veteran at 43 – in chess, 40 is seen as a watershed – this is likely to be his only crack at winning the crown, and he looked exhausted at the post-match press conference. He said he hoped his achievement in reaching the final would encourage the Israeli authorities to give greater recognition to chess.
Asked about the future, Anand joked: "This match is only just over, and already you are asking me what comes next. It will take some time for today to sink in. This match could have gone either way. Boris was enormously determined and showed how motivated he was, and I never felt like a favourite. I've known Boris too long for that."