Spain 2 France 0: match report
For one night at least, Xabi Alonso outshone his more eye-catching Spain team-mates by marking his 100th cap with both goals as the world and European champions secured a Euro 2012 semi-final against Portugal at the expense of Laurent Blanc’s dismal France.
Blanc refused to confirm he would continue as national coach following Les Bleus’ quarter-final exit in Donetsk, but considering the abject manner of his team’s performance, he probably has good reason to consider a future elsewhere.
Spain, however, stride on. It was hardly a classic in the Donbass Arena, but Vicente del Bosque’s team only had to endure sporadic French attacks as they coasted into the last four.
Portugal and Cristiano Ronaldo are likely to give their Iberian neighbours a sterner test than France, but Spain are beginning to look peerless once again and Alonso was their stand-out performer.
“Alonso is a very good team player and he knows how to sacrifice and help.” said Del Bosque. “He is one of the attacking strengths we have – he can create and finish and he showed that today. He is a complete midfielder.
“France didn’t have many chances and we were in control all the time. It was important to win and that’s what we did.”
Beset by squad disharmony, with coach Blanc admitting that the French camp was enduring a ‘lot of difficulties’ and still troubled by the ‘demons’ of the mutinous campaign at the 2010 World Cup, all France appeared to have in their favour prior to kick-off was their remarkable record of never having lost to Spain in a competitive fixture.
Six previous meetings had resulted in one draw and five French victories, including the 1984 European Champions Final in Paris and Euro 2000 quarter-final, but Spain have laid plenty of historical ghosts since suffering their last defeat in a major tournament – against France, obviously, in the second round of Germany 2006.
But just as in South Africa two years ago, the French have become their own worst enemy, with Hatem Ben Arfa clashing with Blanc and Samir Nasri and Alou Diarra involved in a dressing-room row following last Tuesday’s Group D defeat against Sweden in Kiev.
Tellingly, none of that trio starting this game and, with central defender Philippe Mexes serving a one-match suspension, France were ever more reliant on Karim Benzema and Franck Ribery to inspire them to victory.
There was a distinct lack of experience and nous within the French starting eleven, something borne out by the fact that Del Bosque’s team had won a combined total of 759 caps compared to 327 of France’s starting line-up.
It was as though Spain knew they would be able to walk the ball past France goalkeeper Hugo Lloris at some point and Alonso even attempted a 50-yard strike after the spotting the French captain off his line on eight minutes.
The opening goal did not take long to arrive, however, and it proved a welcome distraction to the largely neutral crowd who were more interested in performing a Mexican wave than watching the game.
Still, when Uefa deign to stage such prestigious fixtures in a city that appears to have fewer hotel rooms than a motorway service station, it should be no surprise that only 800 French supporters and 2,000 Spanish fans chose to make the trip to the baking outpost of Euro 2012.
Spain’s opener was well-worked and proof that they can do more than pass teams to death.
Andres Iniesta’s pass to Jordi Alba saw the left-back burst past the stumbling Mathieu Debuchy before crossing for Alonso at the far post.
Alonso was unmarked as he arrived at the far post, but he cleverly headed the ball down into the ground, making it impossible for Lloris to save.
France could barely string two passes together and their first-half efforts on goal were restricted to two free-kicks.
Benzema sent one high over the bar from 30 yards before Yohan Cabaye forced a stunning save from Iker Casillas with a 25-yard effort which appeared destined for the top corner of the net.
France, so poor in the first-half, emerged with more intent after the interval, with the reality perhaps dawning on Blanc’s players that they were heading for a feeble exit.
Newcastle midfielder Cabaye, a rare French shining light in this tournament, attempted to drive France’s fightback, but they had to wait until the hour mark before they genuinely troubled the Spain goal.
And when his chance came, Debuchy should have at least hit the target after being picked out brilliantly by Franck Ribery’s cross. Six yards out, the Lille defender directed his header over the crossbar and it was a good chance wasted.
Spain had allowed France to get back into the game and Blanc introduced Nasri and Jeremy Menez on 64 minutes for Florent Malouda and Debuchy respectively in an effort to keep the foot on the pedal.
In response, Del Bosque replaced David Silva with Pedro Rodriguez and then switched Fabregas for Torres, but France retained the momentum and Casillas was fortunate not to gift Menez a goal at the near post on 71 minutes after he had palmed Ribery’s cross away.
The game was beginning to fizzle out, however, with France running out of ideas and Spain and Alonso fully deserved their second after referee Nicola Rizzoli pointed to the penalty spot following Reveillere’s challenge on Pedro.
“We have to be realistic.” Blanc said. “This Spain team is great and there is no shame in saying they are a better side than us and they proved that this evening.”