NBA draft grades: Pick-by-pick analysis
The stage is set. The NBA draft is ready to go. Some picks remain mysteries, others are pretty certain.
The crowd booed Commissioner David Stern. They booed the Miami Heat. But hey, it's Newark, N.J., and it's the NBA draft. Get ready for more of it.
Stay here and follow the draft as we provide instant analysis and grades for each pick.
The draft starts at 7:30 p.m. ET on ESPN, but that first pick will almost certainly be Anthony Davis of Kentucky. Who else gets picked? Check out our latest mock draft and review team needs while you wait.
The crowd gave him a warm but anticipated reaction, as you might expect, and no one looked particularly surprised when Stern made his announcement. We've known about this pick since the lottery last month, but in that time, there have been no reasons to doubt it. Davis should be a franchise player as he continues to improve his offense. Defensively, he's a once-in-a-generation player. The Hornets could use the help in the paint, too. And Davis can dress for success. Grade: A
In an NBA draft first, college teammates go first and second. Kidd-Gilchrist was a bit of a surprise with this pick, but he may be the safest pick in the draft other than Davis. Kidd-Gilchrist will provide the Bobcats with stability on the wing. But he may not be the scorer the Bobcats lack. Grade: B+
This pick was inevitable when Kidd-Gilchrist went second, as the Wizards need a shooting guard to pair with point guard John Wall and had been rumored to want Beal enough that teams were considering trading up to No. 2 to get the former Gator. Beal should be a good fit, but he may have been a bit of a reach if he can't improve on his college production. He draws comparisons to Ray Allen, but he shot 34% on three-pointers in his one season at Florida. Grade: B
This pick fills a need, clearly. Waiters will be a nice partner for last year's rookie of the year, point guard Kyrie Irving. He rose up the board after spending the season as the Orange's sixth man. Waiters has a lot of talent, but the pick seems to be a reach with Thomas Robinson and Harrison Barnes on the board. He dealt with maturity issues in his freshman year before stepping up as a sophomore. But he's a plug-and-play guard who should score well. Grade: C-
Robinson arguably was the best player on the board after Davis, and he's a tremendous value pick here. He should pair with center DeMarcus Cousins to help the Kings dominate the boards. He's not an elite defender, but his rebounding prowess prevents teams from getting second chances. Robinson was last season's breakout college star as the Jayhawks reached the title game. He fits the Kings and should be ready to start immediately. Robinson went through tremendous personal tribulations, and he was in tears as he spoke to ESPN after being selected. Grade: A
Lillard enters the league ready to play point guard, but he has questions to answer. He didn't play against elite competition in college and missed most of the 2010-11 season with a foot injury. He's a good scorer and passer, but this pick mostly reflects the weakness at point guard in this draft. The position is a need for the Blazers, and it's tough to be too hard on a Day One starter. Grade: B-
This was the right pick for the Warriors. Barnes has drawn a ton of criticism for not maximizing his abilities with the Tar Heels, but the same questions surrounded Rudy Gay. The Warriors had a need at small forward, where Dorell Wright started last season. Barnes was the best player available and the best fit for the Warriors. He has the potential to be a star, but we said that when he was a top recruit, too. Grade: A-
Ross has everything a team could want in a shooting guard, but he lacks star potential. The Raptors think they've got a star in Lithuanian center Jonas Valanciunas, who joins the team this year after being drafted in 2011. Ross can shoot, slash and defend, and his athleticism is excellent. He should be a solid starter if he can play with shooting guard DeMar DeRozan. They both have size, but neither is an ideal small forward. We'd expect more upside from a No. 8 pick, particularly with shooting guards Austin Rivers and Jeremy Lamb available, but Ross should be solid. Grade: B-
Drummond was the risk/reward pick of the draft, and he wasn't going to fall much lower than this. The Pistons already have Greg Monroe in the pivot, but he needed a better partner. Drummond will let Monroe move back to power forward and play up in the high post. Eventually. The issue with Drummond is that he is very raw. But the Pistons needed to take a risk, and this makes sense. Grade: A-
Rivers has a lot of talent but didn't reach every high expectation last season. He's got a swagger about him, projecting an alpha mentality. He should become a very good scorer. The worry is that the Hornets are hoping to bring back shooting guard Eric Gordon and would like to make Rivers a point guard. He struggled at that position in college, so the fit may not be ideal despite his great talent. Rivers let USA TODAY Sports in on his whirlwind day Wednesday. Grade: C
After taking Lillard sixth, the Blazers needed to go big with their second pick. Leonard is the best center on the board and has the size and athleticism to become a very good player in the league. He may take a few years to develop as he works on his body and his skills. He's far from a finished product, which makes him a nice contrast to Lillard. Leonard had a rough childhood and it's good to see him find a bright future. Grade: B-
Lamb sputtered a bit at times last season for the 2011 champions, taking over as the star after Kemba Walker left. But he averaged 17.7 points and showed great scoring ability. He's better off out of the spotlight as a high-scoring role player. Lamb probably was the best player left, and he can help the Rockets, who traded Chase Budinger recently. But this pick may be packaged as the team targets Dwight Howard and Pau Gasol. Grade: B+
The Suns say they want to bring back Steve Nash, but if the veteran point guard leaves, they have his replacement right here. Marshall is the best passer to come out of college in years, perhaps since Jason Kidd. He draws criticism for poor athleticism and defense, and he still needs to improve his shooting. But Marshall gets players involved. He averaged 9.7 assists a game last season and should, if nothing else, be able to take the reins when Nash does leave Phoenix. Grade: A-
Think of Henson as a poor man's Davis. He's ridiculous long and springy, blocking shots from all sorts of angles and positions. But he really lacks strength and polish on the offensive end, and his frame is so thin it will be difficult for him to add weight. The Bucks already have a similar player in Larry Sanders and an overload at power forward. This pick doesn't fit a need, and there are a few better players on the board, including Henson's North Carolina teammate Tyler Zeller, a scoring center who would have been a perfect replacement for Andrew Bogut. Grade: C
Harkless' declaration for the NBA draft was among the more surprising this season, but he has tremendous upside. He reminds us of Indiana Pacers swingman Paul George, who left Fresno State a year before he was ready and took time but is now a rising star. Harkless should replace Andre Iguodala, if he is traded, and he's more of a scorer than shooting guard Evan Turner. He's not a great fit, though, as the 76ers need a center, but he has high upside at No. 15. Grade: B
White has top-10 talent but has dealt with an anxiety disorder and an issue with stolen laptops that led him to a lost freshman season at Minnesota. But if the Rockets (or whatever team ends up with this pick) keep White focused, he has greater potential than many of the players drafted above him. He's a point forward with the athleticism, strength and ballhandling skill to rise to stardom. And No. 16, the Rockets weren't taking much of a risk. Grade: A-
UPDATE: The Cavaliers get Zeller from the Dallas Mavericks in a trade, sending the 24th, 33rd and 34th picks in exchange. Zeller was the best available player at this point and has tremendous skills inside on offense and defense. He also has a long history of injuries, which is why he fell out of the lottery. The Cavaliers overpaid, but they do need help inside, and Zeller should fit well with Irving and Waiters. Grade (including trade): C+
Jones is a lot like White, the last Rockets pick at No. 16. But it's tough to imagine both will lace up for Houston next year. Jones played third fiddle behind Davis and Kidd-Gilchrist on Kentucky, but he's one of the top talents available. Jones can do a little of everything and is active on the boards. But he has dealt with some on- and off-court issues. Grade: B
Nicholson was the star of the surprise Bonnies last season, and he has the size and athleticism to compete down low in the NBA. The power forward should be a big help for Howard, the Magic's star center, if they don't trade him. Otherwise, Nicholson should help them get past the lost rebounding and paint defense. Nicholson lacks upside as a four-year college player. But he may contribute right away. Grade: B-
Fournier may be the lone non-U.S. college player drafted in the first round this season. He played last season for Poitiers in the top French league, and he averaged 14 points a game against strong competition. He has high upside and hasn't had his 20th birthday. He can play either wing position and should fit well in the Nuggets' system because of his slashing ability, though he's not much of a shooter. As with many foreign players, he could be kept overseas until he's ready to contribute. Grade: A-
Sullinger's back drew red flags from league doctors, reportedly, but he was a major producer for the Buckeyes for two highly successful seasons culminating in a Final Four run last year. He averaged about 17.5 points and 9.7 rebounds a game the past two seasons. Sullinger can play power forward or center and would be an ideal replacement for (and possibly an upgrade on) free agent Brandon Bass. The back is a risk, but this pick is all about value. Sullinger should come in and contribute right away. Grade: A-
Melo put up weak numbers last season, but he's a big body, which the Celtics need. The 7-foot, 255-pounder has good athleticism for his size and plays decent defense, but he's little more than a standard backup center at this point. His potential is limited because his natural skills aren't elite. The pick fits a need and wasn't a reach, but that's about all. It seems more like an insurance pick, in case Sullinger's back really is a problem. Grade: D+
Jenkins is the best shooter in the draft, and the Hawks can use his presence. This pick is one of the draft's safest, and Jenkins has a lot of the same skills as No. 3 pick Beal, but he's not as athletic. Jenkins can step right in and be a key role player off the bench. Grade: A-
And the crowd goes silent. The Mavericks, who acquired this pick in the trade for the No. 17 spot, went with a player not commonly projected into the first round. But Cunningham emerged last year as a producer for the Beavers with his standout athleticism. If he can become a point guard, this pick may prove wise. The Mavericks need guards, but Doron Lamb and Tony Wroten Jr. have more upside and versatility and would have been better picks. Grade: C+
Wroten has lottery talent, but his ego, effort and shooting ability have drawn ire. He's a capable oversized point guard at 6-5, very similar to Iman Shumpert of the New York Knicks. If Wroten is reeled in by a tough coach and learns to make better decisions, he could be a star and the steal of the draft because of his natural playmaking instincts. He could also shoot his way out of the league. Grade: A-
Plumlee, who has two more talented younger brothers, is 7-0 and very athletic. But he's not much of a basketball player. He makes a lot of mistakes with the ball in his hands, but he won't get that opportunity often with the Pacers. He fits a team need, but they would have preferred to land Melo here. This pick is a bit of a reach with plenty of very talented players left, including big men Perry Jones and Arnett Moultrie. Grade: D
UPDATE: Moultrie would have been a great fit for the Miami Heat, but they traded him to the 76ers for a future first-rounder and the 45th pick. Instead, he'll be an excellent fit for the 76ers. He's tough and athletic and can shoot, and at 21, he's ready to contribute now. Perry Jones might be the best player available, but Moultrie was the best fit for the 76ers. Grade: A-
The best player available and the last lottery-caliber talent is off the board. And the rich get richer. Jones was harshly criticized for his passive play at Baylor, but his length, athleticism and skills could make him a star if he ever puts it all together. He handles and shoots well enough to play on the wing. And the Thunder will put him in a no-pressure situation. Grade: A
Derrick Rose, the 2010-11 NBA MVP, tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee in the first round of the playoffs, so Teague can help at point guard. Backup C.J. Watson filled in well for Rose last season, but third-stringer John Lucas III is a free agent. Teague can also play off the ball, so he could help at shooting guard, a position of need basically since Michael Jordan left Chicago. Teague has high upside but was a bit unstable, and it's tough to see how he'll get much run when Rose is ready to return. Grade: B+
Ezeli is more talented than either of the previous two centers drafted ahead of him, Melo and Plumlee. His rebounding draws criticism, but much of that comes from a Vanderbilt system that relied on team efforts on the boards and a slow pace. Ezeli defends well and uses his 6-11 frame in a variety of ways, including setting excellent screens to free up shooters. The Warriors come away from the first round having addressed their biggest needs with two quality players. Grade: A-
Taylor is very similar to Kidd-Gilchrist, the Bobcats' first-round pick. But he's still a fine value at the top of the second round, where best available becomes most teams' top priority. At one time, he was viewed as a future star, but he's settled into a role as a good defender and slasher who can hit an open shot. Grade: B+
Satoransky fits the mold of oversized, slow point guard that many European teams rely on, but those players rarely have NBA success. He doesn't shoot well enough to be a quality shooting guard. But he is close with Jan Vesely, the Wizards' first-rounder last year. Grade: D+
James is the toughest player in the draft, and we don't say that because he served in the Air Force before playing for the Seminoles. He's 27, so his upside is limited. But he can own the boards and play great defense. He's a great fit next to Dirk Nowitzki for the Mavericks, who received this pick from the Cavaliers. He's the best available center, fills a need and has a great back story. Grade: A-
Crowder was Big East player of the year and the senior leader of one of the nation's best, most overachieving teams last season at Marquette. He's a power forward with shooting guard hype, but he's a smart player who works as hard as anyone and can contribute, one way or another, right away. There are a lot of better players available, though. Grade: C+
Green, nicknamed "The Dancing Bear" for his 6-6 squat frame, is a cyclone on the court. He has point guard instincts and power forward strength. He is out of shape, but he's been out of shape for years. And he's been a 6-6 forward for years, too. Green, the Big Ten player of the year, is a proven winner, helping Michigan State reach the Final Four twice. If you like intangibles, he's your guy, even if he'll never be more than a role player. Grade: B+
UPDATE: The Pacers received Johnson from the Sacramento Kings for cash. It's a great move for Indiana, as Johnson is one of the most NBA-ready players in the draft. He's a strong, focused scorer with the ability to start in a pinch. Grade (including trade): A-
Acy's scouting report is a list of Jay Bilas' favorite words: long, athletic, dynamic, plays bigger than he is, strong but lean, aggressive on defense. Those are things the Raptors need. Grade: B+
The second Quincy from Baylor in a row has tremendous potential but a bevvy of injury issues. He left early because of knee problems, more than anything, after not quite reaching expectations last season as a freshman. But his upside is about as big as you'll find at this point in the draft, and the Nuggets can afford the risk. The only knock: He does a lot of the same things as Fournier, Denver's first-rounder. Grade: B+
Middleton came into last season as a potential top-20 pick, but he regressed after a strong sophomore campaign. If he can find his shot, he could have first-round value. But if not, he probably is not an NBA-caliber player. Grade: C
Barton had huge numbers at Memphis, averaging 18.1 points and 8.0 rebounds a game. But he is very skinny, and those rebounding numbers won't translate. He had the talent to go in the first round, but he needs to become a more consistent shooter. He's a good value at this point. Grade: B+
UPDATE: The Nets bought this pick from the Portland Trail Blazers. Taylor is a confounding player. He shows flashes of brilliance, but even as a senior point guard for a team that made the national title game, he made a lot of horrible decisions. Grade: C+
Lamb easily was the best player available at this point, as we think he should have come off the board about 15 spots ago. He's an outstanding shooter with a very smooth game, and he can handle a small role right away and ease into a bigger one. He's the fifth Wildcat off the board. Grade: A
Scott was the most dominant player in the Atlantic Coast Conference last season, but he lacks the size to be an impact post player in the NBA. Grade: B-
English was the star for Missouri as a sophomore, but he reined himself in and let Marcus Denmon grow into the role over the past two seasons. But English is the better NBA prospect, a prototypical shooting guard who doesn't do anything particularly well. Grade: C
The Heat, who received this pick from the 76ers, need a center. Hamilton is big and defends and rebounds well, but he'll have a tough time proving a major upgrade on Joel Anthony or Ronny Turiaf or Dexter Pittman. Grade: C-
Miller lacks upside, but he was the senior leader on the national champions. He's the sixth Wildcat off the board, but he may not make the team. Grade: C-
Murphy, a high-scoring guard with a great shot and good handles, was the best player on the board. He could be a nice compliment to Alec Burks, last year's first-rounder, at shooting guard. It's not easy to get a viable contributor this late, so this pick deserves praise. Grade: A
Papanikolaou drew the ire of the Knicks fans in attendance, but he played well for Olympiacos, one of the best European teams, and could contribute in a few years when he comes over. Grade: B
O'Quinn was the star of the Cinderella Spartans in their upset of Missouri. He has all the physical abilities to compete, but he played weak competition. Grade: B+
Turkyilmaz is one of those players who would have been picked in the first round a decade ago. He's a 7-footer with skills to play on the wing. But he's still very raw and may never play in the NBA. That type of risk is acceptable this late in the second round. Grade: B-
Joseph is a fine slasher who played a big role on a good college team. He has good athleticism and can score in bunches. If nothing else, he'll be a contributor in the Development League. Grade: B+
We'll defer to the old maxim: You can't teach size. Kuzmic is a 7-footer. Beyond that, he's a man of mystery. Grade: C
Aldemir is a 6-10 forward who hits the boards hard but still needs to work on his body. He's a project but a solid stowaway. Grade: B+
UPDATE: The Nets bought this pick from the Philadelphia 76ers. Shengelia, from Georgia the country not Georgia the school, was one of the higher-regarded foreign prospects this season, and he has a lot of potential if scouts and highlight video are to be believed. They'll stash him away, but the 6-9 slashing and shooting small forward could play one day long after you've forgotten this run of foreigners. Grade: A-
UPDATE: The Lakers bought this pick from the Dallas Mavericks. Johnson-Odom is one of the most explosive players in the draft and has a great motor, but he's 6-2 and has the skills of a small forward. Johnson-Odom has a nose for the basket, and if anyone can teach him to play a little point guard, he could be very valuable this late in a draft. Grade: B+
Another rail-thin, lanky European comes off the board. Zubcic is 6-11, 229 pounds but plays small forward. He may never reach the NBA, but it never hurts to take a flier this late. Grade: C-
"This guy will NOT factor into Deron Williams' decision to stay in Brooklyn," ESPN's Fran Fraschilla said. Karaman's a 6-9 small forward who likely never will reach the NBA. The Nets should have taken someone who might play here soon in their first year in Brooklyn. Have to give the fans hope. Grade: D
Hummel's so easy to root for that we can't help but love this pick. He's had knee problems, but he has a lot of talent and can hit big shots. He may actually make the team, which says a lot at this stage. Grade: A-
Denmon lacks the size to play shooting guard, but he has a lot of talent and he's extremely aggressive in attacking the basket. We could see him leading the D-League in scoring one day. Grade: B+
He's a 7-footer with post skills, so this was a fine pick. But he doesn't have the athleticism to ever make much of an impact. He's not going to be the next Isaiah Thomas, last year's Mr. Irrelevant who became a starter for the Sacramento Kings. Grade: B
Deputy commissioner Adam Silver would like to thank the city of Newark, y'all.