Wimbledon 2012: Andy Murray ready to bury horrible history by beating Roger Federer
In most years, the Wimbledon pain starts on the first Monday of the tournament, when we see the ritual sacrifice of a young hopeful. And it often peaks on the second Friday, with the 11 semi-finals that have been played and lost by the likes of Tim Henman, Roger Taylor and Mike Sangster.
But not this year. This year, for the first time in the modern era, we have a survivor. We have a man to play for the trophy on the final Sunday – a day untainted by failure (at least, since the time when this tournament was contested by minor royals and athletic curates). We have a man capable of wiping out all that godforsaken history.
The job is difficult but not impossible, for Murray has beaten Roger Federer – the greatest player in tennis history, mind you – more often than he has lost to him. Only in two grand slam finals has he been reduced to shirt-rending frustration by Federer’s unique poise. Yet this is the first time that they have met inside the sport’s most iconic stadium, and in front of a crowd that will surely rally behind the home hope, for all Federer’s godlike status.
“It is a court I love playing on and the more matches you play on a court you get used to the surroundings,” said Murray, who will walk out on Sunday for his 31st appearance – and easily his highest profile – in this wonderful arena. “You know the wind, where the shadows are on the court and the sun, where everybody is sitting in the box.
“At the US Open, for example, I don’t play on it [the Arthur Ashe Stadium] that much so sometimes it can feel a bit new each time you go out there. Whereas at Wimbledon I have obviously played so many matches out there now. I know how the court plays, the speed of the court. I do feel a lot more comfortable on that court than all of the other courts in the slams.”
There is a lot of glib rubbish talked about Murray. Most of it comes by critics who would not know what it is like to leave home at 15 to train in a foreign country, nor to commit yourself to such a punishing regime that every Christmas Day is punctuated by yoga sessions and a run along Miami beach.
You can slate Murray’s hangdog body language or his unkempt facial hair, but the idea that he crumbles under pressure is clearly flawed. Here is a man who has performed so robustly at Wimbledon, the place where he is under the greatest public scrutiny, that he has won 16 of his past 18 matches here. The only man to beat him on Centre Court since the start of this decade is Rafael Nadal.
It is an extraordinary record when you consider how many fine players have struggled under the burden of expectation at their home slam. Amelie Mauresmo is perhaps the classic example, having failed to pass the quarter-finals at Roland Garros, but you could also look at Lleyton Hewitt, the former world No 1 who could never win in Melbourne.
Murray simply shuts himself off from all the hullaballoo, just as his coach and mentor, Ivan Lendl, used to do in his own playing days. There is a story about the aftermath of the 1984 French Open – the first grand slam final that Lendl had won, at the fifth attempt – in which a friend found him lying on the floor of the locker-room totally exhausted.
As the friend later recalled, “I leaned close to him and he whispered, ‘Take my mother back to the hotel I have to find a different exit’. The b------ had just won his first major tournament ever, he was almost dying and he was still planning how to avoid people.”
It is hard to see Murray going to such extremes. Indeed, if he wins on Sunday, he may well perform the post-Pat Cash ritual of climbing up to his player’s box to embrace his friends and family.
But after Friday’s courageous win over Jo-Wilfried Tsonga he admitted that “I am not going to speak to many people in the next two days. I am going to have my phone off. I will just go about my business like I have for the rest of the tournament – playing on the PlayStation, taking my dogs for a walk. Nothing different”.
Like any other superstitious sportsman, Murray has no desire to change any part of the ritual that has carried him this far. He practised on Saturday with Oliver Golding, Britain’s best 18 year-old, as he has on every day of the tournament. And he made his way in from Surrey incognito in his friend’s Volkswagen Polo, as he has on every day of the tournament.
So how will he pass Saturday night? “I will watch whatever is on Sky movies. I normally try to watch something funny in the evening, something that is relaxing. I have slept perfect so far.”
If Murray wins today, and ends what Federer once called Britain’s 150,000-year wait for a grand slam trophy, they will soon be making a movie about him.
A Wimbledon title would carry him across the final frontier, ticking off the one great sporting achievement – with the rather less resonant exception of the Tour de France – that no British male has claimed since the professionalisation of athletic endeavour. Centre Court awaits the greatest story of our time.