Roger Federer v Novak Djokovic, ATP World Tour final: live
DJOKOVIC BEATS FEDERER 7-6, 7-5 Fed has to go for winners now. He's 0-15 down and a 15-shot rally is playing to the hands of Djoko. Out comes a stop-in-time backhand winner from Fed. Djokovic's defence keeps him in it at 30-all now. And a backhand error gives him match point, would you believe it. Near hysteria at the 02. And what a way to finish! Federer has the rally, Djokovic is sliding all over the shop. He's sent wide - he's deep too - before lacerating a backhand beyond Federer, who will be fuming he couldn't win that one. Incroyable! The familiar hands go up, the racket's dropped and the Serbian's eyes point upwards. A breathless, magical end to the tennis year and surely one of the best matches over the last 12 months for good measure. Once again: Federer v Djokovic, bloody hell. "We pushed each other to the maximum today," says Djoko. And some.
Federer* 6-7, 5-6 Djokovic A few more swings and momentum changes why don't we. Djokovic now noses in front 30-0, seemingly a few steps closer towards the end-of-year title. To 30-all we venture before a proposterous recovery from the Serb, running to the hoardings, sees pinpoint length. Suddenly Djokovic is one game away from the title.
Federer 6-7, 5-5 Djokovic* Fed covers all bases brilliantly at the net first up, finishing with an incisive volley. 30-0 turns into two set points. Cue Djokovic brutality as Federer can only net. Nerves to the fore. The Serb realises it and counters quite magnificenty. Two huge, huge points ends as Federer goes long. Djokovic was off balance in that rally. He finishes it with a passionate outburst, quite possibly heard down the Blackwall Tunnel. Incredible resolve. DJOKOVIC BREAKS
Federer 6-7, 5-4 Djokovic* Fed doesn't want to exert himself too much in this one. Clearly happy to serve out for the set. Mind, there's not much he can do in this game as the Serb holds easily.
Federer* 6-7, 5-3 Djokovic Don't say I didn't tell you. Djokovic ups the intensity and opens up a 15-30 lead. A brute of a forehand then has Djokovic scampering to no avail. Back comes Djokovic to earn a break. An ace from Federer in reply. Pure chess countering. To deuce we go. This is the Serb's rally: he's at the net ready to put away the volley only to send it wide! More ding dong tennis. More incredible work from Fed. He survives the test.
Federer 6-7, 4-3 Djokovic* Both now able to hold out quite comfortably, Djokovic mustering his fifth ace of the night, holding to 15. Despite the break, this set still feels like it's not over for Fed. Key game looming.
Federer* 6-7, 4-2 Djokovic The electicity of the opening hour has dwindled somewhat in the last 20 minutes, but it's still just as dramatic. Nothing in it as Fed keeps his nose in front with little trouble like only the top guys know how.
Federer 6-7, 3-2 Djokovic* There is so little in it. As in Fed's service game, Djokovic just maintains the advantage but the momentum soon swings. A long backhand hands Fed a break point. He has to make it count but three unforced errors (forehand + wide) keeps the Serb in with a sniff.
Federer* 6-7, 3-1 Djokovic The Swiss musters a 30-15 lead. But the Serb senses an opening, thanks to a midcourt forehand from his opponent. It's put away delightfully. Fed rallies to 40-30 but there is apprehension. Cue that first serve, which gets him out trouble to maintain that break.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Infostrada Sports - &lt;a href="http://search.twitter.com/search?q=Djokovic" target="_blank"&gt;#Djokovic&lt;/a&gt; has never lost a final in his career after winning the first set - his record in those situations is 26-0 (via &lt;a href="http://www.twitter.com/EldrickISB" target="_blank"&gt;@EldrickISB&lt;/a&gt;).&lt;/noframe&gt;
Federer 6-7, 2-1 Djokovic* The Serb's turn to dominate the service game. A drop in intensity from both perhaps, but we can forgive them this. And to Francesco Totti for taking his eyes off proceedings.
Federer* 6-7, 2-0 Djokovic The Swiss holds to 15. Can you forgive me the details for a sec? "Come on Roger; only you can do it," opines Judith Allport.
Federer 6-7, 1-0 Djokovic* How to follow that hour of magic? A Djokovic double fault. Statistics suggest that this finale is the Serbs now. But the old stager doesn't want to see his wife and kids just yet. He ekes out a 15-30 lead, which becomes 30-40 thanks to a rifled backhand (again it's deep and too good for Djoko). The Swiss lets out an anguish with a shanked backhand on his second break point. Errors, though, are the order thereafter from both players. Djokovic comes out on top - there's an almighty "come on" from the Serb entwined in all this when a Federer forehand goes long - but it's soon clear how key this game is. We hit deuce three times, both are pushing each other to the max. Federer even has a break point chance but his 16th error of the night on the forehand puts pay to that. But he keeps pushing - Djoko's now chatting away to no one in particular in his corner - and it does pay off after nearly 10 minutes. FEDERER BREAKS
Federer 6-7 Djokovic Tiebreak: More swings in this final than the Sixties on heat right now. Djokovic opens up a 2-0 minibreak. Cue another 10-shot rally, ending with a peerless backhand winner which is graciously applauded by Djokovic. The Serb is loose in the next point - his 14th unforced error - before Federer aces to lead 3-2. That lead is, unsurprisingly, wiped out as Djokovic sniffs out a 4-3 lead. A costly error off the Swiss' backhand frame loops long and a mini break then ensues. Cue another helter skelter of a rally, won by Federer with another wickedly deep forehand. Then, a second set point to Djokovic on the Fed serve. But, what a set save! It's a sizzling serve, Djoko somehow returns, it's ding-dong thereafter, ending with a scarcely believeable crosscourt winner from the man who spent 300 weeks at world No 1. We're at 7-6 now and the Serb finally takes the set with a forehand winner out wide. Federer v Djokovic, bloody hell.
Federer 6-6 Djokovic* Fatigue? These two? Yes, there are visible signs of it, but you'd hardly notice with the quality of this set. Federer latches on to a Djoko drop, which surprises the Serb, and the Swiss is at 0-30. Yawn! Back comes Djokovic thanks to a Federer forehand long and three brutal first serves in a row. Mammoth hold.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Simon Briggs - Novak hurling himself around the court again, as he did against Tsonga. But it's not grass and he's taken the skin off his elbow. 6-5 RF&lt;/noframe&gt;
Federer* 6-5 Djokovic At 30-15, Fed sends another directional forehand wide and Djokovic springs into action, diving left and landing with a semi-thud. Nothing a spot of pampering in Monaco over the next month won't do. For now, there's blood visible on his left arm. Federer holds.
Federer 5-5 Djokovic* Djokovic races to 30-0 and suddenly it's like he playing a Wimbledon qualifier. Not that Federer's playing badly, just that the Serb is in the zone. Nothing will get past him seemingly. But are there nerves? Fed counters to 30-all before Djokoic garners his first set point. It's a lengthy one, surely benefiting the Serb, but he can't convert. Federer invests heavily in the next rally too and now it's the Swiss with a break. Talk about tables turned. Fed sends Djokovic wide and deep, ending with the Serbian netting. FEDERER BREAKS
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Simon Briggs - Much debate, little agreement this wk about standard of tennis, which were best matches. But this Fed v Djok final, surely, is genius sport&lt;/noframe&gt;
Federer* 4-5 Djokovic More fizzling stuff from Federer, deep and directional, which forces Novak to hit behind him three times, creating a thud of the racket on the surface. But the Swiss maestro's forehand is a touch off in this one and Djoko rallies to deuce. It'a second break point a rally later as Fed advances to the net. Easy pickings for Djoko as he whips a forehand winner. What next? A big "Come on" from the Basle bomber thanks to a sizzling first serve. But he's in a fight now: five times we go to deuce before Djokovic, hitting off balance, back tracks and hits a looping forehand cross court. Federer nets and suddenly the Serb is leading from his early battering in the opening salvos.
Federer 4-4 Djokovic* More respite after the frenetic start to this final. A short and sweet game is enlivened by several calls from the cheap seats. We think directed towards Robert Pires, watching from the regal seats. Rowdy Monday bunch in tonight. Djokovic holds with a mightily heavy, top spin forehand winner which Fed barely gets a step towards.
Federer* 4-3 Djokovic Federer's forehand to the fore and an easy hold, just like the old times (until Djokovic digs in once more).
Federer 3-3 Djokovic* Djokovic probably didn't even register he was 3-0 down and being drubbed. He's back in this one but Fed starts brightly with yet another angled backhand winner. 0-15. No matter. Djokovic counters to 30-15 before an uncharacteristic forehand into the net so soon into the rally. The Fed's breathless assault on the baseline comes into force and Djoko is spread-legged in reaching. But he holds with a controlled rally, sending Fed side-to-side, finishing the game with a top spin forehand winner out wide. We're all level.
Federer* 3-2 Djokovic Magnifique! Chouette! First point is utter brilliance. Federer drills every return, Djokovic happy to soak it up. After a 20-shot of brutality, the Swiss hits an incredible backhand winner down the lines. Cue uproar. But Djokovic doesn't know the word beaten and rallies to 30-15 before Fed sends another crunching backhand wide after a deep forehand which unhinges the Serb. Back comes the world No 1, his first break point chance. It duly arrives as Fed goes long with a fierce backhand. One of his few errors. DJOKOVIC BREAKS (and we all need one already)
Federer 3-1 Djokovic* The Serbian's game has finally reached the 02. He's found his rhythm and controls the longest point of the match - over 10 thwacks - with Federer looking to keep things short and sweet. That will favour Djoko all night long. But Federer rallies and lacerates one backhand winner past the Serb. He tries the same approach next up, aiming for another short rally, but this thunderbolt goes just wide. We're back to deuce with a Serbian forehand error and his head, not for the first time, is down. But he holds with a crunching winner.
Federer* 3-0 Djokovic Timing lacking from the Serb, implicit from Federer. But Djoko wins his first point to tumultuous applause from this knowledgable crowd (definitely less of the corporate feel tonight). Lots of gung-ho tennis at 30-15. Federer conjures a forehand drop, Djokovic reaches cross court, Federer lobs, the Serb nets. Bundles of screeching shoe noises from the Serb already. At 40-30, Federer sends a wickedly kicking second serve out wide and sends Djoko's return into an empty court. Peerless start.
Federer 2-0 Djokovic* They say the first point against the serve is pivotal and Federer continues his excellence. It's countered with a Djokovic mishit at the net and Federer whips a forehand winner, wrongfooting the world No 1. To compound the misery, he then strikes his second unforced error long. Three breaks for Fed, who takes it on the first of them as Djokovic, off balance, hits low into the net from behind the baseline. FEDERER BREAKS
Federer* 1-0 Djokovic Off and running. Federer racks up an ace down the middle to start us off before forcing Djoko into a backhand error off a serve out wide. Variety the key and the Swiss angles an ace out wide. The icing? Another blistering serve, Djoko's return is a decent height for the advancing Fed, who puts away the volley like he's just enjoyed a vintage Christmas dinner.
20.10 Enough already! Final stat for you: Federer has only run 88 miles on court this year, while Djokovic comes in at 109 miles, nearly a whole marathon more.
20.05 Djokovic calls heads. It's t'other and Federer chooses to serve. Any advantage will do. It has to be said, there is quite a frenzied atmosphere in tonight.
20.00 Usual last minute interviews in the tunnel. All fairly pointless and nothing we haven't heard. Do I sound ready for this? Just wait for their entrances.
19.50 Mark Petchey has overseen the after-match interviews this week and now he's on ceremony duties. He is forever turning into the Athers of the tennis world. Though he does seem to be losing his voice.
19.45 Huge joy and body pumping on the doubles' court. Debutants Granollers and Lopez have beaten the Indian pair, Bhupathi and Bopanna, 7-5, 3-6, 10-3 and the singles' finale is next. The Spanish duo head to the Davis Cup final in buoyant mood.
19.40 And here's Djokovic on the looming showdown. Sound's like we won't be seeing any bagels tonight:
It's going to be very open. I think there is not really any predictions about who's going to win. Very few points will decide the winner.
19.30 Another numbers game for you. Tonight's figure? £1,100,000... If Djokovic - the only player unbeaten over the last week - wins tonight he will collect the full "unbeaten" prize fund of $1.76m. Each round-robin victory is worth a mere £82k, so the equivalent figure for a player who lost a mtach on the way to the final would be a cool £1m.
19.10 This showdown warrants a stats festival. Here's one for you: since November 2010, The Fed is 32-2 on indoor hardcourts, with both losses coming to Juan Martin Del Potro.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Infostrada Sports - &lt;a href="http://search.twitter.com/search?q=FinalShowdown" target="_blank"&gt;#FinalShowdown&lt;/a&gt; Djokovic can be the first non-Federer player to win all 5 matches at the WTF since Hewitt in 2001. Fed has done it 5 times.&lt;/noframe&gt;
18.55 So, judging by Oliver Brown's eyewitness report last night, the clamour will be more Basle than Belgrade inside the 02 tonight.
At times in this cavernous arena, it felt like a Roger Federer tribute night as the Swiss groupies gathered with placards requesting: “Quiet please, genius at work”. We might as well have been in Zurich as on the outskirts of London. It said a great deal for Federer’s supranational appeal that the number of Saltires fluttering around the O₂ was dwarfed by the contingent draped in the Swiss flag and its bold equilateral cross. Those cries you could hear were not of “C’mon Andy!” but “Allez, Roger!” Not even a returning British grand slam winner could, it seemed, hold a candle to the celebrity or popularity of tennis’ most venerated star.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Douglas Robson - Federer and Djokovic have split their 4 matches in '12, Serb winning twice on clay (Rome, RG) and Swiss at Wimbledon and Cincy. &lt;a href="http://search.twitter.com/search?q=atp" target="_blank"&gt;#atp&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
18.50 Do you feel the love like Federer? Is it going to be Basle comes to Greenwich, as per last night?
I think for both of us it's pretty straightforward. We've got to press out the last juice that's left in our body and make it a successful year end, even though it's been successful for everybody who has been taking part in this tournament.
18.45 WTF form guide tells us that The Fed has ruled the roost since the tournament moved to London three years' ago and the Swiss maestro will aim to make it a hat-trick of titles tonight (his seventh in total). Meanwhile, the Serb was the champion in 2008 in Shanghai but has not reached the final since. Nevertheless, six of the last seven WTF titles have been won by these two beasts of the court.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Infostrada Sports - &lt;a href="http://search.twitter.com/search?q=FinalShowdown" target="_blank"&gt;#FinalShowdown&lt;/a&gt; &lt;a href="http://search.twitter.com/search?q=Federer" target="_blank"&gt;#Federer&lt;/a&gt; leads &lt;a href="http://search.twitter.com/search?q=Djokovic" target="_blank"&gt;#Djokovic&lt;/a&gt; in head-to head 16-12 (all-time), 12-9 (hardcourt), 3-1 (indoor hardcourt) and in finals (4-3).&lt;/noframe&gt;
18.30 Good evening and welcome to the denouement of this year's World Tour Finals. The final. Naturally, it's the top two players in the world who are the final men standing. First impressions? Djokovic looks knackered, while this is Federer's to lose. Which means a three-set thriller, right?