Better effort by Dynamo, but a worse loss
CARSON, Calif. — With tears in their eyes and knots in their stomachs, the Dynamo again walked off the Home Depot Center pitch unable to spoil David Beckham's party Saturday afternoon.
Discounted for most of the week as the "other" team in the 2012 MLS Cup final, the Dynamo tested and pushed the Los Angeles Galaxy in a way they never did in last year's final. But the result was the same.
For the second year in a row, Beckham and the Galaxy beat the Dynamo in the final.
"To be honest," Dynamo coach Dominic Kinnear said, "I don't know if I want to cry or throw up, one of the two. We played well.
"Last year you could put your hand up and say we didn't really get going. We played well and we gave ourselves a chance to win the game, and that's the tough part."
The Dynamo were much more competitive in the 2012 final, but it wasn't enough before a sellout crowd of 30,510 that showed up to watch the last match of Beckham's six-year sojourn through Major League Soccer with the Galaxy.
Los Angeles center back Omar Gonzalez, the MLS Cup MVP, tied the score with a header in the 61st minute.
Second-half surge Landon Donovan converted a penalty kick four minutes later. Robbie Keane capped the scoring in stoppage time by converting a penalty kick after he was impeded in the box by Dynamo goalkeeper Tally Hall.
Now Beckham will continue his career elsewhere.
"I still love it like I did when I won my first," Beckham said after noting he also won titles in his final seasons with Manchester United and Real Madrid.
Four-time finalists and winners of the 2006 and 2007 final, the Eastern Conference champion Dynamo wasted little time showing they would be more competitive in the rematch. They dominated possession in the first 11 minutes and threatened in the early going when Ricardo Clark had a shot punched out of danger by Galaxy goalkeeper Josh Saunders.
The Dynamo had only one shot on target and one corner kick in the entire 90 minutes of the 2011 final. They had three shots on target, four corner kicks and a 1-0 lead at halftime thanks to Calen Carr's goal in the 44th minute.
The Dynamo actually finished with more shots on target than the Galaxy, winning that crucial statistical category 6-4 on an afternoon Keane had two goals disallowed.
Keane denied One was negated because he was offside and another was nullified because of a foul by Gonzalez in the box.
The Galaxy had a great opportunity to take an early lead in the 12th minute when they caught the Dynamo with a counterattack. Beckham played the ball from his defensive half to Keane on the left wing. With Jermaine Taylor desperately rushing back to cut the space as Donovan sprinted down the right side, Keane passed to Donovan.
Fortunately for the Dynamo, Donovan's shot went wide right. He later admitted feeling as though he let the team down with that miss.
When introduced to the media as a forward after the match, Donovan said, "not after that first chance."
The Dynamo suffered a huge blow when Carr exited in the 59th minute with a left knee injury. Gonzalez tied the score two minutes later when he headed Juninho's cross past Hall. "The first (Galaxy) goal changed the momentum for sure," Kinnear said.
Donovan converts Nothing could save the Dynamo in the 65th minute when they were called for a penalty after Clark was whistled for handling the ball. Donovan converted the penalty near the right post to take a 2-1 lead.
"It took some (guts) for (Donovan) to step up and take that penalty because I could see what he was like after that (missed) chance," Beckham said.
Keane got the final goal on another penalty kick.
"It's not easy to get to this game," Dynamo captain Brad Davis said. "It's not easy to win a championship. And for us to be back here again for a second consecutive year — we've been talking about this being the fourth time in seven years. It's a testament to the club, to the coaching staff, to the players that are in this group.
"You just have to look back and look at the positives."