Granada bring in Alcaraz to replace sacked Anquela
Granada have sacked coach Juan Antonio Anquela, with Lucas Alcaraz set to be appointed as the La Liga strugglers' fourth boss in just over a year.
The news, which did not come as a surprise with Granada sitting 17th in the table, was announced via the club's official website on Wednesday morning.
Alcaraz, who had been in charge at Aris Salonica in Greece and reportedly had a clause in his contract allowing him to leave for a La Liga club, has a mixed record during previous coaching spells in the Spanish top flight with Recreativo de Huelva, Racing Santander and Murcia.
Granada-born Alcaraz coached at his home-town club between 1995 and 1998, when they were playing in the Segunda Division B. He is expected to take charge until the end of the current season, and his first game in charge will now be at home to Real Madrid in the league on Saturday.
Anquela, who had impressed as Alcorcon boss in La Segunda last season, replaced former boss Abel Resino last summer, but has looked out of his depth at times in the top flight. The final straw was Monday's 3-0 league defeat at Andalucian neighbours Sevilla, when his side showed plenty of commitment but less organisation or creativity.
"The board of Granada CF has this morning fired coach Juan Antonio Anquela," a Granada club statement read. "The side's sporting director Juan Carlos Cordero communicated the decision to the Jaen-born coach, who this morning will say goodbye to the squad at the Armilla training ground. Granada thanks Anquela for his commitment and work and wishes him all kinds of success in his professional future."
The Andalucian club have a close relationship with Serie A side Udinese, similar to that in place between the Italians and Watford, and have been Spain's most active side during the current transfer window. New signings have included striker Carlos Aranda from Zaragoza for €300,000 and loan moves for Malaga midfielder Recio and Benfica forward Nolito. Malaga attackers Diego Buonanotte and Seba Fernandez are also reported loan targets.
Further typical wheeling and dealing has also seen four players join before being immediately loaned out to other clubs - most recently with Brazilian defender Naldo signing on Tuesday from Gremio, but heading straight out on loan to Serie A club Bologna.