Mayo snuff out Kerry challenge
National Football League round-up:Beaten All-Ireland finalists Mayokept Kerryscoreless in the second half as they ran out 0-15 to 1-6 winners at McHale Park in Castlebar in the only Division One game on Sunday.
Although Eamonn Fitzmaurice was missing his Dr Crokes contingent in his first game in charge, it was a below-par performance from the Kingdom despite going in at the break all level (0-9 to 1-6).
James O’Donoghue’s goal after 17 minutes was the highlight of Kerry’s performance after Mayo made all the early running. They even briefly took the lead, when Conor Cox knocked over a point just before the half-hour mark. Alas, it was to be their last score of the game.
Kerry’s hopes were not helped by the sending off of Anthony Maher for a second yellow card on 49 minutes, although they kept the scores level for another quarter of an hour before Michael Conroy’s third point saw Mayo take the lead.
Jason Doherty contributed six points to Mayo’s cause, while Kevin McLoughlin and substitute Enda Varley both scored two apiece in the six-point victory.
Michael Meehan's early second-half goal proved the difference as Galwaystarted their Division Twocampaign with a 1-15 to 0-15 win over Derryat Pearse Stadium.
Meehan reacted the sharpest after Michael Martyn’s strike hit the post to give the Tribesmen a 1-8 to 0-5 advantage.
Derry did reduce the gap to just one point with a flourish of scores, but late points from Meehan and Mark Hehir sealed victory.
Westmeathfought back from being seven points and a man down to beat Louth0-16 to 2-9 in Mullingar.
The home side had already shipped goals from Adrian Reid and Colm Judge before Doron Harte received a straight red card.
Westmeath battled to go in just three behind at the break (0-7 to 2-4) and drew level through a Dessie Dolan point before John Heslin’s late point sealed the win.
Wexfordalso came back to pip Longfordin the battle of promoted sides at Wexford Park, where a late goal from captain Redmond Barry saw the home side take the points on a scoreline of 2-8 to 1-10.
Longford had raced into a 1-7 to 0-1 lead after 32 minutes, their goal coming from Robbie Smyth. PJ Banville gave Wexford a lifeline just before the break with his side’s first goal and two points from Ben Brosnan got them back within a point before Barry’s vital late intervention.
In Division Three, Monaghan enjoyed a 12-point victory over Meath in Clones, running out 1-18 to 2-3 winners, while fellow Ulster sides Antrim and Fermanagh also picked up two points with wins over Cavan and Wicklow respectively. Roscommon beat Sligo 1-11 to 1-8 in the all-Connacht clash at Dr Hyde Park
In Division Four, Carlow staged a daring raid in Thurles as they beat Tipperary by a single point, 1-14 to 0-16, while Limerick beat Leitrim 0-11 to 0-9 at the Gaelic Grounds.
Offaly were too strong for London in Ruislip, winning 1-13 to 1-5, while Waterford ruined Mick O’Dwyer’s league debut as manager of Clare, with a 1-9 to 0-11 victory in Miltown Malbay.