ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
An Australian Crime Commission investigation has found widespread drug use in Australian professional sport, with some athletes being given substances not yet approved for human use.
The year-long investigation says organised criminal networks have been involved in distributing the drugs to athletes and support staff, including doctors and coaches.
In at least one case an entire team is believed to have been doped.
A former head of the Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority says today is the "blackest day in Australian sport" while Justice Minister Jason Clare says "the findings are shocking and they'll disgust Australian sports fans".
Look back at how the day's events unfolded (All times AEDT):
Justice Minister Jason Clare joined 7.30 host Leigh Sales to discuss the report's claims and possible responses to them.
He says a classified version of the report has been handed to the Australian Federal Police and other relevant authorities.
Dr Brian Morton, chair of the committee of general practice at the Australian Medical Association, has told PM that one of the main problems is that a lot of the drugs are legal when used properly.
But he says there are mechanisms in place to catch out those who try and cheat the system.
"I think there's some classic examples and that's EPO, which are used in patients with renal failure and they're on special authority from the Government and can only be prescribed by an approved renal physician.
"Other things like testosterone, there are requirements for testing to make sure the patient is truly testosterone deficient, two blood tests at least are required.
The PBS (Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme) is audited from time to time and those sorts of things really depend on the doctor's ethics.
"It's relatively easy to do but it's very readily recognisable and there are networks in both Medicare and the PBS to highlight unusual prescribing of drugs."
The Australian Crime Commission's report suggests organised crime has been involved in providing drugs to athletes around Australia.
Caro Meldrum-Hanna from the ABC's 7.30 has been investigating some of those alleged links.
Rhonda Orr, a senior lecturer in exercise and sports science at the University of Sydney, has told PM that an extract made from calf's blood has been used by some sports teams in recent seasons.
She says the extract is not on the list of banned substances and it is used in a clinical setting.
AFL boss Andrew Demetriou says the league will enforce mandatory reporting of doping activity and approaches.
He says the AFL commission has endorsed more people, testing, technology and "intelligence gathering" for its integrity.
The AFL will also establish a whistleblower service to combat doping.
Demetriou says the code will work closely with states and police bodies to share information.
He says there will also be background checks for all staff.
The North Queensland Cowboys have tweeted a quote from star playmaker Johnathan Thurston:
Not long now until AFL chief executive Andrew Demetriou holds a press conference at AFL House scheduled for 6pm.
ABC Grandstand presenter Peter Wilkins has told ABC News 24 that the sporting community wants dopers named.
Manly coach Geoff Toovey says he welcomes an investigation into the NRL club's sport science department.
Toovey was confident the club had nothing to hide and said it would assist the NRL in any way possible.
"It was a decision from the NRL and we're fully participating and cooperating," he said.
Veteran NRL super-coach Wayne Bennett says he is still trying to get his head around the explosive findings of the year-long probe. Read the story here
Here is Tabcorp chief David Attenborough's interview with the ABC in which he says corruption in sport is a problem that affects countries and sport all around the world.
Auditors have reportedly been commissioned to review records of supplements bought by NRL clubs Manly and Penrith following their connection with sports scientist Stephen Dank. Read the story here
Brisbane Broncos coach Anthony Griffin says no player at the club has ever failed a drug test.
World Anti-Doping Agency president John Fahey has rejected a suggestion that sports betting should be temporarily banned, now the Australian Crime Commission has uncovered doping and links to organised crime in sport.
Independent senator Nick Xenophon is calling for the ban until sporting codes are cleared of links to organised crime.
But Mr Fahey does not believe that is the right response.
"Well that just drives it underground. It sounds good, but it just drives it underground.
"If people want to bet they don't rely upon a corner shop or something, they can do it legally with a registered agent who advertising on TV."
Tabcorp chief executive David Attenborough has told the ABC that corruption in sport is a problem and has been for a long time.
Telstra is among the major companies considering the impact of today's revelations on its sporting sponsorships.
Chief executive David Thodey says the telco will be carefully monitoring the situation.
The Senate has today established an inquiry into gambling and sport, and in particular "the importance of spot betting and its potential effect on the integrity of sporting codes".
It will also examine whether betting has affected the public attitude towards sport.
The motion was put forward by Greens Senator Richard Di Natale and amended by Independent Senator Nick Xenophon before being passed by the Senate.
It is due to report back by May 16.
Senator Xenophon says sports betting should be banned until sport is cleared of links to organised crime.
"This is about the saving the integrity of sporting codes, and honestly some of the approach of sporting codes in relation to dealing with drugs in sport where there is a link with organised crime has really been quite woeful."
Earlier today ASADA's chief executive officer Aurora Andruska said she couldn't say how long the investigations would take, and urged athletes to come forward with information.
Where do the major codes stand?
Leading NRL coach Wayne Bennett says he doubts there's widespread doping and match-fixing in rugby league.
Australian Olympic Committee president John Coates has a blunt warning for cheats - put your hand up now because you'll be caught sooner or later.
In a statement released this lunchtime he called for "severe" penalties and "more investigative work off the field of play".
From the ACC report: "Some anti-ageing clinics have been identified as a key source of supply of pharmaceutical grade WADA-prohibited [performance-enhancing drugs] to athletes, in some cases without prescription."
News Limited is reporting that the NRL has sent a team of auditors to Manly with a brief to investigate the Sea Eagles' sports science department.
World Anti-Doping Agency president John Fahey says he was alarmed by the report's findings, but not surprised.
He says the report's findings prove the issue of doping is "alive and well", and should refocus international efforts to stamp it out.
Mr Fahey has suggested that extra resources will be needed to deal with the issue.
On whether this is the blackest day in Australian sport, he says: "I think the blackest day will come if we don't take the opportunity that's now presented to us, face the problem head on, give it the resources and commitment, and ensure that there are systems in place so that there's no other black days like this in the future."
1:35pm: How much do you know about the substances like GHRP, pig brain extract, and the other weapons in the dopers' chemical arsenal? Read our explainer here.
1:17pm: The boss of Cricket Australia, James Sutherland, says he was shocked when briefed about the Crime Commission's findings earlier this week.
He said there was "no specific evidence or links" between criminal figures and Australia's cricketers.
"No sport can afford anything other than constant vigilance," he said.
He said Cricket Australia would immediately carry out a review of its integrity systems, controls and processes.
1:09pm: Football Federation Australia's chief executive David Gallop says soccer is vigilant about doping and match-fixing but says there's no specific evidence of it happening.
Victoria Police have identified the A-League as being at major risk of match-fixing.
12:52pm: Kevin Sheedy is asked whether he has noticed any evidence of match fixing:
12:41pm: Greater Western Sydney coach Kevin Sheedy says the report will be a "rude awakening" for many people involved in professional sport, but he's pleased the report's findings have been released so that action can be taken.
12:28pm: ASADA's chief executive officer Aurora Andruska says the agency identified possible criminal links as early as 18 months ago while investigating the use of peptides and hormones in sport.
She says ASADA has begun a formal investigation into individual athletes and support staff across a range of sports, although privacy provisions prevent the agency from discussing who is being targeted.
12:26pm: We're standing by for a press conference from Kevin Sheedy.
12:22pm: In related news just in, the US Anti-Doping Agency (USADA) says Lance Armstrong now says he wants "to be part of the solution and assist in the effort to clean up the sport of cycling."
USADA has given Armstrong two more weeks to cooperate fully in its investigations, in return for a possible reduction of his life ban.
Mr Demetriou says a number of measures have already been put in place to prevent drugs and match-fixing, but it's clear more needs to be done.
He said AFL officials would meet with clubs to review the extent of medical supervision over fitness programs and treatments provided to players.
12:10pm: Earlier Australian Rugby Union CEO Bill Pulver said the ACC report was a wake-up call to professional sporting codes.
He said he was quite proud of the code's anti-doping measures, but: "I think it would be naive for the ARU and Australian rugby community to believe that this is not an issue that spans all professional sports."
He later added: "There are no investigations on foot in regards to rugby, but there can be no room for complacency.
"ARU will provide cooperation and assistance to the relevant authorities to ensure full transparency, along with other member sports of COMPPS (Coalition of Major Professional and Participation Sports)."
12:06pm: Victoria Police says authorities have identified A-League soccer as being at major risk of match-fixing.
"We're seeing vast increases in the betting pools in Asia on A-League soccer," Deputy Commissioner Ashton said.
He added that one bookmaker alone had taken more than $40 million on one A-League match.
He said cricket and tennis were also at risk, based on the amount of betting involved.
12:00pm: Management at the Brisbane Broncos NRL team say they have nothing to fear from the investigation.
A Broncos spokesman says drugs are not an issue and the team has no medical sports scientists.
The Broncos will hold a media conference later today.
11:57am: Victoria's Deputy Police Commissioner Graham Ashton is speaking to reporters now.
He says match-fixing investigations are already underway in the horse racing industry, but say there are no such investigations involving other sports at this stage.
He says the confidential version of the ACC's report details the names of who is allegedly involved, but he's not allowed to disclose those details.
11:55am: Performance coach Wayne Goldsmith says supplement use is widespread and known to team managers in Australian Rules.
11:49am: Mr Ings says he's confident ASADA's new coercive powers "mean Australia is better placed than any country in the world to be able to handle this worst-case scenario."
11:42am: Former ASADA boss Richard Ings has told ABC News 24 that: "This is not a black day in Australian sport, this is the blackest day in Australian sport."
We're standing by for a press conference from Victoria Police.
11:39am: Kate Lundy ends the media conference with this comment: "I would urge anyone who is involved in cheating and fixing to step forward, make themselves known, and be part of cleaning up sport in Australia".
11:33am: Here are some more key findings contained in the ACC's report:
11:30am: The Government is not saying which clubs or which players are caught up in the alleged drug use or match-fixing.
Sports Minister Kate Lundy said: "It's entirely appropriate to allow due process to unfold with these investigations and for privacy and the other confidentiality imperatives of our law enforcement agencies to be respected".
The Crime Commission says there are legal restrictions on what it is allowed to say publicly.
Jason Clare says he can understand why the public will be frustrated that it's not yet being told who has been caught up in the ACC investigation, but says it's important not to compromise any criminal prosecution.
11:26am: From the ACC report: "In some cases, medical practitioners who are prescribing peptides, hormones and other PIEDs are engaging in lax, fraudulent and unethical prescribing practices, such as prescribing controlled drugs in false names."
11:21am: Peptides are one of the substances authorities have been focusing on:
11:15am: NRL boss David Smith says former Federal Court judge Tony Whitlam has been appointed to work with anti-doping authorities and establish a new integrity unit within the code.
11:10am: Background video: Dr Robin Willcourt was consulted by Essendon's Steve Dank and Dean Robinson last year and outlines what he told them about sports supplements while he also suggests the use of testosterone and hormones to return athletes to their normal levels of those substances should be allowed.
11:06am: AFL boss Andrew Demetriou says the findings of the report came as a shock to him.
"Sport is too important in this community. Everyone wants to watch a sport that's pure and we welcome the briefings from the Crime Commission and we welcome the Federal Government action," he said.
11:03am: The Crime Commission boss has declined to say which code is involved in the match-fixing allegations.
"I can tell you that there is one, and it's been referred to the relevant authorities," Mr Lawler said.
11:02am: Justice Minister Jason Clare says the Crime Commission has identified the risk, but also the reality in one case, of match-fixing.
Crime Commission boss John Lawler says the threat of match-fixing is "extraordinarily serious" because it involves large amounts of money through global betting arrangements.
10:57am: James Sutherland, the chairman of the Major Professional and Participation Sports organisation, says "Australia's major sports are rock solid behind the Government and federal authorities in our determination to tackle this issue."
10:47am: Speaking to reporters in Canberra now, Mr Clare has said "the findings are shocking and they will disgust Australian sports fans."
He says authorities believe multiple criminal offences have been committed, and is vowing to pursue anyone involved.
"The findings are shocking and they'll disgust Australian sports fans," Mr Clare told reporters in Canberra, at a press conference also attended by the heads of major sporting codes.
"The findings indicate that drugs are being facilitated by sports scientists, coaches, support staff as well as doctors and pharmacists. And in some cases sports scientists and others orchestrating the doping of entire teams."
10:44am: Here's what we know so far:
The Crime Commission believes the involvement of criminal figures may have resulted in match-fixing and the fraudulent manipulation of betting markets.
"Multiple athletes from a number of clubs in major Australian sporting codes are suspected of currently using or having previously used peptides, potentially constituting anti-doping rule violations," Justice Minister Jason Clare said.
He said some coaches, sports scientists and support staff working with elite athletes had been involved in facilitating the use of prohibited substances.
The report’s findings in relation to suspected criminal activity have been referred to the Australian Federal Police as well as state and territory police forces.
Sports Minister Kate Lundy this week introduced legislation to boost the powers of the Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority (ASADA) to allow the "full and unhindered investigation" of the issue.
"If persons of interest refuse to cooperate with ASADA investigations, they will be liable for civil penalties," Senator Lundy said in a statement.
The report's release comes as ASADA and the AFL's integrity unit look into claims Essendon gave unnamed supplements to players.