Manchester United v Real Madrid: Uefa have 'no problem' with referee Cuneyt Cakir following controversial red card for Nani
Uefa have said they have “no problem” with referee Cuneyt Cakir following the fall-out from his decision to send off Nani in Manchester United's Champions League defeat to Real Madrid.
The Turkish referee showed the Portugal international a red card for his waist high challenge on Alvaro Arbeloa in the 57th minute of last night's match at Old Trafford.
At the time of the incident United were leading 2-1 on aggregate, but eventually lost the match 3-2.
There have been mixed views on the decision with former Manchester United captains differing on how they saw the incident.
Gary Neville said: "Nani is a player who regularly tries to control a pass like this over his shoulder and its never a red card! Changed the whole game! Poor ref."
Meanwhile, Roy Keane told ITV: "It's dangerous play - it's a red card. You have to be aware of other players on the pitch. Does he think he's going to have 20 yards to himself? Whether it's [a brave decision] or not, it's the right decision. Whether he meant it or not doesn't matter."
Yet Bryan Robson has disagreed with Keane: "I think the only person in the stadium who thought it was a sending off was Roy Keane.
"I'm glad Keane didn't take up refereeing as a profession."
The views of The Independent readers are also split, with over 10,000 of you taking part in our poll.
However, Uefa have confirmed today Cakir will remain on its list of officials to take charge of Champions League matches this season.
"We have no problem with him," a Uefa spokesman said. "There are no issues for us regarding the sending off and we will wait for the official reports of the match delegate and the referee's observer, as is procedure. If they raise concerns then we will act."
Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson is yet to publicly comment on the Cakir's decision, with his assistant Mike Phelan saying he was "too distraught" to talk to the press after last night's match.
Follow the Independent Sport on Instagram here, for all of the best images, videos and stories from around the sporting world.