Lakers’ Kobe Bryant Tears Achilles’ Tendon, Ending His Season
Kupchak added: “He’s proactive in all ways. You wouldn’t expect him to wait a week or two” to have surgery.
“When I got the phone call that he wanted to do it today, I wasn’t a bit surprised,” Kupchak said.
In an already tumultuous transition in which the questions have only mounted for the Lakers — from their late drive toward the No. 8 seed for the playoffs to their hopes of regaining their marquee status — Bryant’s injury brings more uncertainty.
Will his injury affect the free-agency decision of Dwight Howard, whose contract expires July 1?
What about Bryant’s career as a Laker, given that his contract expires in 2014?
Howard would not discuss his free agency, same as all season, although he is expected to re-sign with the Lakers. The Lakers can offer him five years at $115 million while other teams are limited to four years at $85 million.
But the more immediate focus on social media was on Coach Mike D’Antoni for letting Bryant play so many minutes. Kupchak said that he tried to slow Bryant, too, with no success.
“His message to me was ‘Mitch, I hear what you’re saying, but we’ve got to get in the playoffs; I’m playing, and there’s nothing you can do about it,’ ” Kupchak said.
As befitting an old-school star determined to stay current, Bryant, who opened Twitter and Facebook accounts this season, used several platforms to provide a minute-by-minute account of what he said was “by far” the lowest moment of his 17-year career.
Perhaps most remarkable was his interview session with the local news media, which Bryant had held at arm’s length going back to his 2003 arrest and his subsequent trial in Eagle, Colo. Bryant was similarly held at arm’s length by Lakers fans, many of whom regarded him with something of the cool admiration they once bestowed on Kareem Abdul-Jabbar.
On Friday night, Bryant not only talked graciously but joked, if darkly.
“Players at this stage of their career pop an Achilles’, and the pundits say they’ll never come back the same,” Bryant said.
“So this isn’t your last game?” a reporter asked, on his knees in the group that surrounded Bryant.
“Really? Really? It’s appropriate that you ask that question from down there,” a grinning Bryant said, drawing laughs.
Bryant then bared his soul on Facebook.
“It’s 3:30am, my foot feels like dead weight, my head is spinning from the pain meds and I’m wide awake,” Bryant wrote as part of a longer post. “Forgive my Venting but what’s the purpose of social media if I won’t bring it to you Real No Image?? Feels good to vent, let it out. To feel as if THIS is the WORST thing EVER! Because After ALL the venting, a real perspective sets in.
“There are far greater issues challenges in the world than a torn Achilles. Stop feeling sorry for yourself, find the silver lining and get to work with the same belief, same drive and same conviction as ever.”
In his last seven games, Bryant averaged 44.5 minutes, 29.8 points, 7.3 rebounds, 8.4 assists and 2.1 steals, leading the Lakers to six victories.
He remained in character, a high-wire act rather than a model of efficiency, scoring 47 points while taking over so completely in a victory at Portland that his teammate Pau Gasol said it was “bittersweet” because the Lakers had not shared the ball more.
Bryant is likely to play again, so this will probably not be his farewell. If it turns out that it was, few N.B.A. players will have had one like it, an impressive final stretch leading to the night he became vulnerable for all the world to see.