Matt Kenseth tames Darlington for third win of year
DARLINGTON, S.C. — Matt Kenseth's dream season with Joe Gibbs Racing now includes Darlington Raceway – the historic oval where he's been dreaming of an inaugural victory for his entire NASCAR career.
And with his regular crew chief on the sidelines, Saturday night's triumph in the Bojangles' Southern 500 took on even more meaning for Kenseth, who said his 27th victory "feels bigger than any win" during a 13-year career in Sprint Cup.
"There's a lot of tradition here," he said of the track that opened in 1950. "To be able to win at a track like this, it's big. It's one of the biggest races we have. It's just a special place to win at."
Kenseth snatched the lead from teammate Kyle Busch and led the final 13 laps Saturday night. He won with interim crew chief Wally Brown, who stepped in when Jason Ratcliff served a one-race suspension stemming from the No. 20 Toyota's engine failing postrace inspection after winning last month at Kansas Speedway.
"I feel bad Jason's not here, but Wally did a great job and all these guys," said Kenseth, who has won three of his first 11 races since joining JGR after 15 seasons with Roush Fenway Racing. "We had a sixth-place car, and the last two pits stops were awesome. We've got a great combination."
It was the first Sprint Cup win at Darlington for the 2003 champion, who leads the circuit in victories this season and moved up a spot to third in the points standings.
"This is a dream come true, guys," Kenseth radioed his crew. "Holy cow."
Denny Hamlin, completing a full race for the first time since fracturing his back nearly two months ago, finished second and made it a sweep of the top two for JGR.
"I'm tired, just wore out," said Hamlin, whose back didn't cause any pain during the 500-mile marathon. "This is just a tough, grueling race. The guys on pit road were flawless. The best in the business.
"They kept picking up spots. I kept doing my part on the track. You have to stay so mentally tough for so long and on top of the physical stuff that you got going on, it's tough to overcome. Luckily it was a good day for us."
Jeff Gordon finished third in the 700th start of his career in NASCAR's premier series. He has seven victories at Darlington, most among active drivers.
"I thought that was very cool," the four-time champion said. "This track has been one of the best for me, and it holds so much history for this sport. I couldn't' think of a better place to get the 700th start. Then to have a strong performance, it felt great. I wanted the 700th to be memorable one."
Jimmie Johnson, who maintained the lead in the standings by 44 points over Carl Edwards, was fourth. Kevin Harvick was fifth.
Busch, who led a race-high 265 of 367 laps, faded to sixth after fending off several spirited challenges from rivals – including a daring maneuver that took Kasey Kahne out of contention when he slid into the Turn 1 wall while trying for the lead with 33 laps remaining. Kahne limped home in 17th with a damaged No. 5 Chevrolet after tangling with Busch for the second consecutive race.
Kahne didn't appear to make contact with Busch but said he lost the handle on his car because of his rival's overaggression.
"He entered (the turn) so early and was just going straight for the corner," said Kahne, who received an apology from Busch after their collision triggered a multicar wreck in last week's race at Talladega Superspeedway. "Whether he hit me or (disrupted) the air (around Kahne's car), he blew his entry. I'm not real sure what he was thinking on that."
Kahne and Busch also tangled early in the season-opening Daytona 500.
"Three times this year, me and Kyle have had contact, and I've had (cars) capable (of) winning," Kahne said. "It's disappointing on the points side and not winning some of these races."
Busch was trying to complete a weekend sweep at the 1.366-mile track after a dominant victory in Friday's Nationwide Series race.
Carl Edwards, Juan Pablo Montoya, Dale Earnhardt Jr. and Ryan Newman rounded out the top 10.
Danica Patrick finished 28th, five laps down in her second Cup start at Darlington.