Bradford City 3 Northampton Town 0: match report
Three goals in the opening half-hour gave Bradford a joyous return to Wembley as they brushed Northampton aside to end their six-year exile in the Football League’s bottom tier.
Northampton manager Aidy Boothroyd had spent the week acclimatising his players to the Wembley surroundings but his defence looked like they had just landed on Mars as Bradford set about doing to the Cobblers what they had suffered at the hands of Swansea City in their previous visit for the Capital One Cup final.
“We looked like a rabbit in the headlights for a period of 30 minutes,” Boothroyd said. “Bradford dealt with the whole day – the occasion and, more importantly, the game – better than we did. They’ve got what they deserved.”
It has been quite a season for Phil Parkinson’s squad, which cost just £7,500 to assemble, but they showed no signs of fatigue in this, their 64th game. Parkinson called on his players to “finish the job” and they’d done so within twenty-eight minutes against an abject Northampton.
“It couldn’t have gone much better for us really. To be three up at half time, it’s beyond your wildest dreams,” he said. “The second half was about us being professional and seeing the job through. I thought there was a ruthlessness about us,” he added.
It was just over 28 years ago that 56 supporters died in the Valley Parade fire – Bradford-born Boothroyd was in the crowd with his father that day – and as supporters rose to applaud the victims in that same minute, you sensed that the city was looking forward to a brighter future.
“In the last couple of weeks I’ve been to the Bradford memorial service and what the supporters have been saying to me is that we’ve brought the spirit back into the city with this team, with our commitment with a never-say-die attitude,” Parkinson added.
Nahki Wells was quickest out of his corner for the Bantams, curling an early free-kick over the bar and going close with a header and by the 15th minutes, they were ahead. James Meredith’s cross ran all the way to Garry Thompson at the far post, and his looped ball back in was headed home by James Hanson.
Four minutes later, Bradford delivered another hammer blow as Nathan Doyle surged down the right flank and crossed for centre-back Rory McArdle, whose bullet header flew low into the net. The fleet-footed Wells then got in on the act to effectively end the contest as he volleyed past the hapless Jon McLaughlin from close range following good work from Kyel Reid and Thompson, helped in no small part from more laissez-faire defending from the Maroons. It was Wells’s fourth goal in five games against Northampton this season and his 26th in total.
“To score on the biggest stage, at the most important times, those are the ones that really stay with you,” Wells said afterwards.
Northampton’s forays into the Bradford half were rare and fruitless. The only contribution from their own strikers, Clive Platt and Roy O’Donovan, were bookings for rash lunges at Andrew Davies and impressive left-winger Kyel Reid, leaving Boothroyd apoplectic on the touchline as his team threatened to implode.
Though Northampton struggled to mount a response, Parkinson described his defenders performance as “immense”. The same adjective was appropriate for Bradford’s supporters who have had few days of celebration since being relegated from the Premier League in 2001.