US Open: Justin Rose wins from Phil Mickelson and Jason Day
Justin Rose of England has taken out the US Open ahead of perennial runner-up Phil Mickelson of the US and Australia's Jason Day.
Rose finished on 1-over-par 281 after shooting an even final round at Merion Golf Club in Pennsylvania.
Two shots further back was six-times US Open runner-up Mickelson and Queenslander Day, both with total scores of 3-over-par 283.
Day, who was runner-up in 2011, shot a 1-over-par final round 71 to head into the clubhouse as Rose tried to hold off Mickelson over the final couple of holes.
The lead had changed several times with Rose, Mickelson, Day and equal fourth-placed Hunter Mahan all with a taste of the lead at various stages on the final day.
Rose, 32, birdied the 16th hole to take the lead ahead of overnight leader Mickelson.
Holding par on the 17th, Rose clung to a one-shot lead when he put his 18th-hole tee shot on the fairway near a plaque where legend Ben Hogan hit a famed one-iron shot to seal a 1950 US Open victory at Merion.
"When I saw my shot lying in the fairway, I thought, 'This is my moment'," Rose said.
"I've seen the Hogan photograph a million times and now it was me hitting the shot. I hit a 2-iron into the green and it all worked out."
The ball rolled to the back edge of the green and Rose used a hybrid to knock the ball an inch from the cup and tapped in for par to take the clubhouse lead, although his triumph was not yet secure.
Mickelson, the three-times Masters champion, needed a birdie on the tough 17th or 18th hole to force a play-off to keep alive hope of winning his first Open.
Mickelson parred the 17th but bogeyed the 18th, handing the title to Rose and joining Day as equal runners-up.
It was the eighth attempt at the US Open for Rose and he became the first Englishman to win the title since Tony Jacklin in 1970. The win coincided with Father's Day in the US and the United Kingdom and Rose paid tribute to his late father Ken.
"I couldn't help to look up to the heavens and think that my old dad Ken had something to do with it," Rose said after his win.
Mickelson said a sixth runner-up finish was hard to take.
"This is tough to swallow after coming so close, this was my best chance out of all of them," Mickelson said.
Australian David Graham won the last US Open at Merion in 1981.
Day was previously runner-up in both the US Masters and the US Open in 2011 to Charl Schwartzel and Rory McIlroy respectively.
Through the final round Day scored birdies on the fourth, eighth and 10th holes but bogeyed holes 5, 11, 14 and 18.
Another narrow miss in a major has Day believing his time will come soon.
"As long as I keep knocking on the door, I think I'll win a major here soon," Day said.
"Unfortunately things happen in golf and that's just the way it is."
Earlier American Shawn Stefani hit a hole in one on the 17th, the first time it had been achieved at that hole in five US Opens at Merion.
Australian John Senden finished the tournament at 9-over-par 289 in equal 15th place.
Mathew Goggin shot a final round 3-over-par 73 to finish the tournament with 291. Geoff Ogilvy finished with 293 in equal 32ns place and US Masters champion Adam Scott finished on 15-over-par 295. Fellow Australian Alistair Presnell also made the cut finishing in equal 67th place.
Tiger Woods concluded his round as the leaders were heading out. He closed his tournament with a 74 for a 13-over-par total of 293, his worst 72-hole performance relative to par at the US Open since turning pro in 1996.