Demons finally sack Neeld
Left to right: Peter Spargo, Peter Jackson and Mark Neeld face the press. "From the club's perspective, the on-field results this year have been unacceptable, well below the expectations that we would have had at the beginning of the year. It's not only the fact of only one win for the year, it's the scale of the losses that we'd had to endure," he said at a press conference on Monday morning, which Neeld also attended. "If the board made that decision on Friday and we didn't act immediately we could be accused of not acting with integrity." Neeld, whose tenure has been under severe scrutiny for more than a month, said that "when the CEO called me at five to eight this morning, yeah, I had a fair indication [of what would occur] when I took the call". He said he had no regrets about the decisions he had taken as coach of Melbourne since his appointment at the end of 2011. At the end of his first season senior players Brad Green, Jared Rivers and Brent Moloney all departed.
"A lot of decisions had to be made, and some of them were really hard. It was felt by the whole footy club, and me in particular, that they needed to be made," he said. Asked about his reaction to his sacking Neeld replied: "At the moment the emotion's just disappointment." "The whole club's taking responsibility. There's going to be changes across all parts of it, and I'm one. I take responsibility for my component, no doubt." As well as the sacking of Neeld new chief executive Jackson unveiled a restructure of the Demons' dysfunctional football department, led by a new position, general manager of football operations, that will report to him. Current football manager Josh Mahoney will act in that position and, Jackson confirmed, will be a candidate for him as part of an "industry search for a candidate for that role". The club's search for a new coach will also begin immediately. Jackson, however, signalled his more immediate priority was to address persistent speculation that some Melbourne players – he did not name them, but James Frawley and Jack Watts are reputed to be among them – had become exasperated during Neeld's tenure and would seek to leave the club at the end of the season.
"There's been a lot of public conjecture about some players and whether they want to stay ... beyond this year, whether they see a positive career opportunity here. It's our responsibility, it's my responsibility as CEO, that we do as a matter of urgency everything we can to ensure players see a future at this footy club and a positive career for them," Jackson said. "We need to convince them ... that this is a place they want to be for the next 10 years of their career." Newly installed chief executive Jackson also reiterated the Demons' precarious financial situation, which has been exacerbated by their awful performances. He said their struggles were so conspicuous that they were now a significant drag on the AFL competition. "We are a huge impediment to the industry at the moment, in terms of opposition teams playing us as a home game, our stakeholders, the MCC, broadcasters, everything you look at," he said. Jackson said he received a phone call late on Friday from AFL chief executive Andrew Demetriou indicating the support of the AFL Commission for its multimillion-dollar overhaul. But he stressed that was contingent both in him remaining at the helm of the Demons to implement that overhaul – he is contracted until the end of 2014 – and also for there to be changes within the Melbourne board as part of it accepting responsibility for the club's problems. But he also implied the AFL Commission was not keen on the type of board overhaul being advocated strongly by former Hawthorn president and current Melbourne presidential candidate Jeff Kennett.
"They want to see the composition of the board and what that looks like. They would be anxious if there was a group that they didn't have the confidence that tried to take over the board," Jackson said of the AFL Commission. Asked whether he would be prepared to work with Kennett should his takeover be successful, Jackson replied: "Let's just leave that answer to what I said." Melbourne is currently undergoing a detailed internal board review of its board, being led by current board member John Trotter, to recommend changes to both structure and personnel. Interim president Peter Spargo, who also attended the press conference, predicted "several" directors would join McLardy and Grimshaw in resigning after the review is complete. "I would expect change ... the board needs refreshing and rejuvenation," he said. Neeld’s departure has meant there has been a complete overhaul of the Demons' leadership triumvirate since the start of the season. In addition to McLardy’s resignation chief executive Cameron Schwab was, like Neeld, sacked despite being under contract.