Halladay Wraps Up N.L. East Title for Phillies
Halladay instantly broke into a big smile, and the Phillies gathered in the middle of the diamond for hugs and high-fives. Thousands of red-clad, towel-waving Phillies fans in the announced crowd of 14,309 gave them a standing ovation.
And Halladay was in the middle of the celebration. His years without a postseason trip were tied for fourth most among active players; the highest total belonged to Mike Sweeney, a Phillies bench player whose drought will end in his 16th season.
“That’s the reason you want to come to a team like this,” Halladay said. “They know how to do it.”
BRAVES CONTINUE THEIR PUSH Omar Infante singled home the winning run with two outs in the 11th inning as the Braves kept up their push for the N.L. wild-card spot by beating the visiting Marlins, 2-1. Before the game, Braves Manager Bobby Cox said he planned to start Tim Hudson and Derek Lowe on three days’ rest this week. The win pulled Atlanta even in the wild-card race with San Diego, which played late Monday night.
CARDINALS STILL ALIVE Matt Holliday homered and drove in three runs as St. Louis beat the visiting Pittsburgh Pirates, 6-4, to stay alive in the N.L. Central race for at least one more day. A Cardinals loss would have clinched the division for Cincinnati.
DODGERS FOIL JIMENEZ Ted Lilly scattered four hits in eight innings and the visiting Dodgers prevented Ubaldo Jimenez from getting his 20th win with a 3-1 victory over the Rockies. Jimenez (19-8) has one more start, at St. Louis, to try to become Colorado’s first 20-game winner.
RAYS STILL WAITING Nick Markakis drove in two runs with a triple and a single, leading the Baltimore Orioles to a 4-0 victory over the American League East-leading Rays. Tampa Bay’s magic number to clinch its second playoff berth in three years remained one. The potential clincher drew a crowd of only 12,446 to Tropicana Field.
RED SOX BEAT WHITE SOX Clay Buchholz outpitched Mark Buehrle as Boston won in Chicago, 6-1, postponing clinching parties for their A.L. East rivals.
RANGERS RAISE FLAG, THEN FALL Justin Smoak, traded to the Mariners by the Rangers on July 9 in the deal that sent Cliff Lee to Texas, hit a three-run homer as Seattle edged the Rangers, 7-5. Before the game, the Rangers unveiled a flag commemorating this year’s A.L. West title, their first division crown since 1999.
TIGERS LOSE IN CLEVELAND Armando Galarraga went from unhittable to giving up three homers in an 18-pitch span, and the Cleveland Indians beat visiting Detroit, 6-3. Galarraga (5-8) did not give up a hit until Matt LaPorta hit a 412-foot homer to center field leading off the fifth. One out later, Luke Carlin homered to right. Travis Hafner hit a three-run shot with two outs for a 5-2 lead. ... Jarrod Dyson hit his first major league home run and caught 10 fly balls in center field — tying a team record held by Amos Otis and Carlos Beltran — as the Royals beat the visiting Twins, 10-8.