Karl Harris Dies in Superstock TT
Another rider was killed on the Snaefell Mountain Course during the 2014 Isle of Man TT races.
The Auto Cycle Union reports that Karl Harris, 34, of Sheffield, passed away following a crash at Joey’s (26th Milestone) during the second lap of Tuesday’s RL360 Superstock TT, a four-lap race featuring 1000cc machinery.
The known British motorcycle racer Harris was piloting a Moto Breakers Kawasaki ZX-10R Ninja in the Superstock TT. His death is currently under investigation.
Harris became the 242nd rider to perish in both TT and Manx Grand Prix races since racing begin on the Isle of Man in 1911.
Gary Thompson, TT Clerk of the Course, said “Karl was one of the great characters in the race paddock. His infectious enthusiasm and sense of humour lit up many race meetings. He was a hugely talented racer and will be sorely missed.”
Harris has a superb history in motorcycle racing, highlighted by three British Supersport Championships, and multiple British Superbike podiums. He debuted at the Isle of Man TT in 2012.
Harris began racing as a teen in 1990s, when he competed for Team Great Britain in the Superteen Championship. Harris’ first title arrived in 1999 when he won the European Superstock 1000cc Championship. He followed this by a season in World Supersport.
But Harris is best known for his career in the British Championship. He dominated British Supersport, winning three titles from 2001-2004 – one for Crescent Suzuki, and two for Honda Racing.
In 2005, he joined the British Superbike Championship, and earned 15 podium finishes aboard Honda, Yamaha and Suzuki machinery. His best British SBK season was 2006 when he finished fifth overall, achieving six podiums.
Following the tragic loss of Harris, this marks the sixth death at the Isle of Man TT races since 2011.
The first fatal crash of 2011 occurred during practice for the Sidecar race. The ACU reported that Bill Currie, 67, of Ellesmere Port, and his passenger Kevin Morgan, 59, of Shrewsbury, were killed during the IOMTT sidecar crash at Ballacrye in the north part of the Mountain Course.
The third rider to perish on the Mountain Course in 2011 was Derek Brien, 34, of Co. Meath in Ireland. Brien was killed during the IOMTT crash in the first Supersport race. The ACU reported that the fatal, one-man IOMTT crash occurred during a high-speed section at Gorse Lea.
There were no deaths in 2012, and one in 2013 when Yoshinari Matsushita, 43, of Japan, was killed following a crash at Ballacrye in the north section of the Isle of Man.
And this year was already marred by two deaths; Bob Price, who died in Monday’s Monster Energy Supersport 1 race, and now Harris.
Harris’ death was the 19th at the Isle of Man TT event since the turn of the century.