Rafael Nadal fights back to win ninth French Open with victory over Novak Djokovic
The final point of a brutal French Open final left a bitter taste. Distracted by rude interruptions from the crowd, Novak Djokovic pushed his second serve long on match point down. As he dragged himself to the net for the handshake, he made a sarcastic thumbs-up sign to the stands.
This would have been a bleak moment for Djokovic, however it came. There is nothing he desires in the world more than the French Open, the one title missing from his set of grand slams. Since 2011, his record at Roland Garros stands at 17-0 against everyone born outside Majorca. But against Rafael Nadal it is 0-3, and that is the statistic that counts.
“It is not easy playing best-of-five against him in these conditions,” a softly spoken Djokovic said afterwards, in what must count as the understatement of the tennis year. Nadal’s tennis was only B+ on Sunday, by his own high standards. But his physical resilience was awe-inspiring on what was a sultry, sweaty, sauna of a day.
Is he the greatest endurance athlete in the history of tennis? There is a case for saying so. And his most obvious rival would be Bjorn Borg, the man whose record of four successive French Opens he equalled in 2008 and 2013.
Nadal’s 3-6, 7-5, 6-2, 6-4 victory stretched that number to five, while also extending his own record of most wins at a single slam to nine.
“Today was very tough, very humid. The combination of two weeks of cold with the drastic change affects us, affects our physical performance. I felt I was totally empty, drained, exhausted. I don’t know if I could have played a five-set match. But mentally I was so strong. I really wanted to defeat him. I suffered quite a lot, but I found solutions,” an emotional Nadal said later.
“Playing Novak is always a challenge. I lost to him the last four times we played. Every time I have a chance to beat him, I play at my limit.”
While we are marking the scorecard of greatness, we should also note that Nadal has 14 majors to his name. This places him in equal second place, alongside Pete Sampras, in the annals of the game. Only Roger Federer, the man he made to look mortal, remains ahead of him on 17.
Djokovic has six, for purposes of comparison. And yet he will believe that he should stand higher up the leaderboard, given that he has now lost five of his past six slam finals.
This vulnerability at the most pressurised moments was the lacuna that his new head coach, Boris Becker, was brought in to address. On Sunday, there were three key points that bore Becker’s signature as Djokovic charged into the net behind serves that slid wide to the Nadal backhand. He won the first two with neat stop-volleys. But on the third attempt Nadal slammed a backhand past him for a clean winner. Psychologically, this was a blow to the solar plexus.
At the end of the third set, which ended when he planted the simplest of volleys into the net, a demoralised Djokovic fixed his player’s box with a grim, 30-second stare that said: “Why haven’t you prepared me better for this?” Yet it was his body, more than his tennis, that let him down. He admitted later that he had felt ill for several days and vomited a few times in the build-up to the final.
In fact, Djokovic looked to be on the point of vomiting early in the fourth set. Even Nadal could not help hunching over after many of the points, which achieved a punishing intensity as temperatures soared to 30C. As the champion posed for photographers after the match, he had to put the Coupe des Mousquetaires down because his right arm was seized by cramp.
The heat had acted as a third participant in the drama from the outset. Even in the 2hr 36min semi-final against Ernests Gulbis on Friday, Djokovic had struggled physically. On Sunday, knowing that a long final would be his downfall, he came out determined to seize the initiative, holding his ground on the baseline even as Nadal peppered him with those throat-seeking, dive-bombing forehands.
At first the approach worked. Nadal was discomfited and discombobulated by the salvos of winners being fired from the far side of the net. He missed three examples of his favourite shot – the inside-out forehand – in the blink of an eye to give away the first set.
But gradually he reasserted himself and the arm-wrestle tilted in the other direction. Rather than becoming tentative on his forehand side, Nadal looked for the winner more and more often as the match went on. As Djokovic admitted: “His first shot off that side was terrific today.”
Despite losing to Nadal at Roland Garros for each of the last three years, he will not give up hope of winning the French Open.
"It was fantastic. I am so grateful for the opportunity to play here," he said. "Of course it's right after you go off the court and you want this title so much and you don't win it for several years now, and it's disappointing.
"But it's not the first time that I have this particular experience. At the end of the day, you have to put things in perspective and see where I come from and what kind of life I have. It's a blessing.
"So to be able to also be appreciated by the fans the way I was in the end of the match just gives me more, I'd say strength and motivation to come back here and try till the end of my career hopefully to get at least a title.
“It’s incredible to win this tournament for the ninth time. I gave it my all, I played at the best of my ability, but Rafa today was the better player.”
It was not perhaps such a classic as the semi-final contested by these two players on Court Philippe Chatrier a year ago, but it could once again have a far-reaching impact on the rest of the season. In 2013, Djokovic took a while to regain his mojo, while Nadal went on to claim a second major title in three months in New York. On the evidence of Sunday, he is not planning to relinquish his grip on the No 1 spot in a hurry.