Former New Zealand batsman Lou Vincent banned for life for match-fixing
The England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) announced a life ban on disgraced former New Zealand cricketer Lou Vincent on Tuesday, just hours after the player admitted he was a "cheat" and had shamed his country and the sport by fixing matches.
The ECB said 35-year-old Vincent had pleaded guilty to 18 breaches of the board's anti-corruption regulations in three matches in England and had accepted the ban which barred him from playing or coaching in any form of recognised cricket.
Vincent, who played 23 Tests and 102 one-dayers for New Zealand before retiring in 2007, released a statement earlier Tuesday saying he accepts his punishment and he had "lived with this dark secret for so many years", but had now decided to come forward and tell the truth.
"This has been a complex case which has crossed different cricketing jurisdictions and required close collaboration and intelligence-sharing between both our own anti-corruption unit, other domestic boards and the ICC's ACSU (anti-corruption and security unit," ECB chief executive David Collier said in a statement.
"We are extremely pleased that the matter has now been brought to a satisfactory conclusion and that an individual who repeatedly sought to involve others in corrupt activity for his own personal gain has accepted that his conduct warrants a lifetime ban from cricket.
"It once again highlights our resolve to keep cricket clean and rid the game of the tiny minority who seek to undermine the sport's integrity," he added.
Vincent, representing Auckland Aces, also tried to "corrupt" two matches in the 2012 edition of the Champions League Twenty20 tournament, its organisers said on Tuesday.
The top-order batsman has already been banned by the Bangladesh Cricket Board for three years for failing to report an approach from match fixers when he played for the Khulna Royal Bengals in the 2013 BPL season.
The 35-year-old has also given evidence to International Cricket Council anti-corruption investigators in which he says he was involved in fixing in five countries between 2008 and 2012.
Vincent said he had shamed his homeland and the game, prompting him to come clean to try to ease his conscience.
"My name is Lou Vincent and I am a cheat. I have abused my position as a professional sportsman on a number of occasions by choosing to accept money through fixing," he said in the statement.
"It's a truth that has rightly caused uproar and controversy in New Zealand and around the world.
"I have shamed my country, I shamed my sport, I have shamed those close to me. And for that, I am not proud."
Vincent apologised for his actions, admitting he suffered from depression but refusing to use that as an excuse for his actions.
"Today is the day I offer my deepest, deepest apologies to the public and the cricketing world, to the loyal fans, to the dedicated coaches, staff, players past and present," he said.
"The people who know me know I'm vulnerable, but they also know that I am not stupid. And I know what is right and what is wrong.
"I do suffer from depression - that is absolutely no excuse for all I've done wrong.
"I have kept my head down for too long now and it's time to man up to my mistakes and today, I can stand with a better conscience because I know I am doing the right thing.
"It is entirely my fault and I'll never be able to stand in front of a game again, it's entirely my fault that I will not be able to apply my skills in a positive way to help future cricketers, but it is entirely possible that I can use this moment to convince others not to be tempted by wrongdoing."
After retiring from international cricket, Vincent travelled the world playing in numerous domestic leagues before retiring from playing early last year.