Ryan Harris back as Aussies relish Indians' whingeing
India captain M.S. Dhoni countered that there had "not been any form of complaints from our side so far", but declined to criticise his opposing captain for commenting about his team. David Warner (thumb) and Shane Watson (concussion) seemingly dispelled doubts about their fitness by batting in the nets, albeit to throwdowns. The captain said he was "sure" Watson would be fine, and also his belief the all-rounder is best suited to a top-three batting position. "I've just got to manage him right. If we've got to go in to bat, I've got to make sure he hasn't bowled too many overs at the end there so he's fresh when he gets out there to bat. That's the most important thing to me," he said. Smith's faith in Watson remaining at first drop, despite modest results, will allow Burns to be a direct replacement for the injured Mitch Marsh (hamstring) and bat at number six, an introduction not afforded to recent Australian batting debutants such as Usman Khawaja, Rob Quiney and Alex Doolan, who each began at three. "Joe Burns gets his opportunity on Boxing Day and it's going to be a very special week for him," Smith said.
"If you're batting in the top order in state cricket you can bat anywhere in the Australian line-up. "I just think that [starting at six] is the best way to go about it. Shane Watson is best suited in the top three and Joe Burns going to slot in at six, and hopefully do a job for us there." India did not follow Australia in disclosing their team, amid suspicion Suresh Raina may be poised to end his 26-month exile from the Test team, in place of Rohit Sharma, partly because he is able to bowl off-spin and Dhoni is keen for his batsmen to bowl more to ease the burden on the specialist bowlers. Raina is addled by a reputation that he is susceptible to fast-bowling, but Dhoni argued his position as a limited-overs mainstay ensured he has been exposed to top-class pacemen since he last played Test in September 2012. "We've all seen what he can do batting at five or six in the ODIs, even on wickets that have got a bit of pace. Test cricket is slightly different . . . the red ball does move slightly more than the white ball," he said. "He has been working hard on his cricket and it will only reflect once he gets a game."
Swing-bowler Bhuvneshwar Kumar bowled for an extended spell on Thursday. The 24-year-old swing-bowler, a first-choice bowler for India when fit, was said by Dhoni to have recovered from the ankle injury that sidelined him from the first two Tests, but that he lacked the match fitness to be a realistic contender to play in Melbourne. Mohammad Shami could retain his position, maybe at the expense of Varun Aaron, with Dhoni saying he favoured rotating bowlers during Test series to reduce the potential for them to break down. With Harris recovered from that quadriceps injury that ruled him out of the second Test in Brisbane the bowler who replaced him at the Gabba, Mitch Starc, has lost his place. The omission of the left-armer is the 11th time he has been dropped, albeit mostly due to the return of a first-choice paceman, since his debut three years ago. Smith that Starc, 24, remained high in selectors' thoughts but had to improve his consistency.
"He's still there [in contention]. He bowled a couple of good spells last week. He'll go back and play a bit of Big Bash and keep his loads up. You never know [when his next opportunity may come]. Three back-to-back Test matches is pretty heavy on our fast-bowlers so we might see him back in the team next week," he said. "I think they [selectors] have told him consistency, trying to build pressure and bowl the same ball five out of six balls and getting it through to the keeper. That's pretty crucial for us. Shane Watson did a terrific job for us last week. He built a lot of pressure, and when he built that pressure we got results as well. I think that's one thing he needs to work on a little bit." While Smith won his first Test in charge of the team, during Michael Clarke's absence, he has been left on the brink of suspension for the next 12 months due to his team's poor over-rate. Smith conceded the team had to get through their overs more quickly but predicted the expected cooler conditions in Melbourne, and the likelihood off-spinner Nathan Lyon will bowl more, would make that easier to achieve in the third Test. "It's something we need to look at. I think we need to hustle through the overs a little bit more," he said. "It was a obviously a tough week last week. It was extremely hot [in Brisbane] and when the bowlers were going down on that first day I think that's when I lost most of my time."