Cricket World Cup: Australia's George Bailey demands aggression against England at MCG
George Bailey will aim to keep things aggressive but attractive in Saturday's World Cup opener, with the vice-captain keen to avoid any ugly incidents at the MCG.
Bailey will lead Australia in the absence of Michael Clarke, with the World Cup co-host to start their campaign against arch-rival England.
The International Cricket Council has put all 14 teams on notice regarding behaviour standards, vowing to crackdown on sledging.
David Warner was twice fined for code-of-conduct violations during the summer and would cop a suspension if he plays up on the weekend.
Bailey suggested he had not raised the issue with Warner or any other team-mates.
"That's never been a discussion I've had in any of our meetings," Bailey said.
"We've got a lot of different personalities within the team and I think we all know how some of those guys play.
"I don't think that will change. I think it's part and parcel.
"Obviously we don't want any ugly incidents, but we'll certainly play the game aggressively."
Australia coach Darren Lehmann was also confident the match, set to be watched by a sell-out crowd of over 90,000, would be played in the right spirit.
"Very much so. Both teams have played hard in the tri-series when we've come up against each other and during the Ashes series," Lehmann said.
"That won't change come Saturday I'm sure ... David will do the right thing."
Straight shooter Bailey acknowledged the clash with England could be his first and last hit-out during the World Cup, with Clarke to return next Saturday against Bangladesh.
Asked what he can do to save his spot, Bailey replied "I don't think I probably will, but that's fine".
A match-winning knock from Bailey could give selectors some serious headaches.
Bailey, who has not scored a half-century for Australia since November 14, feels he is "hitting the ball really well".
"I'm very comfortable where I'm at," he said.
"I actually feel like my role has changed a bit within the team.
"But, as with every single batsman who is about to take part in this tournament, I want some runs."