Lewis Hamilton and Mercedes to continue 'making history'
World champion and man to beat this season in Formula One, Lewis Hamilton and his Mercedes team sent out a warning to their rivals Wednesday that they intend to keep "making history."
In March, Hamilton said a new deal was "99.6" done, but as the weeks and months went by and the contract remained unsigned he was linked with a move to Ferrari.
However, the British driver has now inked a three-year-contract with the German constructors.
"Mercedes is my home and I couldn't be happier to be staying here for another three years," said Hamilton.
"The Mercedes car I am driving right now is the best I have ever had in my career; it's just so much fun to be out there every weekend, on the limit and fighting to win at every track."
The 30-year-old Hamilton teamed up with Mercedes in 2013 after leaving McLaren and won the drivers' championship the following year, wrestling it from Sebastian Vettel's grasp after four years of dominance. The Briton has won 15 races in the Mercedes, taking the checkered flag a remarkable 11 times last season. CONFIRMED: 3 more years for @LewisHamilton! "@MercedesBenz is my home" #3MoreYears pic.twitter.com/PAmAWudo2v— MERCEDES AMG F1 (@MercedesAMGF1) May 20, 2015 Mercedes also finished top of the constructors' championship in 2014 after Nico Rosberg gave them a one-two finish, leaving Mercedes almost 300 points clear of their nearest rivals Red Bull in second. "Lewis enjoyed an historic World Championship season with Mercedez-Benz last year and it was a priority for this season to renew his contract for next the term," said head of Mercedes-Benz Totto Wolff in a statement released on their website. "Lewis' sporting track record speaks for itself and he is a great personality for the company. Personally, I am looking forward to continuing to race with the strongest driver pairing in Formula One and to more historic achievements together." The winning partnership has continued into 2015 with Hamilton and Rosberg once again occupying first and second spot ahead of the sixth grand prix of the season in Monaco on Sunday. Read: Reserve drivers: The forgotten men of Formula One