England v New Zealand, second Test, day five: as it happened
Thank you for joining us for the series. If ever two-Test series were shown to be ridiculously restrictive, it is this one. Hopefully we will return for the one-day series that begins a week today and that inconsequential series that comes around at the end of the one-dayers. I know we'll meet again some sunny day. Thank you for your contributions and correspondence. Bye!
It was disappointing today, At halfway we were right in the game and created opportunities. But every time we had a chance they took the game away from us with positive batting. Adam Lyth has looked solid at the top of the order and Ben has taken great strides, played nicely at Lord's and here today too. Mark Wood has also added fire to our attack.
Look, when you're not on your A-game you get found out. That's how Test cricket works. We've got five weeks away now to work on our games and come back in Cardiff ready to build good totals. It's been a challenge against their bowling attack but I'm pleased to score some runs. You need to judge well outside off and I've managed to do that which is nice. Our batting has looked good. We could have batted out the day today but those four early wickets hurt us."
What a fantastically enjoyable series and one that ended in the spirit that it was played with the England players coming on to the field to shake their opponents' hands.
All credit to NZ but let's begin the post mortem by saying that England's slip catching has been truly terrible, Gary Ballance needs to work on his technique against the fuller ball, Ian Bell needs a rest, Stuart Broad needs to do as he's told by Ottis Gibson and Moeen Ali needs some bowling and to start snatching for his left pocket again with his left hand. Plus points - Cook's batting, Stokes' nerve and skill at Lord's and Mark Wood's pace and promise. But I believe England are in a better position now than when the series started.
Wicket!! Buttler lbw b Craig 73 Bagged him with the arm ball after two big off-spinners. Buttler, anticipating it would drift past leg-stump shouldered arms and was hit on the knee roll.
Looks plumb. It's out. NZ win the second Test by 199 runs
Buttler farms the strike off the last ball in the most Buttleresque way possible, high over cover for a single.
A little flavour of the speed of Buttler's hands.
NZ gave what they want - a spinner at Anderson. But what's this? A square drive for four to bring up his 1,000th Test run in his 104th Test. To say Anderson looks comfortable would be a dreadful untruth but take heart, England fans, he's still there despite one beauty fizzing past the edge as he prodded forward.
Buttler's eye is a modern wonder. There's so much space he can uber-milk Henry with fours, smacking him over his head and over midwicket. Henry fights back by getting one to jag back that Buttler edges crisply into his solar plexus. The blow fells him and understandably provokes an audible curse. The next ball tails away from the edge as Buttler is squared up, protecting his vitals.
That's six of them out of the way and he didn't have to play at the first four then runs the last one down to third man for four.
Buttler takes two scoring opportunities to smear fours, the first a full-blown drive that flies off the edge for four then punches an on-drive for another. Twenty-four overs left - 144 balls. Jimmy survived 82 in Chennai in 2008, 85 at Trent Bridge in 2008 and 130 when he made that preposterous 81 at Nottingham last year.
Southee greets Anderson with a short one that goes past him at chest height. The batsman thinks about a waft down to fine leg and definitely goes towards the ball but it misses everything.
Wicket!! Wood c Craig b Southee 17 The bowler has been straining to hit that line in t'corridor and when he does after a couple of short ones to set up the drive, Wood has a nibble and edges low to second slip where Craig swoops low to scoop up a very good catch indeed. FOW 230/9
Back-to-back maidens - but not all are equal. Boult lets Buttler leave the first three and the sixth. He drives the fourth and fifth ut not with conviction and doesn't pierce the infield.
Maiden from Southee. Wood plays and misses twice but survives. Twenty-seven overs left, two wickets to get.
Wood jabs out a yorker for a single which puts Buttler on strike for Boult who decides to bounce him. He hardly ever bothers to bump anyone but they are usually special when he does and this one jags past Buttler's face as he sways back.
Jos Buttler brings up a deserved half-century with a very fine leg glance for four when Southee drifts on to leg stump. The bowler adusts his line to outside off, but serves up a half volley that Buttler smears for four more through cover point. This has been a very good innings - no doubt forgotten quickly if/when England lose but it has been a terrific knock - judicious, clever and full of pluck.
Boult takes the new ball. The NZ review counter goes back to zero and the bowler comes back over the wicket and is clearly tempting Wood to drive. The batsman is resisting, though, throttling his instinct until the line gives him the opportunity to punch it through pint for two then turn the attempted middle-and-leg yorker through midwicket for two more.
The fielders are making Craig sound like Harbhajan, oohing and ahhing at every ball, but in truth Buttler's judgment is impeccable until the last ball that he cuts for four. The right shot but it flew off the edge and smack between first and second slip at catchable height.
A maiden from Boult, sticking to his round the wicket attack on Wood. Surely going across him would work better. He's no rabbit but there's a reason he bats at No10.
BB McCullum gives Mark Craig two slips an silly point, a wide leg slip and a short leg for Mark Wood who is let off the hook with a wide one that he pushes comfortably through cover for a jogged two. Craig tries to bring the leg trap into play, the one that did for Root (and Bell who had a hand in his own demise), but it leaps above the blade, hits the top of the flap and trickles away for a leg-bye.
The first of 35 overs available to New Zealand to finish the job begins with Trent Boult around the wicket to Jos Buttler, who likes that angle and climbs into a cover drive when given some width, creaming the ball for four. He has four slips and a gully but the pitch has lost its bite - possibly momentarily - and Buttler leaves two alone that just die outside off.
Peter Rowntree has some fascinating thoughts on England's spinning options.
Coming back on the subject of spinners. First of all I resepct your freinds view of Adam Riley. Adam is still a very young spinner learning his trade and will undoubtedly have off days.
Rashid, very fine cricketer and has lots of advantages, not least of which is his batting (99 v Somerset) last week. He is also an attack bowler who will take wickets for you. But there lies an issue, if you want someone to tie down an end, Rashid is not your man, he bowls to get wickets and inevitably they cost him runs. So what you badly need is an economical bowler at the other end, which currently England do not have. Also May not really leggie weather yet, but if the forecasters are right and this will be a long dry summer starting with June, then come July/August Rashid could be a real handful. England have one other issue if they play Rashid and that is Buttler's standing up game is not yet good enough for a bowler of this type getting real turn.
Headingley does its once in a century impression of Multan as Broad falls.
Williamson, with two right-handers to bowl at, has to alter his line and flight. He tosses one up and Wood cannot resist it, driving uppsihly for four about a yard wide of a scrambling mid-off. That's TEA. Two wickets away from victory and four overs away from the new ball. I will resume in 10 minutes.
Spin at both ends with Craig back on the field and into the attack. He lets Wood get away by gliding the ball between the slips for a single then drops short to Buttler who pivots on to his back foot to deposit him into the crowd by the old dressing rooms for six. When I say crowd ...
Wood gets off the mark when Williamson gives him a full toss that is driven between the bowler and mid-on for four. He takes a single off the next ball, again with the wind blowing up the dead grass and dirt, and Williamson pins Buttler at that end for three balls.
Wicket!! Broad b Williamson 23 Drops a little short, Broad roicks back to try to force it through cover for four and drags on. The gale whips up the dust as he played the shot but that's no excuse.
Boult returns and causes Ronchi more problems than Broad, conceding four byes. Buttler defends solidly.
A run apiece for Broad and Buttler both turned through square, Broad's with an inside edge.
Where is the spirit of Swalec in 2009? Isn’t Stuart Broad used to doing rear-guard action if we go back last year to sri-lanka vs England when Jimmy got out on the penultimate ball against them Broad batted for hours then didn’t he? Do you think that Jimmy will have the same task or not?
O my Collingwood and my Swann long ago! Broad survived 24 balls, Anderson 55 a year ago.
Lovely shot from Broad, running it off an open face for four off Henry then punching a vintage Broad backfoot drive throgh the covers for four more. Glenn Miller's signature theme plays as Broad, in the mood, then smashes the last ball of the over off the backfoot over cover for four more.
Wil Craig off, Williamson comes back but isn't as relentlessly accurate as he was in his three one-over spells to date and Broad plays him comfortably after Buttler on-drives for a single.
Buttler takes a single off the first ball. No protecting Broad here and his partner vindicates his faith by gutsily getting into line.
And another from Craig to Broad. No gimme ball that over at the end of which he leaves the field.
Craig again bowls a long hop outside off and is smeared through cover point for four by Broad. On which note, here's Matt Nunn
So it looks like NZ’s much maligned spinner, who Boycott claimed ‘can’t bowl for toffee’ is about to spin his side to victory. Craig might be average, but he’s far better than Moeen. Why will our selectors not gamble with Adil Rashid who has the talent and ability to bowl a side out on a final day pitch. Yes, he might bowl the odd boundary ball, but it’s a risk that’s surely worth taking.
I agree that Rashid has to come into contention. Not for Cardiff, but certainly for Edgbaston and Old Trafford.
Buttler takes a very painful blow on the finger as a ball jams his 'Peter Pointer' into the bat handle. Ouch. Out comes the physio and the ice spray when wagging his hand for a minute does not provide adequate pain relief. That was Henry's comeback for Buttler turning him through midwicket for four. He's all right, though slightly disconcerted, understandably so and follows the next ball that squares him up and snakes away towards first slip.
I know it sounds terrible but I think a loss would do the whole set up a lot of good. Bayliss is going to be heavily involved in the selections from here on, and won’t hesitate to remove the likes of Bell and Ballance. As per the suggestion that Cook was supported by Moores, it’s always been more than obvious that a poor captain was managing a poor coach. The team set up was Cook’s buddies and that’s still why KP is not in the team. Strauss has already bowed to Cook in this way but I don’t think Bayliss will bow to Strauss.
Interesting thoughts, Evan. I don't think selection is in Bayliss's remit yet and Bell and Ballance both scored hundreds in Antigua and were terrific last summer. I don't know what the dynamic between Downton, Moores and Cook was but I'm pretty surem despite everything, the reason KP is not in the team NOW has more to do with the book and Mr Morgan than what happened or didn't happen 18 months ago.
Maiden for Craig. It's a pressure drop. Now it's gone very dark indeed.
Having debagged Moeen Ali, Henry proceeds to give Stuart Broad the heebie jeebies with a fierce lifter that he fends off his nose with the outside edge that gets him four.
Wicket!! Moeen b Henry 2 An epic misjudgment. A monumental mindfreeze. A Gattingesque folly. Arms are shouldered as the ball careers in from round the wicket, pitches outside off and knocks the top of off-stump.
It's certainly a day for the Finn brothers' ode as the sun comes out. Maiden for Craig.
Alan Day has a remedy that would make Duncan Fletcher and the players apoplectic
Do away with central contracts,so that all England players had to play for their counties. They need to play more cricket and compete with all the other county players for positions in the England side. If the England team was picked, as it should be on merit, most of those in the team today would not get in the side.
Henry's bounce forces Buttler on to his toes and he plays it off his sternum round the corner for a single, which puts Moeen on strike. He takes a sighter then leans back on to his points and punches two through the covers with that lovely high backlift.
Cook's demise. The boy stood on the burning deck ...
Only a one-over spell for Williamson as Craig comes on for the last bowl before drinks and delivers a maiden to Moeen.
Henry is causing Buttler a few problems with his angle from wide of the crease and gets one to spear in at him that takes the edge and flies along the ground under gully for four. It feels very fraught now for England.
I suppose depending on how you look at it, England can consider themselves unlucky with the weather, perusing the county scores during lunch it would seem that only Lord's and Headingly hasn't been adversely affected by the rain today.
As far as the England performance, we have had winter ODI tours to SL, the World Cup and then the spring tour of the WINDIES. Some of these players like Bell, Root etc beginning to look a bit jaded, and unless there is a good reason for selection England should consider resting most of their side for the upcoming ODI matches. The best bet would be to select the bulk of the side who played in the truncated game in Ireland which gives us the chance to look at some other players eg. Roy, Billings, Willey etc. I hope too on the spinner front they will select and look at Adam Riley, Mo's bowling has gone backwards and Adam would seem one of the best prospects for the future (with 2019) in mind.
Heard very good things about Adam Riley, Peter, but a friend of mine, who is also a coach, watched him in the T20 at Lord's last week and wasn't at all impressed. But such evidence, as he pointed out, is hardly representative.
Williamson comes up trumps with his slider and ends the over with figures of 3-1-3-2. Enter Moeen. Can he go a couple of balls further than here last year? There are spots of rain on the cameras.
Wicket!! Cook lbw Williamson 56 Back comes golden arm and he gets one to skid on and rap Cook on the knee roll. The captain was unfortunate in that there were two umpire's calls in that - two amber lights and one red. But it was called in the box. Dickie Bird would never have given that.
Given out. Looks plumb. Was there an edge? No. Imapct was umpire's call as was the call on the stumps. OUT!!
Matt Henry comes on for his first burst of the day and his pace immediately makes things happen, digging one in that Buttler has to adjust quickly to avoid. He looked as though he was going to fend it away then dropped his hands. They know that Buttler is vulnerable to the moving ball outside off and they tee him up with one that he does edge but with soft enough hands.
Craig now has a silly point and silly mid-off as well as a slip, leg-slip and forward short square for Cook who patiently waits for the customary bad ball and cuts it for four to bring up his 9,000th Test run. He's the youngest man to get there. There are 12 greats ahead of him
That's fifty for Alastair Cook and 300 runs for the series. It's a gift of a way to get there, Craig dragging another down wide of off-stump and allowing Cook to clump a square cut with a deep 'thock' straight off the meatfor four. The wind is gusting up now. Hats were flying off the umpires so they have now switched to caps.
Definitely 1 forward, 2 or 3 back. Everybody can see that Cook is not a Captain, and never will be. Let him concentrate on being one of our best openers of all time. Tragic that Wood & Lyth didn't get any experience in the Windies. Both look promising. Tragic that in future, selections will no longer be made purely on cricketing ability, but also on whether the player is chums with those two chums 'Cooky' and 'Straussy'.Bell needs a rest. Time for Hales!
Let's pick a fourth seamer if we don't have an international class tweaker.
I would like to think Hales is the next batsman in line. Where would you bat him, though, if Bell were the one to be jettisoned? At No3 and move Ballance down the order?
Southee comes round the wicket to Cook, hangs two outside off-stump and gets a bottom edge that squirts along the ground. he then strays on to Cook's pads and he turns him square for a single. NZ decide to review when Southee bowls across Buttler and his hands follow the ball. There's a sound but it wasn't at all woody. The Kiwis think they've strangled him, nonetheless, but the replay and assorted gizmos back the umpire.
Beardie Craig has two slips, two leg slips and a short leg for Buttler now and though he receives vociferous encouragement from the cordon when he beats the bat and hits the pad outside off, Buttler isn't troubled by the other five. Maiden.
Strike rotation ahoy. Good policy from England, avoiding the clampdown. Buttler is very good at the pressure-relieving dab and flick.
Craig hasn't found his line today and is now losing his length, giving Cook a long-hop outside off that he cuts stylishly for four and then tossing one up and inviting Buttler down the track to drive sweetly through midwicket for four more.
Sadly its 1 step forward and 3 back. That’s because the right selections were not made in the West Indies, and we still have a captain who is a poor captain and man-manager (though a very good batsman). The main issues are to find a captain, to replace Bell, and to find a spinner. Easier said than done. Though we may have found Cook’s opening partner. But why oh why oh why weren’t the issues recognised before the team went to the West Indies? So the next stage needs to start with new selectors.
I am no enthusiast for James Whitaker, Tony, but they do not pick the Test XI on tour or indeed at home. They select the squad then it's down to the captain and coach to chose who to leave out. The word is that Alastair Cook wanted Jonathan Trott, Moeen Ali and Chris Jordan rather than Adam Lyth, Adil Rashid and Mark Wood/Liam Plunkett. And Peter Moores backed him.
Southee continues even though Boult has been the danger man (if you discount IR Bell being a danger to himself at the moment). Cook pulls the first ball for a single. Southee has five balls at Buttler and makes him play at only two, one which takes an edge but it scoots along the ground to gully.
Expensive over from Craig who has no protection and doesn't want any, given the match situation. Buttler flicks him off the pad, through the air for two, sashays towards the bowler and turns him through midwicket for four, clips him squarer for another. You see the problem? Yes, he's bowling on middle, middle and leg and Buttler is happy to milk him. One spins so much from that line that it scuttles down for four byes and Craig ends the over by appealing for catch at bat-pad after Buttler covered his stumps but the ball was nowhere near the edge. Fourteen off the over. This is on!
Cook plays out a maiden, resolutely blocking three and astutely letting the other three from Southee past. Craig will come on for Williamson. Funky captaincy has its limits once the heist has been pulled off.
Not much has been made of the fact that Brendan McCullum put England in at Lords and despite gaining an initial advantage ultimately lost. Now Alastair Cook looks to have done the same thing. I thought there was an old adage that captains were only allowed to think about bowling first in test matches as long as they never put it in to practice.
I suspect it's the month, Geoff, that proves to be the clincher. That even given the ubiquitous fine drainage (too fine) that they can't help but be excited by any hint of moisture and the thickness of the clouds. And now the sun's come out!
Golden arm Williamson resumes on his adopted home turf and begins with a fat juicy pie of a full bunger that Buttler is so surprised to see that he slaps it along the ground to cover. The next one is pitched up and Buttler opens the face and spears it past extra cover for two. He's surrounded with silly point, slip, leg slip and forward short square. Blocker Buttler shows all four the maker's name.
That sky looks bit black over Rob's mother's/filthy/pregnant/ripe/ready to spring to England's rescue. And why has no one saluted Yorkshire over their white rose floodlight decorations?
Rob Smyth, gentleman, the best OBOer in the business bar none, our guide here through the past two Ashes series and much of last year has a book out to whet all appetites for the rest of the summer: Gentlemen and Sledgers : A History of the Ashes in 100 Quotations. I haven't read anything but the extracts, but the identity of the author is recommendation enough for me.
Charlie says quite firmly below that Joe Root's fighting talk last night was ridiculous. I prefer the interpretation that he could not realistically have said anything else even if history, logic, what happened here last year against the Sri Lankans and an accurate assessment of his team-mates' form were stacked against them. "Nah, we're going to prop and cough and play for the draw," would have been an even bigger hostage to fortune.
Good afternoon, everyone. It's been a while. What did you make of the morning's play? Thrilling, I thought. I've spent many an hour sitting freezing my nuts off at Headingley over the past 35 years but even given the gale (I much prefer the Gale) I wish I had been there this morning. Anger again seems to be brewing on social media where the word 'pathetic' seems to be a familiar refrain. For what it's worth, I think this is what you get with a side that is being rebuilt, with half the players having fewer than 20 caps. What we have to discern is whether Lord's to here, lunch on the fifth day in beautiful if bracing LS6, is two steps forward, one step back, two steps forward, two steps back or even two steps forward, three steps back. I'd welcome your thoughts via rob.bagchi@telegraph.co.uk
Anyway, thanks for joining me for the first session - I'll now leave you in the very capable hands of Rob Bagchi.
Cook batting very solidly from England, but some tentative hitting, and dreadful decision-making (mainly Bell) has left England massively up against it.
Root's fighting talk from last night looks utterly ridiculous now, especially when the team has looked so short of confidence this morning.
The key stats from what was a dreadful session for England.
Craig continues from the Football Stand End, meaning New Zealand have spin coming from both sides. McCullum tries in vain to catch Cook off his pad, but the ball just dies and Cook hangs on. End of the over, end of the session, and that's lunch.
Kane Williamson comes in, bowling off-spin from the Kirkstall Lane End. Cook has a little hit out, but very solid fielding ensures it only goes for a single. Williamson then ups the pace on Stokes, and it nearly decieves in, but he hangs on in there. But he's gone next ball!
Wicket! Stokes 29 c Ronchi b Williamson Quicker delivery, and Williamson gets a wicket in his first over of the day. Excellent captaincy from McCullum again to make that change, as Williamson outfoxes Stokes, and England are in a real hole now. FOW 102/5
Buttler comes in, and he stays in on the final ball of the over.
Ouch, that looked extremely nasty. Stokes is smashed by a Southee delivery right where you don't want to be smashed. He's smiling ruefully but he looks to be in an awful lot of pain. Everyone else is trying their best to conceal laughter. As am I. The batsman recovers his composure though, and sees out the over. Another maiden.
Craig getting plenty of encouragement from his team-mates, but he can't quite snare Cook in what's another maiden over.
Cook looking so assured at the crease (I'm sure I've just jinxed him) and he gets the over underway with a single. Southee is then short with his delivery , and Stokes smashes it away for another boundary - he's 29 from 40 balls now.
Stokes finding a good balance at the moment of hitting out when he can, and he's at it again to thwack Craig away for a four. The bowler finds a better length for the rest of the over though and almost has Stokes leg before, but it's drifting wide of off stump.
New Zealand would love to get Cook out before lunch, and Southee is ramping up the pressure. But Cook keeps his focus and helps himself to a three. Stokes is similarly disciplined and he claims a single to end the over.
There's no-one at mid-off and Stokes is free to slide it away for four. Craig still varying his length, which is keeping Stokes guessing. McCullum adds another catcher to silly point, but no further breakthrough.
Southee back on, and he's tempting Cook into a wayward shot, but the England captain again using his experience to resist. A couple of bouncers in there as well - awkward over but Cook comes through. Maiden over.
Craig's delivery is a fraction short, and Stokes smashes it away for four. The bowler starts to find his range though and Stokes has to cling on for the rest of the over.
The wind is picking up, and there's a comedy moment as Boult loses the ball as he's about to deliver to Cook. Stokes and the captain both pick up singles, before the former steals another one to maintain a semblance of momentum. Three from the over.
A veritable feast of runs all of a sudden, as Stokes nudges one down the hill for three. Ooh, and then that is a superb delivery from Craig, turning perfectly, but it just misses the wicket - Cook will be a relieved man.
Cook with a single, and then oh yes! That is a boundary - Stokes sweeping it away for a four, a lovely clean shot. He follows that up with a single, with Boult not quite finding the line he's after.
Cook's single has him back on strike, and Craig is still looking full of confidence and brio. The England captain produces a powerful sweep shot, but it smashes onto Latham's arm. That looked extremely painful. Cook does manage a single though to keep the scoreboard trundling along.
Boult back in, and he's still varying things up a little, with a few fuller deliveries. But what's this? It's another run! Cook with a nick past the leg slip down all the way to long leg for a single.
Craig delivers to Stokes for the first time, and the batsmen tickles a slightly too full delivery wide of slip for a pair. He'll feel better getting off the mark - and he's already beaten Bell and Root's combined total. As the players have a quick drinks break, here's the dreadfull scoreboard so far...
Cook stops the decline with a pair, but New Zealand are absolutely purring here.
Wicket! Bell 1 c Williamson b Craig Caught at leg slip - what on earth was he trying there? He fell right into the trap laid by McCullum, and had looked uncomfortable throughout the over. FOW 62/3
In comes Root, and he's caught as well! Gone at short leg second ball!
Wicket! Root 0 c Latham b Craig What a catch that is from Latham - he cradles the ball as it crashes towards him at short leg. FOW 62/4
Interesting, it's Boult who steps aside for Southee, who is straight in bowling at Bell. The England man looks a little rattled, but keeps his focus and claims a single on the last ball to get himself off the mark.
Bell's in (I really really hope for his sake he delivers here), as Cook gets back on strike, and digs in. It looks like Craig is going to be replaced shortly by Southee to offer the right-handed Bell a different test. Another good probing maiden.
Great battle between Boult and Cook, and at the moment the England captain is standing firm. A couple of excellent leaves again, and he follows that up with a three, smacking the rough side of the ball with that strong left arm. McCullum adds a leg gully in for Ballance, and that's a wicket!
Wicket! Ballance 6 b Boult Beautiful delivery clean bowls the England man, jamming him up on leg stump, and to be honest that had been coming for the last few overs. That absolutely cannoned into the stumps. FOW 61/2
Craig not quite getting his length right this morning- he's a bit full and Cook is able to steal a single. Ballance under pressure, but he's not cracked yet.
Cook gets a nick to pick up a single, which puts Ballance quickly back on strike. And it's a boundary! Ballance flicks it to fine leg for four, for the first boundary of the day. Just 13 runs from the first 10 overs of the session.
Ballance picks up his first runs of the innings, with a swept drive for two off Craig. Debate as to whether starting with Craig's off-spin was the right decision - he's not conceding many runs, but he's not looking particularly threatening either.
Good leave from Cook as Boult tries to tempt him in with an awkward delivery swinging away from the left-hander. The England captain then manages to keep the scoreboard ticking with a pair. I wonder if Joe Root still thinks England are going to win this. Maybe they will. And maybe Fifa aren't so bad after all.
Cook starts the over with a single as Craig is denied yet another maiden over. McCullum puts another man close in to the bat as Ballance gets back on strike.
Boult bowling to Ballance, with good length - hoping for his fourth dismissal of the series against Ballance. McCullum has New Zealand all over him, but he just clings on.
Gary Ballance is in, but it's Cook who's on strike. Another maiden from Craig, who is yet to concede a run this morning.
WICKET! Lyth 24 c Ronchi b Boult. Great delivery that's just moving away and Lyth can't resist a wafer-thin nick. He probably did need to hit that, but will be very disappointed to be out so early. FOW 47/1
Cook remains on strike after that three, and McCullum has set up the field to tempt Cook into sweeping, which he's resisting so far. But that's another maiden over, as New Zealand start day five well.
Trent Boult takes over, bowling to Alastair Cook. The ball is turning nicely from the straight, on what looks like an excellent Test match pitch. Cook just feeling his way in as he looks to get settled on this final day, and he picks up his first runs with three just wide of gully. Lovely control on that shot.
An odd start from Craig, with one delivery flying out of his hand and ending up at mid-wicket. Last delivery is more imposing drifting in on the breeze, and that's a maiden over.
Here we go, we're back underway with Mark Craig bowling to Adam Lyth...
Meanwhile, let's get the juices flowing with this unbelievable catch from Chris Jordan yesterday to get Steven Mullaney out.
The weather at the moment is very drab and overcast, but hurrah, it's not raining! And the forecast looks ok for the rest of the day.
England need 4.19 runs an over to win today - and as this graph shows, that'll need a pretty drastic increase on recent averages. But let's not forget that a draw would of course secure the two-Test series.
And here, thanks to our friends at Cricinfo, are the highest ever fourth innings totals. There's only ever been one successful run chase in excess of 400 in England, and that was in 1948 involving a certain Don Bradman.
Good morning and welcome to the fifth and final day of the second Test between England and New Zealand.
Joe Root of course is claiming England still have a great chance of winning today, but to do so would be a staggering achievement.
England need 411 runs to win today, which would be a fourth innings stand of 455.
Email any thoughts you have to charlie.eccleshare@telegraph.co.uk or tweet me @cdeccleshare
Play is scheduled to start at 11am (weather permitting), but in the meantime have a perusal of the articles above and the preview below.
Joe Root is hoping his home crowd have the same appetite to cheer on England as thousands did at Lord's last week when Alastair Cook's team were pushing for victory there.
England's bowlers got the job done on day five at HQ to make it 1-0 with one to play - the second Investec Test which will conclude at Headingley on Tuesday.
This time, the onus will be on vice-captain Root and his fellow batsmen to try to pull off an improbable win - in pursuit of a world-record 455 - or close out a stalemate, with all 10 wickets still standing at start of play.
Root can expect to be involved at some stage from number five, weather permitting.
But it will be Cook and another Yorkshireman, Adam Lyth, who must set the tone after they negotiated 13 overs to move to 44 without loss only for rain to then wipe out play from early afternoon on day four.
There are still 98 overs scheduled, in which England can either resist or attack - in the knowledge that, if they are bowled out and therefore defeated, the series will be shared.
Root insists victory, and 2-0 to England, is very much on his agenda.
"Look at last week and the atmosphere and environment that was created at Lord's from everyone who came to watch," he said.
"You'd love that to be exactly the same here. It'd be great to get as many people in as we can."
Headingley was full, or very nearly, on days one and two - but less well-populated since.
Root has it in mind to reward those who turn up to witness the outcome, with entry just £5 for adults and free to accompanied under-16s.
"There is quite a bit of work to do, but we've got an opportunity to do something special," he added.
"At least one person is obviously going to have to stand up and play a really important innings.
"(But) you look around that changing room, and one to 11 they are match-winners really.
"We've got every opportunity to go out there and chase them down."
England are up against it, thanks largely to BJ Watling (120) who became the first New Zealander to make a Test hundred at this venue.
Mark Craig (58no) and Tim Southee then also shared an eighth-wicket stand of 67 in under nine overs.
Root said: "Watling played an exceptional knock, and towards the end they probably got a hundred more than we'd have liked really.
"But we're in the position we are, and we've still got a chance of winning the game - which is very exciting."
Watling believes his team have an outstanding chance of victory, but knows it will not be easy.
He said: "We've still got 98 overs and a good 30 overs with the second new ball, so we're definitely backing ourselves to win the game.
"We know England won't back down and they'll be tough to get out ... so we're going to come out strong and try to pick up some early wickets and put them under some pressure."
Join Charlie from 10.30am for all the action...