San Francisco Giants win World Series
Listen to BBC commentary of all five World Series games on BBC iPlayer (UK users only) The San Francisco Giants won their first World Series in over fifty years as a 3-1 defeat of the Texas Rangers in game five sealed a 4-1 overall victory. That gave the Giants their first World Series title since the franchise moved from New York to San Francisco in 1954. Shortstop Renteria, later named the Most Valuable Player of the series, connected at the top of the seventh to help claim baseball's Fall Classic. Renteria, 35, is no stranger to World Series heroics having also delivered the winning hit for the Florida Marlins in game seven of the 1997 World Series. "It was a tough year for me," said the Colombian, who spent three separate periods out of action this season with injuries. "I appreciate the organisation because they have patience in me and I told myself to keep working." Closer Brian Wilson struck out Nelson Cruz to end the game, setting off wild celebrations among the Giants' players and coaching staff. It also capped a remarkable run for a team that will take a first title home to San Francisco after falling short in the Fall Classics of 1962, 1989 and 2002. After securing a play-off berth on the last day of the regular season, the Giants beat the Atlanta Braves and then eliminated the twice-defending NL champions Philadelphia Phillies to reach the World Series. "I couldn't be prouder," said winning manager Bruce Bochy. "That just goes to show what a team can do that plays with heart and determination." Starting pitcher Tim Lincecum was in dominant form for the Giants, pitching eight innings and allowing three hits and two walks while striking out 10. He gave up a solo home run to Nelson Cruz in the seventh inning for the Rangers' only score. His Texas counterpart Cliff Lee was equally brilliant through six innings, matching Lincecum until the seventh. Singles to centre by Cody Ross and Juan Uribe began that inning and a sacrifice bunt moved them to second and third. With the infield drawn in, Lee struck out Pat Burrell for the second out and appeared on the verge of escaping the jam. But on a 2-0 pitch and with first base open, Lee hung a cutter up high to Renteria, who made the most of the mistake by driving the ball over the wall left of centre field to clear the bases for a 3-0 lead. "It was a classic pitchers' duel down to that home run," said a downcast Lee. "Nobody in this room is more disappointed than I am." The defeat put an end to the Rangers' hopes of winning a first World Series in their 50th year as a franchise. "I congratulate the San Francisco Giants, they are truly the champions," said Texas manager Ron Washington. "I'm very proud of my players. They played the game with passion." Former catcher Bochy played on a losing San Diego Padres team in the 1984 World Series and managed the Padres to a Series loss in 1998. "This is your dream," he added. "That's what the game is about, being in this moment right now."