PGA of America pulls plug on Grand Slam
ORLANDO, Fla. (AP) — The PGA Grand Slam of Golf, canceled last year because it was on a Donald Trump golf course, ended for good on Wednesday when the PGA of America decided it no longer fit in the changing landscape of golf.
The Grand Slam was a 36-hole exhibition for the four major champions of the year that dates to 1979 and had been played continuously since 1986 in Chicago, the California desert, Hawaii and Bermuda. It took place after the final stop on the PGA Tour.
It was to be played at Trump National in Los Angeles last year until the PGA of America decided to move it because of all the attention on Trump's remarks about Mexican immigrants when he announced he was running for president. It never found another golf course and canceled the event for the year.
Now, the PGA says it no longer makes sense to play.
"After carefully evaluating the PGA Grand Slam of Golf over the past few years and studying how this event fits with today's golf landscape and the PGA of America's long term strategic plan, the PGA has decided to discontinue the event," it said in a statement.
The PGA cited the PGA Tour wraparound schedule, which starts in October; the European Tour having its lucrative final series ending in November; and other international events (such as the Olympics this year) making it hectic for major champions to attend.
It also said the Grand Slam struggled to attract fans, TV viewers and media interest.
Martin Kaymer won the last Grand Slam in 2014 in Bermuda.
Tiger Woods played for the first time as an alternate in 1998 and won the first of seven titles, including one year when he won by 14 shots in 36 holes. Woods won all of his PGA Grand Slam events at Poipu Bay in Hawaii. That also was where Phil Mickelson shot 59 in 2004.
Jim Furyk won it twice, even though he won only one major. Furyk played three times as an alternate.
If a major champion couldn't attend, or if a player won multiple majors, the PGA of America selected a former major champion as an alternate. There was only one exception over the years: former Chicago Bears coach Mike Ditka. He played in 1990 at Kemper Lakes outside Chicago when the format was a pro-am and U.S. Open champion Curtis Strange had to withdraw for what was described as "intestinal issues."
The Grand Slam had its longest run at Poipu Bay, where it was held for 13 years. It moved in 2007 to Bermuda and stayed for eight years until moving to Trump National in Los Angeles, where it was never played.
The PGA of America still has two majors scheduled for Trump courses: the Senior PGA Championship in 2017 at Trump National outside Washington, and the PGA Championship in 2022 at Trump National in New Jersey.