Double gold for Kiwi pairs at Karapiro
Hamish Bond (left) and Eric Murray receive their gold medals on the dais.
The gold medal hangs from the neck of Eric Murray, who won the men's coxless pair with Hamish Bond.
After winning bronze in the women's single sculls, Emma Twigg carries her boat from the water.
Mahe Drysdale shows off his silver medal from the men's single sculls.
Emma Dwyer (left) and Sophie Wylie cheer on club-mates Juliette Haigh and Rebecca Scown in the women's coxless pairs final.
Hamish Bond (front) and Eric Murray carry their boat from the water at Lake Karapiro.
Emma Twigg prepares her boat after taking bronze in the women's single sculls final.
The New Zealand men's and women's coxless pairs have taken gold this afternoon at the Rowing World Championships in Lake Karapiro.
Men's coxless pair Hamish Bond and Eric Murray had a nail-biting finish, winning by just 0.32 of a second.
Minutes earlier, the Kiwi women's pair of Juliette Haigh and Rebecca Scown crushed the field to pick up New Zealand's first gold medal at the championships.
Mahe Drysdale rowed a hard race but was beaten by the Czech Republic's Ondrej Synek. Emma Twigg, New Zealand's entry in the women's single sculls race, earned herself a bronze.
Haigh and Scown did it in a canter, winning by two boat lengths and more than three seconds.
They started slowly and were back in the pack at the 250m mark, but by 500m they were less than half a second behind the British boat.
From there it was all Kiwi as Haigh and Scown demolished their opposition in the most emphatic style.
The pushed hard to the halfway mark and just when the other crews should have been digging in to take time out of them, the New Zealanders found another gear and motored away even further.
Although British pair Helen Glover and Heather Stanning won the silver medal, daylight was second in this race.
New Zealand's expected biggest competition, the United States pair of Zsuzsanna Francia and Erin Cafaro, started dreadfully and were last halfway through the race.
They left their run too late to defend their title won last year in Poland, but did enough to pip Australians Sarah Tait and Phoebe Stanley into fourth. Canada and Germany finished fifth and sixth respectively.
The gold is Scown's second medal in a row in the event after she and Emma Fetahery teamed-up to win bronze in Poland last year.
Today's gold was the first in the event since Gifu, Japan in 2005.
Haigh was in that boat too, alongside Nicky Coles, the same pairing that won silver the next year in England.
The Kiwi-British rivalry lived up to the hype in the men's coxless pair, but the New Zealand's duo of Eric Murray and Hamish Bond won by a narrow margin.
Bond and Murray were pushed harder than they have been recently only won the final by .3 of a second. British pair Pete Reed and Andrew Triggs Hodge have now lost 12 straight races to the Kiwis, but with 500m to go, their duck looked to be broken.
Earlier the Greek pair of Georgios Tziallas and Ioannis Christou got the final off to a flying pace.
It forced the Brits and Kiwis to counter and the race remained at a frantic pace. While the Greeks tired and fell away, Reed and Triggs Hodge were able to keep the defending world champion Kiwis at bay.
At the 1500m mark, the Brits still held a 0.6 second lead, but with just 400m to go Murray and Bond pounced. They sky rocketed their rate and pushed past the Brits. Reed and Triggs Hodge countered, but it was too late and the New Zealanders were able to hold on to the delight of the boisterous crowd.
Murray and Bond's gold kept alive New Zealand's brilliant run in the event. They have medalled - thanks to Nathan Twaddle, George Bridgewater, Bond and Murray - in every world championships since Gifu, Japan in 2005.