Gebrselassie, Forced to Drop Out, Says He Is Retiring
“I never think about retiring,” he said. “For the first time, this is the day. Let me stop and do other work after this. Let me do other jobs. Let me give a chance for the youngsters.”
Perhaps his body had finally betrayed him once too often after nearly two decades as a top runner. If so, Gebrselassie was in no mood for explanation.
“I don’t want to complain anymore after this,” he said. “Which means it’s better to stop here.”
Of course, it is possible that his decision was made more from emotion than reason and that Gebrselassie will reconsider. He had planned at the least to run a marathon in Tokyo in February and in the 2012 London Olympics.
“He has to change his plans,” said his countryman Gebre Gebremariam, 26, who learned about Gebrselassie in school as a boy and won Sunday’s race in 2:08:14. “He is just special for us.”
Gebrselassie’s right knee began hurting about two weeks ago, as he trained so insistently that he turned off his mobile phone to avoid distractions, said Mary Wittenberg, the race director.
He felt more irritation after a workout Monday, and the knee apparently did not improve during the 4,500-mile flight from Ethiopia to New York on Thursday.
“He knew he had a serious knee problem,” Wittenberg said. “He wanted to try to see if it would settle down.”
It would not. On Saturday, Gebrselassie had a magnetic resonance imaging test that revealed tendinitis. He also had fluid drained from the knee. He seemed incredulous.
“I thought this was not that serious,” he said. “Why this happen?”
In truth, the injury probably could have been rehabilitated for Sunday’s race with proper medical care, Wittenberg said, but “it’s a different mind-set in Ethiopia.”
She added: “In the U.S., professional athletes are treated like serious athletes. In Ethiopia, they just run.”
The possibility that Gebrselassie would not be able to start Sunday became “quite high,” Wittenberg said. On the bus to the start, he confided to Gebremariam, “If I finish, I’m special.”
If Gebrselassie retires now, his elevated place in distance running remains secure as the setter of 27 world records, including the current mark in the marathon at 2 hours 3 minutes 59 seconds. No one has equaled Gebrselassie’s breadth of accomplishment — world championships or world records from the metric mile to 26.2 miles, along with two Olympic gold medals at 10,000 meters.
“From 5K to the marathon, he has nothing to prove,” said Meb Keflezighi, the 2009 New York champion and the 2004 Olympic silver medalist from San Diego. “He’s the greatest, probably, distance runner ever.”
If an asterisk accompanies his career, it is because Gebrselassie’s best marathon times came in a kind of laboratory setting, virtual time trials instead of conventional races, carried along by pacesetters on flat courses in Berlin and in Dubai.
That was the big question about New York. Could Gebrselassie win a marathon on an undulating course in a race that involved a deep field and a pace that surged and slowed like turnpike traffic? His history now says that no, he cannot.
“This is an important race for Haile,” George Hirsch, the chairman of the New York Road Runners, which operates the marathon, had said Friday. “If he wins, the word ‘arguably’ would be removed from his title as the greatest distance runner.”
The only challenger to that mythical title, in Hirsch’s view, is Emil Zatopek, the Czech star who won the 5,000 and 10,000 meters and the marathon at the 1952 Olympics in Helsinki, Finland, in the days before the explosion of East African runners.
But Gebrselassie did not finish Sunday, and “arguably” sticks to his reputation like gum on the bottom of a shoe. If he reconsiders, he could find inspiration in the knowledge that Carlos Lopes of Portugal won the 1984 Olympic marathon at 37. But, whether he continues or retires, time is closing in.
For the second time this year, Gebrselassie could not finish a race in New York. In March, he dropped out of a half-marathon here, complaining of breathing difficulties. That problem was said to have been resolved with spray to sooth his irritated nasal passages.
Just before Sunday’s race, in a television interview, Gebrselassie kept a brave front about a “small problem” in his knee. “I don’t think it will interrupt me,” he added. But he did not seem totally convinced.
He said he would not push the pace.
“I want to watch” the others, he said. “I want to stay behind.”
Gebrselassie is a gregarious man who transcended the sport of distance running at a time when Kenyans and Ethiopians are so successful that they have become anonymous in their dominance. His life has broadened far beyond running.
In recent years, Gebrselassie essentially split his time between sport and business, having built two schools, a gym and a hotel and opened an automobile dealership. He employed at least 600 people directly and perhaps 400 indirectly in one of the world’s poorest countries.
He spoke Friday of his dual responsibilities, about running, but also about insurance and health care for his employees and how “if the businesses fail, it’s the failure of the life of the people.”
Laughing, he recounted how his father, a subsistence farmer, did not want him to become an athlete. And how he changed his mind when Gebrselassie was awarded a Mercedes-Benz for winning the 10,000 at the 1993 world track and field championships — the first of many international titles.
“His sheer endurance in an endurance sport is unbelievable,” Hirsch said.
Wearing gloves to shield the 40-degree chill and a 13-mile-per-hour north wind, Gebrselassie ran Sunday with his left arm familiarly wide, a result of carrying his books back and forth to school as a boy. But instead of running fully upright, Gebrselassie frequently kept his head down against the wind and perhaps against the pain in his knee. Finally, at Mile 16, on the downhill portion of the Queensboro Bridge, he just stopped.
“He said downhills were his problem,” Keflezighi said. “Uphills were fine.”
Later, Gebrselassie said he would not run again. “Will I miss the race?” he said. “It’s hard to me, hard because. ...”
He did not finish the thought. He thanked the reporters in attendance. And then limped away. “It’s better not to complain anymore,” he said.
His retirement would not be accepted, Wittenberg said later. She advised Gebrselassie to reconsider. But she knew the decision would be up to him.
“This is the kind of athlete that when you’ve performed to the highest of highs, he may very well decide that it’s enough,” Wittenberg said. “A knee injury with two weeks to go happens to mere mortals, you know.”