Jim Furyk shoots 58 at Travelers Championship for lowest PGA Tour round ever
CROMWELL, Conn. -- Jim Furyk no longer has to share a piece of PGA Tour history. It's all his.
One of six players to shoot a 59 in PGA Tour competition, Furyk one-upped himself Sunday in the final round of the Travelers Championship, posting the first 58 in tour history.
"There's a lot of rounds by a lot of great players ahead of me that have never reached 58, so to hold that record alone right now, on the PGA Tour at least ... is phenomenal," Furyk said. "To have a little, small place in history is something you dream of."
Furyk started hot, playing his first four holes of the day in 4-under. He closed the front nine with four consecutive birdies to shoot a course-record 27 then opened the back nine with three more birdies.
From there, it seemed like his inevitable sub-59 score might not be so inevitable after all. He made par on the par-5 13th hole then followed with two more on Nos. 14 and 15.
Furyk needed to make one more birdie for the magic mark, and it came in the form of a 23-footer on the par-3 16th hole.
He closed with a pair of pars, hitting all 18 greens in regulation, to set the single-round record on the par-70 TPC River Highlands course.
"I'm hitting it well, I'm putting it well. It's trying to find a way to stay out of your own way really," Furyk said. "And don't let any thoughts leak in."
After posting a third-round 72 on Saturday, Furyk sent video of his swing to his father, Mike, who also serves as his instructor. The older Furyk offered a few tips as well as confirmation that his son had been working on the proper mechanics.
Perhaps more impressively is that, mired in a share of 70th place, Furyk continued grinding toward a strong finish.
"Rather than just kind of mailing it in, I went to the range," he said. "I just didn't want to go shoot another 72 and hit it like I did yesterday. It would have been easy to do, but I wanted to practice and kind of get some momentum."
After the 58 was completed, when asked to name his most important shot of the week, Furyk pointed to a 7-foot par putt on Friday afternoon that helped him make the tournament cut on the number.
Furyk's first score in the 50s came in the second round of the 2013 BMW Championship. He is now the only player with multiple sub-60 rounds in PGA Tour history.
He was 1-over entering Sunday and wrapped up the Travelers Championship at 11-under 269. Furyk moved up 65 places Sunday to finish fifth as Russell Knox claimed the win at 14-under.
Information from The Associated Press contributed to this report.