AFL grand final: Western Bulldogs' moments of magic that decided the 2016 premiership
Grand finals are made of moments, each of which is pored over for months and years in the search for the whys of the day.
No team wins all of them on grand final day, but usually the team that wins the most will go home with the cup. On the biggest stage in 2016, it was the Western Bulldogs who made the little moments matter.
When reflecting on what a classic grand final, there will likely be too much good to choose from, but a handful do stand out from the rest.
These are the moments that won the 2016 grand final for the Western Bulldogs.
It was early days and a goal apiece in the first quarter, when a squaring kick hung at half-forward for the Bulldogs. Isaac Heeney was in pole position.
You can bet Easton Wood knew his team-mates were looking at him for leadership in this moment, and so he unflinchingly committed to the cause.
He did not take the mark, but he won the ball. Lachie Hunter profited on Wood's commitment and spotted up Tory Dickson, who made no mistake.
Wood stood up time and again during the game, but the skipper made his biggest mark earliest and the Bulldogs never looked back.
The Bulldogs have combined toughness with exhilarating flair during the 2016 season, and it was important they didn't sacrifice one for the other on the big day.
They proved their toughness early, but had a little bit of trouble turning their attacking play into results. By midway through the second quarter, that had all changed.
The Bulldogs ran the ball the length of the field before it found its way to Picken in the pocket. His exchange with Hunter — which included an audacious over-the-head handball —ended in a perfect snap for goal.
At the time the Dogs looked to be pulling away, and though they did not (not at that point, anyway) they had laid down a marker to the Swans and proved they were not going to be scared into their shells.
The Swans had the momentum and a handy lead in the closing stages of the second-quarter.
But their half-time lead was trimmed and their momentum obliterated when Toby McLean bobbed up — not unlike a cork in the ocean — to manufacture a snap and goal.
It would have sent John Longmire mad. The Swans were 11 seconds away from surviving to the break but McLean changed everything.
Josh Kennedy dominated the first half like few ever have in a grand final. He had 22 disposals and two goals to the long break, and looked a sure bet for the Norm Smith.
His influence waned in the third quarter, but his danger did not. Midway through the third term, with the game completely in the balance, he popped up in the same sort of spot he had been dobbing goals from all day.
But this time Dale Morris, a veteran Bulldog surely still disbelieving of how far this team has come, threw everything he had at the ball and Kennedy.
The smother stopped the attack, and Kennedy never threatened in the same way again.
Make no mistake, Tom Boyd was an absolute revelation in his first grand final. Anyone who still has any doubts over this former number one draft pick, or questions if he is worth the money he is paid must surely have been silenced.
He clunked mark after mark in his sticky mitts, competed brilliantly in the ruck, won clearances and crucially kicked three goals, the last of which sealed the flag.
Norm Smith winner Jason Johannisen had just had a goal overturned, and there was a risk the setback would trouble the Dogs. Not today.
Morris again stepped up with a tackle on Lance Franklin that stopped the big Swan in his tracks and caused a spillage, at which point Boyd seized his moment. One step from 60 metres, bang. The flag belonged to the Bulldogs.