Novak Djokovic leads Serbia to maiden Davis Cup win after beating France
Viktor Troicki and Novak Djokovic had their heads shaved in celebration after sealing Serbia’s first Davis Cup title in Belgrade
Troicki was left shocked after he secured the title with a straight-sets win over Michael Llodra in the decisive fifth rubber in Belgrade.
After Novak Djokovic had earlier levelled the tie at 2-2 by beating Gael Monfils, the 24-year-old Troicki produced the match of his life to win 6-2 6-2 6-3.
Troicki's success came just 24 hours after he and doubles partner Nenad Zimonjic surrendered a two-set lead to lose and give France a 2-1 advantage heading into the final day.
He was therefore a surprise selection to replace Janko Tipsarevic for the do-or-die encounter, but responded with a career-defining performance in front of a parochial home crowd.
'I am in shock. After the last shot I really couldn't believe that this happened,' he said.
'I think for the next few days I will still feel a little bit different. 'It will be maybe five days until I will feel the real expression and the real feeling of this win.
'This is the most intense pressure ever in my life and to win it in front of my home crowd I think is the best possible way.
'I don't have any words, seriously. It's unbelievable.'
The mood inside the Belgrade Arena had already been stoked after an emotional 6-2 6-2 6-4 win from Djokovic, who wore his heart on his sleeve in typical style.
The world No 3 was clearly pumped up for the occasion as he revelled in the home support.
It served to inspire him as he raced through the opening two sets before the 12th-ranked Monfils battled back in the third.
The Frenchman twice broke to lead and Djokovic's emotions looked set to overwhelm him as he at one stage smashed his racquet to pieces.
But the Serbian rallied to immediately break back on each occasion before claiming the win to set the scene for Troicki's memorable success.
Serbia captain Bogdan Obradovic, whose decision to call-up Troicki proved a masterstroke, praised the spirit of his side after they also recovered from a 2-1 deficit to win their semi-final against Slovakia.
'I want to congratulate my team, they did very, very good especially in the third day,' he said.