Sauna contest leaves Russian dead and champion Finn in hospital
The annual sauna world championship in Finland has been called off after a Russian man died after spending six minutes enduring a temperature of 110C.
Vladimir Ladyzhenskiy was pronounced dead after being dragged from the sauna by judges. Police were investigating the cause of death.
Another competitor, Timo Kaukonen from Finland, was also pulled out and is being treated in hospital for burns. Officials said the competition will not run again.
This was the 12th world sauna championships, where competitors try to outlast others in the heat and steam. The event has been held in Heinola, 86 miles north-east of Helsinki, since 1999.
Ladyzhenskiy and Kaukonen had made it through to the final ahead of more than 130 other participants, but six minutes into the contest, judges noticed something was wrong with the Russian, and dragged both competitors from the sauna.
Both middle-aged men were seen to have severe burns on their bodies and were given first aid after they collapsed.
Ossi Arvela, head of the championships, said the event had been immediately suspended following the incident, and confirmed police were investigating.
"All the rules were followed and enough first aid personnel were in place," Arvela said in a statement, adding that all the competitors had been required to present a doctor's certificate before taking part.
Saija Jäppinen, cultural secretary at Heinola City Council, later announced the end of the event. "After this incident we decided that this game is over and done," she said.
Rules in the competition require the sauna to be heated to 110 C (230 F). Water is added to the stove every 30 seconds and the last person to remain in the sauna wins.
Competitors must verify their condition by giving a thumbs up to judges when asked, and be able to leave the sauna unaided.
Kaukonen is a five-time winner of the event and reigning champion, while Ladyzhenskiy is believed to have come third in last year's contest.
• This article was amended on 10 August 2010. The original implied that Saija Jäppinen was cultural secretary of Finland and referred to her as "he". This has been corrected.