CRICKET WORLD CUP FINAL 2011: India v Sri Lanka LIVE
Dhoni thumps the ball high into the night sky over deep midwicket for SIX. India are world champions!
Successive boundaries reduces the deficit to juts five. it's been a plucky effort from the Sri Lankans, but they are going to miss out again. As Bumble would say, 'start the tuk tuk.'
Cripes, this is nervy stuff. India can't believe how close they are to winning the World Cup, Sri Lanka know they only need a couple of good overs to put India right under the pump. It's still touch and go, let me tell you! Kulasekara is asked to perform the duties and there's a huge roar as Dhoni clubs a full delivery, angling in on leg stump to the midwicket . And then Yuvraj gets in on the act, clumping the ball through the covers for another .
Batting Powerplay is enforced, Sangakarra asks Malinga to come back in - he has thee overs remaining to try and influence this match... six wickets in the last five overs? It would take a  collapse of South African proportions for that to happen. It's a fabulous over which ratchets up the pressure, just three runs taken as Dhoni pushes to cover and then to long-off.
Sri Lanka are (understandably) appealing for everything at the moment, but aren't having any joy. They're oh so very close to a run out but Dhoni's bat is *this far* over the line and then they appeal for an lbw shout which clearly took a huge chunk of Yuvraj's inside edge. Not out. India require 30 from 30.
Boom! Dhoni holds his pose, just to make sure the photographers pick hm up as he watches his thump over point sail high into the crowd for runs. Perera looks distraught and, tellingly, the Sri Lanka players look at their shoes, perhaps hoping this would hurry up and end. India require 35 from 34 deliveries.
Randiv tries his luck with another six, but there's really little to trouble Yuvraj who's just come in, let alone for Dhoni who is seeing it like a beachball at the moment. three singles and two leg byes move India to 43 runs short of victory. 
Is it too little, too late for Sri Lanka? You have to think so. Yuvraj moves off the mark and puts the smile back on the the Indian fans' faces with a super slap over covers for a one-bounce four. Tidy.
Now then! A full and straight delivery does for Gambhir who plays a rash shot, moving down the track and wide of his stumps, totally missed the ball which rattled into middle stump.
India require 52 runs from 54 balls to become World Champions. Dhoni and Gambhir take a single-a-piece. Not long now.
I'm not sure what's up with Murali, but he doesn't look himself at all today. In fact, the whole Sri Lanka team has gone a bit wobbly. Dhoni crunches Murali over long-off for four, there also a misfield in that over which allows a couple of extra runs to be snatched. Looks like they've resigned themselves to losing.. they need a spark and they need it (very) soon.
Another break in play, this time as Gambhir needs to replace his bat. Malinga slides one in low towards the batsman's feet, he digs it out but loses about a twelfth of the toe of his bat. Six from the over, including one wide, means
Dhoni is really struggling out there at the moment, he required some spray earlier but is now receiving further treatment on his back. the physio pulls him about in all kinds of shapes, attempting to right whatever is wrong in a way that looks thoroughly painful. Murali returns to the attack, but he's not hitting his straps today. Dhoni and Gambhir swat him away with ease and the final ball of the is thwacked over cover forfour
Now or never for Sri lanka? they need wickets and they need them soon. With that thought firmly at the front of his mind, Sangakkara brings Malinga back into the action, but with no joy. He delivers the usual mix of fullish length deliveries boom down on the off stump, mixed in with a couple of yorkers but India captain Dhoni is good to it - he jams his bat down on to angle the ball square for a couple.
That's another super shot. Dhoni keeps the pressure up on the Sri Lanka bowling attack with an exquisite thwack through cover point. it flashes to the rope in an instant which is the cue for another crescendo of noise to pour down from the locals in the stands.
Shot! A crushing blow from Gambhir sends the ball screaming over the man at covers - tantalisingly close  to the out stretched fingers - and bounces over the rope for runs. Cur pandemonium in the stands as the required runs enters double digits.
There it is, the first admission from Bumble that India are now firm favourites to take the trophy. I'm going to hold back on that as I think there is more to come from this game yet, the Indian run chase is going through another unnervingly serene period... surely that can't last forever. India remain n content to take the ones and twos, Gambhir paddles a couple down towards fine leg. 
Right, the players have taken another break for drinks and we move into the final sequence of this World Cup - 17 overs in which the title will be decided. Hold onto your hats as I fancy there will be more than the dd twists and turn before we reach the denouement of this tournament. Kulasekera rejoins the bowling attack, the Indian pair paddle five singles.
And again! Dhoni gets onto the front foot and thumps over covers for another four runs. Perera looks aghast as the ball bounces once and then over the rope. This is a very good little spell for India who are moving on at 5.15 an over  - although they require 6.11 from here.
Shot! That's just the tonic for India who had been getting bogged down, allowing the run rate to creep slowly upwards. Dhoni thumps Murali dismissively through the covers for four runs. Bang tidy shot.
So, 30 overs gone, India pass the 150-mark, you have to say, with seven overs left in the tank, they should cruise this. However, this is a World Cup final and Sri Lanka tend to take all their wickets in the last 10 overs, so don't come to any hasty conclusions. Dhoni bags two with a clip off his pads, just behind square leg.
After a couple of overs break, Murali returns to the attack. he's not been in the wickets today, in truth, he hasn't even got close. BUT he is only going at 2.80 an over, which we can all agree is a fantastic return. Four singles, not much drama and we move on... after the Indian pair have taken a quick drink and changed gloves. 
Gambhir looks determined to take the attack to Dilshan who is giving it plenty of flight, but he very nearly comes undone. Gambhir fails to follow the flight, the ball pitches, takes the edge of his bat and squirts through past the wicketkeeper for four runs. Looks like he may have hurt his back with that big heave... the physio comes on the back and liberally applies some of the magic spray.
Bowling change, Malinga comes back into the action t try and ruffle up the Indian pair in the middle. As you'd expect, the batsmen lower their back lift to try and counter the barrage of toe breaking yorkers. Gambhir plays him very well, just jabbing his bat down and guiding the ball through the empty slip region for four runs.
Dilshan continues, he goes for four runs. India need to be careful, the required run rate has now edged past six, to 6.16, in fact.
Hang on, this is all happening too fast, I swear Murali only bowled two deliveries there. Nope, it's my fault, I'm lagging behind by about 30 seconds - Gambhir and Dhoni take a single each off Murali's bowling. Looks like they will be happy to just see him off, then get stuck into the part-timers later in the innings.
Dhoni eases off the mark with a whipped slap down the leg side. There's four more for Gambhir who punches a couple via point. they're zooming through the overs at the moment with a spinner at each end.
Nowt going on for Murali at the moment, he's playing a supporting role.Not a sentence I thought I'd be writing at any stage today. Just two from the over: one leg bye and one single for Gambhir clipped to deep backward point.
Now then, that wicket has changed things! Sri Lanka will be delighted to have broken the partnership, but Sangakkara will not be pleased he missed a very decent stumping opportunity as Dhoni failed to get anything grounded behind the line as he attempted to drive.
What a stunning catch. Dilshan tempts Kohli into a rather tame half volley, chipped back toward the bowler who flew to his right, grasping the ball as it past him at head height.
Murali continues, four singles keeps the scorecard ticking over - Sri Lanka could really do with a wicket and soon, these two look set fair to hang around for some time now.
Randiv gets his line all wrong, there's some pretty poor fielding in there two which all adds up to make runs. Kohli flicks one of his hips fine, Malinga sprints round but dives over the ball. Let's put that horrible sequence behind us and move on.
Ooooh, Gambhir, you lucky boy! He survives a scary moment as he's well short of his ground but the shy at the stumps misses. Muralitharan finally comes into the attack, his last match for Sri Lanka... is it going to be too much to ask that he plays a key part in victory? Gambhir's fifty comes up in 56 deliveries.
Three, two, one gooooooo! The rather annoying PA encourages the fans to make noise, not sure that's entirely necessary in this the noise continues to spill down from the stands. Certainly not as Gambhir plays shots like the one which was just clumped up and over midwicket, once bounce and that's Tidy.
Dilshan comes into the attack, maybe feeling slightly put out at having to wait so long after opening the bolwing against England! His first delivery is a stinker which goes for three wides down the leg side.
The spinner Randiv continues, there's a touch of turn out there for him, not a great deal mind, certainly not as much as we expected earlier in the innings. How do the stats look:  They look like this: the required run rate 5.53, India are moving along at 5.43. Cruising. Kohli cuts a late clip down towards third man which is cut off so that's just two runs.
I was just about to start waxing lyrical about a parsimonious over, six deliveries that really summed up how Sri Lanka need to bowl over the next couple of hours... but then Perera slides one down leg which is clipped fine for runs. I've been asked to give my opinion on who will win this game... but I'm flatly refusing at the moment, there's too much going on to call it. It's sweltering in Mumbai, so now it's time for some drinks.
Dropped! Oh, Kulasekara, what have you done there? A guilt-edge opportunity to break this pair goes begging as he shells a catch at long off. In his defence, it was a tricky take, racing in, he had to dive low to take collect the ball which pitched through his fingers, much to the locals' joy.
This game is so finely balanced, it's impossible to call just which way this is going to go. In the last five overs, India have been going at seven - but are leaving themselves open to mistakes in their rush to chase down the total. Seven runs from that over, the pick of the shots coming from Gambhir who leans forward and pushes a tidy clips through midwicket.
Shot! Gambhir has the crowd on their feet following his stunning thump up and over cover for four runs - which takes him past 4,000 runs (at 40.44) in ODIs. The noise levels then go through the roof as the same batsman pulls a rank, short delivery fine for another boundary. All or nothing is this India innings.
What's thew key for players sat in the dressing room now after having watched their two openers go for not very much is the question posed to Bumble. His answer is simple: responsibility. The batsmen need to back themselves and go out and get the runs, he adds. Simple, really. Gambhir takes a hop and a skip down the track then thumps Perera through midwicket for four runs. India's fifty came three overs quicker than the Sri Lankans managed.
After studiously watching 10 deliveries, Kohli moves off the mark with a very tidy flick off his pads which runs fine, too fine for the man square to block off and that isfour.
Perera swaps ends and takes up the mantle for Malinga who takes a well-earned break. The carnival atmosphere that had gripped this stadium for the past four hours has now subsided to a murmur, inquisitive looks, scratching of heads and, no doubt, some quiet prayers as the Indian hordes try to work out how they're going to win this match from here. Two runs from the over as Gambhir guides Perera's wide delivery through point.
Kulasekara back into the attack, Sangakkara moves right up to the stumps. A sign that India just want to see out a few overs and build a base for the rest of the innings, the pair in the middle barely offer a shot, just one run as Gambhir drops a straight delivery back towards midwicket.
Cripes, this wasn't the start I was expecting, India have backed themselves into a corner very early in this innings. They'll need to find a hero... with Mr Reliable, Sachin Tendulkar already back in the hutch. Credit to Malinga, mind. taking the two openers inside his first four overs.
What a moment for Sri Lanka! The talisman Tendulkar walks after edging a delivery sliding miles down off behind to Sangakkara. Total silence at the Wankhede Stadium.
Bowling change, Thisara Perera comes in and is immediately given the treatment by Gambhir who carves him over point for four runs. The party in the stands continues as the locals sense they are watching two players dead set on winning  this together...
Malinga continues for a third consecutive over, Sri Lanka need to stem the flow of runs which are coming far too easily in these early overs. Just one from the over as Gambhir pushes to the on-side. 
Yes... this is the Tendulkar we know and love. He looks in the mood for it this evening, signaling his intent with two stunning . A picture-perfect push to the rope at long-on is followed by a super cut past the man at point for another four.
Shot! Tendulkar looks in super nick (is he ever in any other kind of nick?) - two super pushes to midwicket and through covers move the score on, they don't quite reach the boundary but in terms of statements of intent, it would seem the Little Master isn't going to hang around.
Huge cheers as Tendulkar clips square to move off the mark off the bowling of Kulasekara. The crowd rise to their feet once again as the Little Master punches positively through covers fro three. Time to settle for India, they just need this pair to stick around for a while to brush off that miserable start.
Second delivery, Malinga makes the breakthrough which is greeted by total silence in the crowd. Dumbstruck, the locals find their voice as Gambhir moves off the mark with a neat clips off his pads square forfour.
What a start. First over, Sehwag is trapped plumb in front off a fullish, straight delivery. They ask for a review, but it's futile.
A very decent total, especially when you consider how slow the Sri Lankan's innings began. India have a huge task on their hands. More in a bit.
Here we go then with the final over - Zaheer Khan has the task of trying to keep this total down to a minimum... Oh dear... The final ball is thwacked for a huge SIX over point as Sri Lanka add a mammoth 18 off those last six deliveries.
Shot! Sri Lanka really are making the very most of this Powerplay - Perera comes in and straight away starts swinging high and hard. Harbhajan looks on angrily as he's thumped back over his head to the boundary at mid-off for
Boom! Kulasekara opens his arms up, swings hard and sends Zaheer back into the stands for the first of the innings. And then successive bring Mahela Jayawardene his century off 84 deliveries. A match-winning innings? Steady on now... but he's certainly batted his side to a commanding score.
Kulasekara goes trying to steal a single to get Jayawardene back on Strike. Great throw from Dhoni behind the stumps ends the battling innings.
A punishing over for India. Munaf patel gets thump to all areas: Kulasekara lobs him fine over the man inside the rope for four and Jayawardene touches a wide delivery fine, just inside the man racing round from third man for another boundary.. 11 from the over.
Here we go, then. Five overs which will decide just how big a total the Sri Lankans will have to defend to become World Champions. Kulasekara immediately starts shimmying across his crease to make space -  he takes a single to the off side and then Jayawardene plays it beautifully off his toes, finding the gap int he field at cover for four.
So Sri lanka have decided against taking the Powerplay early. Nasser rightly notes that if they take it too soon and lose wickets then they'll be into the bowlers and won't add the runs they need at the bottom of the innings. Kulasekara takes a quick two on the off side and a number of singles takes us up to the last five overs with fielding restrictions... this is bubbling up nicely...
It takes a good ten minutes to decide that Kulasekara didn't edge behind. Not sure the DRS system is meant to slow the game down this much. Anyway, it's all still going very slowly for Sri Lanka, India just aren't giving them anything to feed on. But there's a rare lapse in the field: Mahela pushes hard towards point and Virat allows the ball to slip between his legs and to the rope for runs.
Time for Harbhajan, now. A Sri Lankan runs out with water, spare gloves... and most likely a word about when to take the batting Powerplay. Six singles and wide means that's seven runs from the over... not what Jayawardene and Kulasekara need right now.
Munaf Patel returns to the fray, Dhoni has seen off the middle overs with his part-timers and will now bowl out his front-liners. Kulasekara thumps towards the boundary at long leg, the umpire gets ready to signal four runs but from nowhere, Zaheer comes screaming across, slides on his front, jumps to his feet and throws in, saving two runs. Pretty much the story of India's day in the field.
Final over for Yuvraj Singh: Kulasekara pushes just forward of point for one, Jayawardene nurdles a little single on the leg side. Yuvvies figures are a sight to behold: 10-0-49-2 - a great time to post very (very) tidy one-day figures like that.
Right, last ten overs, then. India have certainly turned this game to there favour with those two quick wickets. Zaheer Khan's figures looks super: 7-3-16-2.
And another! A beauty of a slower delivery does for Kapugedera, who chips an absolute dolly to Raina at mid-off. Sri Lanka rocking here a touch.
Has that wicket swung it in India's direction? Too early to make any dramatic statements, but it will certainly halt any thoughts of upping the runs.
Big moment in this final. Samaraweera shuffles across his wicket, sweeping across his body, fails to get anything ont he bat and the ball hits his back leg. Umpire Taufel says no, the DRS system says OUT. And he is.
Acknowledging now is the time to start taking some wickets, Dhoni ask Zaheer Khan to return to the action, probably a touch earlier than he would have wanted. But Khan finds two batsmen in super nick - Jayawardene picks up on the slower ball and very deliberately pushes the ball through vacant slip region for
'Sri Lanka are very nicely placed here,' chirps Bumble in the Sky commentary box - he's right. After the turgid start they have moved into a greats striking distance of really piling on the punishment in the last 10 overs. India need some wickets... and soon.
Catchit is the shout as new bowler, Virat Kohli, gets one to zip up on Jayawardene. Te ball was angling down leg, caught a bit of glove but plopped harmlessly at short fine leg. Jayawardene also finds the rope with a neat clip to third man, that's runs.
Another over for the Little Master, but it's a relatively expensive one. Ones and two coming far too easily on both sides as the Sri Lankan pair pick up on the fact that Tendulkar isn't really turning the ball at all, just bowling slowly, seven from the over.
Super, super shot. Jayawardene shows real dexterity in flicking a straight short delivery from Yuvraj. It was very straight so needed an amount of manipulation to send it fine. Khan zooms round to try and cut it off, but the ball just rolls onto the rope forAnd a single with the last delivery of the over take Jayawardene on to his half century, they'll need plenty more from him.
Apropos of nothing (or so i think) the noise levels go through the roof. What''s this, what have I missed and then all becomes clear. The crowd pick up on the fact that Tendulkar has been chucked the ball and will turn his arm over some gentle off breaks. An assortment of slow things allows the Sri Lanka pair to nick five singles. Not too bad.
I understand the off-field officials want to get every decision right, this being a World Cup final and all, but that are taking a raving aaaaaaage every time a decision is reviewed. Yuvraj and Dhoni ask for a review as Samaraweera's attempt sweep leaves an element of doubt as to if he gloved behind to the keeper. A lengthy review is pretty inconclusive and given not out.Four singles keeps the scorecard ticking over.
That's another delightful shot, Jayawardene thumps with barely any effort to the via point. Bang
Shot! Yuvraj shakes his head in disgust, but that's a super strike, guiding the ball with soft hands through first slip to the rope for four. So, what do you think is a par score for this wicket? Will 250 be enough for Sri Lanka to defend? How much do you hate The Only Way is Essex? Answers in this direction, please: tom.bellwood@dailymail.co.uk
Shot! Samaraweera moves off the mark, steering a wide delivery just fine of the third man area, the despairing dive can't stop the ball hitting the rope. For a moment, a hush descends over the ground as the fans digest the bad news that India have conceded a boundary... then all hell breaks loose as they World Cup party continues anew in the stands. I love all this, me. Oh, and it's time for some drinks.
Timely breakthrough for the Indians, just as Sangakkara and Jayawardene had set up a tidy platform to build a big score, the venerable Yuvvie does the damage.
Huge wicket. Yuvraj plants one outside off, just enough for Sangakkara to be tempted into an expansive swipe, but only finds the edge and Dhoni pouches behind the stumps.
What was that I was saying about how well these two play spin? Well, Sangakarra opens his body up, trying to make space to guide onto the off side, but fails to connect with any of the deliveries. The ball zooms past the stumps at all angles, none of which go more than a few inches past the bails and into Dhoni's hands.
This is a wonderful spell of batting: the Sri Lankan pair playing Yuvraj and Harbhajan beautifully. They're not trying to charge or overly dominate the bowling, they're just waiting for the ball to come on to the bat and guide it around the ground. Jayawardene wait and waits and then clips the ball through point to the rope for four. That bring up the fifty partnership: 51 from 56 deliveries.
If Sri Lanka can move the rate up to five an over, they will reach a very competitive 255. Still, that's a huge leap from where they are now. Sangakarra turns a couple behind square and there's a couple of singles nurdled to the off side. it's sweltering in Mumbai, so we take a short break for drinks.
The Test with India at Lord's has already sold out, we hear. I always get that little glow in my heart when I hear that Test cricket is still popular in this country. Odd, I know. Sri Lanka pass a huge milestone, the century comes up at 4.16 an over.
And so we enter the no man's land of the middle overs. You fancy these next ten overs will really set the tome for the rest of the day. If Sri Lanka can kick they certainly have time to post a big total. Let's see, shall we... Just two singles from the over, both dabbed to the on side.
And time for another bowling change, in comes Yuvraj Singh to turn his arm over. Spin at both ends! Sri Lanka fancy their chances against Yuvvie, Jayawardene is straight onto the front foot, clumping a rather short and ugly delivery over the midwicket for four.
Huge pressure on these two to hang around for the vast majority of these remaining 29 overs. There's a positive push to midwicket for a couple and another single is taken to midwicket, the man in the field does well to take the pace of the ball and save a couple of runs. In case you didn't already know,  India have been super in the field today.
Bowling change, back comes Sreesanth whose five overs went for 33 earlier in the innings. Jayawardene finds the boundary with a positive push that finds the edge and zooms at perfect catching height through the vacant first slip area.
Much, much better over for Sri Lanka, the shackles are released as Jayawardene leans forward and thumps Singh through point for four - the first boundary in six overs. And what's this? A streaky edge zooms past Dhoni and to the rope for another four. twelve off the over in total.
Right, so where do we stand... Sri Lanka are limping along at 3.61 an over and have lost their two openers. Only Sreesanth's early spell went for runs and India's work in the field has been first rate. Yes, the locals have plenty of reason to be making a huge din... which I can promise you they are. Jayawardene touches two runs through midwicket as Patel strays a touch wide.
Brilliant over, Singh's hitting his straps, flighting deliveries high into the batsmen, bang on form. This is a really very good start for India.
Huge breakthrough for India, Dilshan's attempted sweep merely directs the ball on to his own stumps. That's out!
Just another two runs from the over, this really is good stuff from India, well, it is when Sreesanth is taken out of the firing line. Patel's over goes for just a couple of singles, tip-tip line and length stuff. How you enjoying it so far? Email me at:tom.bellwood@dailymail.co.uk
Time for a bowling change: here comes Harbhajan Singh, hoping to get some grip and turn early on this wicket. Dilshan dabs fine but the fielder zooms round to cut off the run.  Just two from the over as the two batsmen take easy singles.
Just two runs from the over, one of them a leg bye. A rather tepid over, truth be told. Sri Lanka's run rate is now just edging up to four an over. It's scorchio in Mumbai so the players are going to take a short break for drinks...
Shot! ... and again ... shot! This is much more like it from Sri Lanka who plunder successive boundaries through Sangakkara off Sreesanth's bowling.The first clubbed over mid-on, the second was straight back down the ground. The over ends in a bit of a mess for Sreesanth: his no ball for overstepping results in a free hit which Dilshan edges through vacant first slip for four.
Shot! In a rare moment of weakness, Patel sends one down well wide of off, short of a length, perfect cover drive territory for Sangakkara who leans forward and pushes effortlessly to the rope forVery slow going for the Sri Lankans, but at least they aren't losing any wickets.
Yes, the Indians definitely had their Weetabix this morning. More super fielding, the man at mid-off leaps to pluck out a firmly hit drive which had bounced up off the turf. Saves a run, Sri Lanka are being fielded out of the early stages here. An odd thing to say, yes, but it's the truth. Dilshan bags a couple as Sreesanth strays a bit too straight and is clipped to deep square
Another stunning piece of work in the field - Sreesanth's full-length dive stops the ball *this far* short of the rope at deep backward square leg. Two runs saved, Sri Lanka struggling to gain any momentum in these early stages.
Now is as good as any to tell you I'm suffering from dreadful toothache. A filling fell out a few weeks ago and me, being all brave decided I wouldn't need a replacement. The pain restricted me to no more than a couple of hours sleep last night. Agony doesn't even come close. Oh right, sorry, the cricket.. yes. Khan plants one a couple of inches outside off which Dilshan pushes wide of Harbhajan at mid-on for a couple.
After this parsimonious opening spell, Dhoni decides it's time for a bowling change, Munaf Patel replaces Sreesanth and very nearly scrubs another Sri Lankan wicket off. Sangakkara goes chasing after a delivery well wide of off and is hugely lucky not to edge behind to Dhoni. There's some more super, super work int the field as Khan chucks himself low and hard to cut off the ball no more than a couple of inches short of the rope. His efforts save one run.
Khan concedes his first runs of the innings, three overs down and he's only gone for two and taken the key wicket of Tharanga. Who writes his scripts?
What a catch! What a time to take a wicket! Khan plants one outside off, Tharanga goes fishing for it, but only finds the edge which screams inside Sehwag at first slip who takes a stunning low diving catch to his right.
Shot! The screw has been turning on Sri Lanka pair and you fancy something had to give and it did... Dilshan's eyes light up as Sreesaanth zooms one down, short and wide which is clubbed over the man at midwicket to the rope for . And there's more damage as Dilshan pushes hard at another loose one which is thumped past the man at point for
Excellent work in the field from Yuvraj at backward of point stops a certain boundary. Stooping low he cut out Tharanga venomous strike to huge cheers from the crowd. The pressure's building on this Sri Lankan pair... that's another maiden for Khan, stirring stuff.
A very watchful start from the Sri Lankan pair. taking very few chances and when they do shake their wrists at the odd delivery they manage to find a fielder every time. This is probably a good time to talk about par scores on this track which will definitely start turning as the game progresses: the guys in the Sky commentary box reckon about 275, I fancy Sri Lanka will be happy to defend 250 on this kind of track. Another parsimonious over, just two singles dabbed to leg.
Huge roars from the crowd as Tharanga connects cleanly with successive deliveries, but both times some super fielding at pint cuts out the chance of any runs. And another huge cheer greets the end of the over, as that is a precious
Cripes, it is so tense out there, I'm sure there's a well-worn analogy about atmosphere, knives and cutting but suffice to say, the hairs on the back of my neck are firmly up. Sreesanth joins the attack, targeting middle and leg over the wicket to Dilshan. there's a very speculative lbw shout  and Dilshan pushes two to cover point.
The noise at the stadium in Mumbai is insanely loud! Zaheer Khan open up the attack for the Indians and it's an absolute belter, zooming a number across the left-hander Tharanga, one slides down leg and runs for a bye as Dhoni fumbles. Did I mention how loud it was?
Right, that's all done, Sri Lanka shoot back to the dressing room, India take their place out in the field... Not long now. You ready?
National anthems and etc. All respect to the Indian and Sri Lankan nations, your anthems aren't a patch on my favourite of the tournament, the West Indies. Proper tune.

Right then the team news... Sri Lanka have made four changes: Chamara Kapugedera is in for Chamara Silva and will bat at five, Thisara Perera is in for Angelo Mathews, Nuwan Kulasekera is in for Rangana Herath, and the offspinner Suraj Randiv comes in for Mendis. That's about your lot.
9.32am: Sri Lanka have won the toss and will bat first. The noise from a capacity 33,000-plus crowd, which greeted the flip of the coin by India captain Mahendra Singh Dhoni, stopped match referee Jeff Crowe hearing Sangakkara's initial call. Dhoni therefore had to try again, and lost.
Morning everyone... So this is it then - welcome to Sportsmail's coverage of the World Cup final between India and Sri Lanka in Mumbai.
Time for some premature reflection. The knives were out for this bloated tournament before it even started, memories of the last event in the West Indies proving hard to forget.
But there's no doubt, this World Cup on the sub-continent has been an absolute cracker. Forget the slimline version we're promised in the future, this has had it all - with one or two notable lame ducks, of course.
Upsets, huge hundreds, deafening sell-out crowds (again with a few notable exceptions) have all been played put over the past six weeks. And what do we have now?
Some claimed that the Indian v Pakistan semi-final was the final everyone wanted. Not so. These two teams have been imperious throughout, two deserving sides to,pay the first ever all-Asian World Cup final.
Excited? You should be. Team news and all the action as soon as we get it and you can direct your thoughts on the day's action thusly: tom.bellwood@dailymail.co.uk