London 2012 Olympics: second-chance ticket sales begin
The website crashed due to high demand as soon as the second chance sales window opened at 6am.
There are 600,000 tickets to events including athletics, beach volleyball and basketball on offer – as well as 1.7 million tickets to football events.
The window, exclusive to those who received no tickets, is open for 10 days until 6pm on July 3 and allows fans to apply for a maximum of three sessions and six tickets per session for most sports.
Once this window is closed, the remaining tickets – if there are any – will go on sale to those who managed to secure tickets in the first phase. This will open at 6am on July 8 and close at 6pm on July 17.
The pick of the non-football tickets include six athletics sessions (and a glimpse of Usain Bolt), beach volleyball and basketball and hockey finals.
Tickets will be sold on a first come first served basis, but applicants will not know if their bid has been successful until they are notified between 24 and 48 hours after applying.
This measure has been introduced as a way of dealing with the huge levels of demand the window is expected to attract as London 2012 organisers (Locog) say the delayed confirmation system prevents crashes.
Earlier this month Chris Townsend, director responsible for ticketing, assured Telegraph readers in an exclusive webchat that the system would be able to handle the pressure."We are confident that the system will be able to cope," he said.
But Michael Allen, director of IT services management at Compuware, said the only way it would withstand the pressure of a million visits at once is if the system has been thoroughly 'stress tested'.
"Before the rush hits, the website should be stress tested to ensure a maximum scale is understood," he said.
"Such tests will flag up any problems so steps can be taken to ensure things run smoothly when the real traffic hits. This kind of forward planning is vital. The hope is that the Olympics website will have been tested and there will be no problem. The reality will become very clear at 6am on Friday morning.”
Consumers suffering buyer's remorse can sell their tickets on the official public exchange from an undefined date in 2012. It is illegal to profiteer by selling them on websites such as eBay although Locog have admitted they will find stemming the flow of black market activity a challenge.
Those who have yet to be won over by Olympic fever and have made no application to date may be able to purchase a remaining 1.3 million tickets – including one of 8,000 for the men's 100m final – from early next year.