Wimbledon 2011: Petra Kvitova profile
The Czech champion follows in the footsteps of Jana Novotna and Martina Navratilova after her SW19 exploits
So who's this new Wimbledon champion Petra Kvitova, then? (It was so much easier to keep track when it was always one or other of the Williams sisters.)
She's the 21-year-old world No7, and the current holder of the Women's Tennis Association's 'Newcomer of the Year' award.
Past winners include multiple slam winners such as Venus, Serena, Maria Sharapova, Kim Clijsters and Martina Hingis.
So her ascension to the top was pretty much guaranteed…
Not necessarily. The WTA Newcomer roll call also includes long-forgotten grand-slam failures such as Daja Bedanova, Irina Spirlea and Caroline Wozniacki.
Very droll. Look, was this a bolt from the blue or not?
No. Her form has been improving: she made the quarter-finals at this year's Australian Open, losing 6-2, 6-4 to last year's losing Wimbledon finalist Vera Zvonareva, then made the fourth round of the French Open, losing to the eventual winner Li Na.
Ah, but we've not even mentioned her grass-court nous yet. It's her best surface. She was an unseeded semi-finalist at Wimbledon last year, losing in straight sets to Serena Williams. And just before this year's tournament, she was runner-up at Eastbourne.
Yes, in retrospect she was clearly on the march. Where does she hail from?
She's from a village in the north-east of the Czech Republic called Fulnek. She's not the first tennis player from the area to make it to Wimbledon; Kveta Peschke reached the fourth round in 2005.
She's certainly not the first Czech woman to emerge victorious from SW19...
Indeed she is not. Jana Novotna won in 1998, and of course there's nine-times champion Martina Navratilova, though if you're being picky, she was a naturalised US citizen by the time of her successes.
Is Martina is one of Kvitova's heroes?
Naturally, along with Hana Mandlikova. But Navratilova is her favourite, given that they're both left handed.
Nearly. One down, eight still to go.