Vitali Klitschko throttles Adamek to claim 40th KO
World heavyweight champion Vitali Klitschko earned the 40th knockout of his career on Saturday when he stopped Polish challenger Tomasz Adamek in the 10th round to defend his WBC belt.
This was the 40-year-old Klitschko’s seventh defense of the WBC belt he won in 2008 against Nigeria’s Samuel Peter and despite a brave effort from Adamek, the champion was rarely threatened.
Having had his first pro bout back in 1999, this was Dr Ironfist’s 40th KO and 43rd victory as he out-classed Adamek and made his trademark big right punish the mandatory challenger.
Along with younger brother, Wladimir, the IBF, WBA, IBO and WBO champion, the Ukrainian siblings continue to dominate the heavyweight division.
Despite being six years older, Vitali Klitschko made the most of his physical advantage as he tipped the scales 12kgs heavier and 15cm taller than Adamek, and dominated the opening rounds.
Adamek, a former cruiserweight and light heavyweight world champion, made a tentative start and a heavy right hand at the end of the second sent him tumbling back onto the ropes, but he got back to his feet before the count.
With Wroclaw’s Miejski Stadium set to host matches next year during soccer’s European Championships, Ukrainian Klitschko had few fans amongst the predominantly Polish crowd of just more than 40,000 fans.
Adamek, who had said his speed would “kill” Klitschko, went on the offensive in the fourth and fifth, upping his work rate, but he rocked backward nearly every time Klitschko landed a telling blow.
The Polish fighter had a standing count in the sixth as Adamek was taking numerous punches and was lucky to reach the end of the round.
More punishment followed in the seventh and Adamek switched to damage limitation as Klitschko made his superior reach count.
The crowd roared when the champion was put on the canvas at the end of the eight, but it was only a slip.
Klitschko landed numerous jabs in the ninth as Adamek’s strong chin soaked up plenty of punishment and Italian referee Massimo Barrovecchio finally put the Pole out of his misery midway through the 10th.
The defeat leaves Adamek with 44 victories, 28 knockouts and two defeats, but most of his fights have been at lighter weights.