Mariano Rivera sets MLB saves record with No. 602
Mariano Rivera set the major league record with career save No. 602 on Monday, pitching a perfect ninth inning to preserve the New York Yankees' 6-4 win over the Minnesota Twins. With fans standing and cheering from his first pitch to his last, Rivera retired Trevor Plouffe, Michael Cuddyer and Chris Parmelee to end it. Parmelee looked at strike three _ it appeared to be Rivera's signature cutter _ and Yankee Stadium roared in approval. The 41-year-old Rivera tied Trevor Hoffman with save No. 601 on Saturday in Toronto. The AL East leaders lost Sunday, putting Rivera in line to get the milestone in the Yankees' last homestand of the season. Curtis Granderson hit his 41st homer of the year for the Yankees. Cory Wade (6-1) got the victory. Michael Cuddyer hit a two-run homer for Minnesota. Scott Diamond (1-5) was charged with the loss. Orioles 6, Red Sox 5, 1st game At Boston, the reeling Red Sox lost for the 12th time in 15 games when Jeremy Guthrie pitched last-place Baltimore to the victory. Boston's AL wild-card lead was cut to 1 1/2 games over idle Tampa Bay. The Red Sox lost three of four games against Tampa Bay this past weekend. Robert Andino hit a two-run homer in the opener of a day-night doubleheader and Nolan Reimold followed with his 12th, putting the Orioles ahead 5-1 in the fourth. J.J. Hardy led off the fifth with his career-high 28th home run. Guthrie (9-17) pitched into the seventh inning for his first career win in Fenway Park. Mariners, 12, Indians 6, 7 innings, rain At Cleveland, Mike Carp hit a grand slam into the second deck in right field and drove in five runs during Seattle's nine-run third inning. The Mariners came in for one day to make up a rainout from May 15, and played in a steady drizzle before the field was covered at the start of the eighth. After waiting 44 minutes, it was called. Carp connected against reliever Chad Durbin for a 455-foot shot to put Seattle ahead 11-4. He doubled home the first run in the inning off David Huff (2-6). Cleveland scored three times in the first against Charlie Furbush (4-9). Asdrubal Cabrera hit a two-run homer and Carlos Santana followed with another drive. Furbush allowed six runs and 10 hits over five innings, but managed to snap a personal five-game losing streak.