IndyCar champion dead after flaming 15-car race pile-up
Wheldon, who won this year's Indianapolis 500, had competed in only two events so far this year. But he was lured back to the track by a $US5 million promotion called the Go Daddy IndyCar Challenge, targeted at drivers who did not compete in the series full-time, with the prize purse to be split 50:50 with a lucky fan. Wheldon had to win the race from the back of the grid to collect the $US5 million. "I am really excited to return in the No.98 entry with [racing teams] SSM and BHA, to follow up our success at this year's Indy 500 and to go after another race win, especially with this carrot on the end of the stick," Wheldon said before the race. "I actually met Go Daddy CEO and founder Bob Parsons the morning of this year's Indy 500, so maybe he's my lucky charm? I'm ready for the Go Daddy IndyCar Challenge and, hopefully, myself and one lucky fan will be smiling on October 16." Sparks shoot out as Wheldon's car launches into the air during the crash.
Wheldon, 33, had two sons - Sebastian, 2, and Oliver, seven months - to his partner Susie Behm. Fellow drivers were told of Wheldon's death in a meeting two hours after the crash, which marred the final round of this year's IndyCar championship and was labelled by some drivers the sport's worst. "It was like a movie scene which they try to make as gnarly as possible," said Danica Patrick, who was making her final IndyCar start.
Pile-up ... cars fly into the air and explode in flames at the IndyCar race in Las Vegas. The debris we all had to drive through the lap later, it looked like a war scene from Terminator or something. "It was debris everywhere across the whole track; you could smell the smoke, you could see the billowing smoke on the back straight from the car. "There was a chunk of fire that we were driving around. You could see cars scattered." Australian driver Will Power's Honda goes airborne as part of a massive 15-car pile-up in Las Vegas.
Other drivers said the crash was unlike anything they had seen in the sport before. "The debris we all had to drive through the lap later, it looked like a war scene from Terminatoror something," Australian driver Ryan Briscoe said. Dario Franchitti, driver of the #10 Target Chip Ganassi Racing Dallara Honda consoles a crew member after Dan Wheldon's death. "I mean, there were just pieces of metal and car on fire in the middle of the track with no car attached to it and just debris everywhere. So it was scary, and your first thoughts are hoping that no one is hurt because there's just stuff everywhere. Crazy." Briscoe later posted on Twitter: "I don't have words for the tragic loss of Dan today. He was a good man and will be missed by all of us. #RIPDanWheldon"
Wheldon with his wife Susie, with son Oliver, left, and Sebastian, right, pose with the Borg-Warner Trophy in May. Wheldon was the IndyCar series champion in 2005 and runner-up the following year. He was runner-up in the iconic Indy 500 race in 2009 and last year, before winning the event this year. "IndyCar is very sad to announce that Dan Wheldon has passed away from unsurvivable injuries," IndyCar chief executive Randy Bernard said. "Our thoughts and prayers are with his family today. IndyCar, its drivers and owners, have decided to end the race. In honour of Dan Wheldon, the drivers have decided to do a five-lap salute in his honour."
He was due to travel to Australia immediately after the Las Vegas event to race at the Gold Coast Indy this weekend with James Courtney in the Holden Racing Team car. Courtney tweeted this morning: "RIP Dan. My thoughts & love to Susie, Seb, Oliver, Clive, Sue & the whole Wheldon family at this tragic time." HRT owner Ryan Walkinshaw tweeted: "Thoughts go out to the family and friends of @danwheldon ace driver and more importantly a top guy, u will be missed dude. #RIPdanwheldon" Australian racing driver Marcos Ambrose also took to Twitter to offer his condolences: "Our thoughts & prayers go out to Dan Wheldon's family & all those in Las Vegas. Very sad day. RIP" Ambrose races in the US in the NASCAR series.