Six Nations 2012: France v Ireland - as it (very nearly) happened
France v Ireland was called off six minutes before the scheduled kick off as fears mounted for the safety of the players on the frozen pitch
Ah, Paris in the spring. Paris just before Valentine's Day. Lovers stroll arm-in-arm along the Seine; bohemians read poetry in the Parc des Buttes Chaumont; diners eat sumptuous meals in candlelit bistros and 30 cauliflowered-eared rugby players freeze their b******* off in the Stade de France.
The good news is that we have a game tonight. After a pitch inspection 90 minutes before kick off the surface at the Saint-Denis has been deemed playable and so Ireland will set about trying to secure only their second win in Paris since 1972.
And boy do they need it. With all the talk of referees and red cards it was somewhat overlooked last week that Ireland blew it. Plain and simple. They capitulated, choked, gave in, conceded ground and paid the price. Brendan Fanning has outlined five areas Ireland need to fix: their tactical thinking, passive defending, selection dilemmas, Declan Kidney's personnel problems and the failure to transfer the form of the provinces to the international stage. Will we see any, or all five, of these addressed tonight? Or will they stand shivering in the snow as a rampaging France cement their reputation as Six Nations favourites?
All will be revealed very shortly. Here are the sides that will go into battle ...
Mr. It's All My Fault Whatever Happens. Dave Pearson
Rules you might need to know about. We need to play 60 minutes of this match for it to constitute a match. After 60 minutes the result stands; before 60 minutes and the game will have to be replayed. There's yet another tense looking pitch inspection taking place right now. The surface is frozen in parts, apparently, but underneath it's soft. They're now putting blowers on certain parts of the pitch to try and thaw it out.
7.49pm: Pitch inspection news. They're still inspecting it. You get the sense that if it wasn't for certain television companies this game would have been called off yesterday. The concern now seems to be whether the pitch will harden during the game to a dangerous degree. You would have to think that it is going to harden - it's going to get colder - but it's slightly farcical that this is happening 10 minutes before kick off.
7.51pm: Still waiting on a verdict. We're now looking at footage of Rory Best practicing in a shed. I could watch this all night. We may have to.
7.54pm: THE MATCH IS CALLED OFF!!!!!!!!!
7.54pm: They haven't told the crowd yet. This could be fun.
7.58pm: The have decided that the potential for injury is too severe and the game is off. There is a suggestion that Ireland were keener for a postponement than the French. The areas at the side of the pitch are frozen solid and the concern is that the pitch would freeze to the same level and cause someone serious injury. I don't think you can play with that kind of risk hanging over the place but at the same time why has it been left so so late.
7.58pm: The crowd have been told. They don't like it. 10,000 Ireland fans have travelled.
8.00pm: They'll probably just replay the game next week but how else could it be settled. Arm wrestling? Drinking contest? A throwing contest?
8.01pm: If they just managed to direct the bile coming from the crowd at the pitch then it would thaw out pretty quickly. "The pitch was unsafe for the players," says the Ireland coach Declan Kidney. "The protocol is for the referee to make the decision. It's unfair that it falls on one person but I think he's made the right decision."
8.04pm: There's not much I can add to this. The game has been called off six minutes before kick off. I would say thanks for the emails but nobody has even emailed yet. What will we do now? Oh well. Goodnight.