ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
President Vladimir Putin granted Russian citizenship to movie star Gerard Depardieu, who has threatened to give up his French passport to protest a proposed tax hike on the rich.
The decision appears to give Depardieu, already a frequent guest of the Moscow celebrity circuit, a chance to pay the 13 per cent income tax levied in Russia on everyone from billionaires to the poor.
"Vladimir Putin has signed a decree granting Russian citizenship to France's Gerard Depardieu," the Kremlin said in a statement.
The decree cited an article of the 1993 constitution extending presidents the right to issue citizenship or to grant political asylum.
Depardieu said on Sunday that a decision by France's highest court to strike down a 75 per cent tax rate on millionaires would change nothing in his highly publicised decision to move out of France.
The government has vowed to push ahead with the tax rate, which would apply to incomes over a million euros ($1.3 million) a year, and propose a new measure that would conform with the constitution.
At his end-of-year press conference, Mr Putin said he was ready to offer Depardieu - whom he called a businessman and a friend - a Russian passport to resolve his tax row.
"If Gerard really wants to have a residency permit in Russia or a Russian passport, we can consider this issue resolved positively," Mr Putin said on December 20.
Depardieu had previously mentioned moving to Belgium, although he is a frequent guest of Moscow cinema festivals and other Russian celebrity events.
The hulking actor has been a star in Russia since the Soviet era and still retains cult status among many movie buffs.
France was seen by the USSR as one of Europe's friendlier countries with natural socialist tendencies - a status that made its movies a staple of Soviet silver screens.
Depardieu has since grown into a frequent jury member of the glitzy Moscow and Sochi film festivals whose final word on a movie is often treated as gospel.
He has even been specially invited to take up Russian citizenship by the iron-fisted leader of Chechnya - scene of two brutal post-Soviet wars that claimed tens of thousands of lives.