Cosmo editor Helen Gurley Brown dies at age 90
Helen Gurley Brown, the editor of Cosmopolitan magazine credited with helping to usher in the 1960s sexual revolution, has died at the age of 90.
According to a statement issued by the Cosmopolitan's parent company, the Hearst media corporation, Brown died at the New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Centre after a brief stay.
Brown was editor of Cosmopolitan between 1965 to 1996, taking the once-staid magazine and packing it with provocatively posed models, frank articles and racy headlines extolling the virtues of sex.
"Widely heralded as a legend, Brown's impact on popular culture and society reached around the globe, first with her 1962 bestseller, Sex and the Single Girl, and then for the more than three decades she put her personal stamp on Cosmopolitan," Hearst said.
Brown summarised her message as: "Good girls go to heaven, bad girls go everywhere".
And it proved to be a lucrative proposition. By the 1980s the magazine had grown to 300 pages, a third of that expensive advertising. It now appears in 35 languages across more than 100 countries.
Brown came to the forefront of changing sexual attitudes in the United States and the modern women's liberation movement when Sex and the Single Girl was published in 1962.
In 2006, she explained the impact of her book, saying it had changed the balance in the bedroom.
"Before I wrote my book, the thought was that sex was for men, and women only caved in to please men," she said.
"But I wrote what I knew to be true - that sex is pleasurable for both women and men."
She said nobody was talking about female sexuality at the time she wrote the book.
"You were just supposed to go through with it, rearrange the spice rack in your head and think about what you were going to do tomorrow while you're having sex," she said in a 2004 interview with Mediabistro.
Brown was editor of Cosmopolitan for more than 30 years, ending in 1996.
"I wasn't so high and mighty, I felt very lucky to even give me a chance," she once said about the role.
"I knew nothing about business, I knew very little about - I knew nothing about magazine editing, all I had was a basic brain and a lot of drive."
Writer and former Cosmopolitan Australia editor Mia Freedman met Brown in New York right before she became an editor in her own right.
She says Brown was a pioneering feminist.
"She was a trailblazer - you couldn't have had Sex and the City without Sex and the Single Girl," she told The World Today.
"She was completely eccentric. She had this office that was more like a sort of a bordello.
"It had these leopard print couches and red velvet and she was always wearing leopard print herself and in fishnets and she was an incorrigible flirt, with men, with women, with furniture."
Ita Buttrose, who was the founding editor of Cleo magazine, has also paid tribute to Brown.
"She was a pioneer, she vamped up Cosmopolitan, it was a very dreary old magazine before she came along," she told ABC Radio this morning.
"She sort of gave her readers life and you know not just to accept the role that was then given to women, be a housewife, you know go home, make cakes and look after the children.
"She said don't settle down, you know, enjoy your life, enjoy sex and keep searching for Mr Right."
Hearst chief executive Frank Bennack Jr says Brown was a "true pioneer for women in journalism – and beyond".
New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg has described her as a "quintessential New Yorker".
"[She was] never afraid to speak her mind and always full of advice. She pushed boundaries and often broke them, clearing the way for younger women to follow," he said.
Brown wrote a number of other books, including Sex and the Office, Having It All, and The Late Show: A Semiwild but Practical Survival Plan for Women over 50.
She was married to movie producer David Brown, who produced Hollywood hits such as Sting, Cocoon and Driving Miss Daisy. He died in 2010.
Brown was born in Arkansas in 1922.
Her father died in an elevator accident when she was 10, and the family moved to Los Angeles.