'Archaeological miracle': Construction workers stumble upon sixth-century mosaic in Jerusalem
A 1,500-year-old mosaic floor with a Greek inscription has been uncovered during works to install communications cables in Jerusalem's Old City — a rare discovery of an ancient relic and an historic document in one.
The inscription cites sixth-century Roman emperor Justinian, under whose rule the Roman Empire finished converting to Christianity, as well as Constantine, who served as abbot of a church founded by Justinian in Jerusalem.
Archaeologists believe it will help them to understand Justinian's building projects in the city.
Indiction is an ancient method of counting years that was used for taxation purposes.
Archaeologists said the inscription suggests the mosaic dated to the year AD 550/551.
Justinian was one of the most important rulers of the Byzantine era.
In AD 543 he established the Nea Church in Jerusalem — one of the biggest Christian churches in the eastern Roman Empire and the largest in Jerusalem at the time.
The Nea Church was partially excavated in 1970, and contains an inscription similar to the newly discovered mosaic.
"The fact that the inscription survived is an archaeological miracle," David Gellman, director of the excavation on behalf of the Israel Antiquities Authority, said in a statement.
"The excavation, in a relatively small area, exposed ancient remains that were severely damaged by infrastructure groundwork over the last few decades.
"We were about to close the excavation, when all of a sudden a corner of the mosaic inscription peeked out between the pipes and cables."
He said every archaeologist dreams of finding an inscription, "especially one so well preserved and almost entirely intact".
Researchers believe that the building of which the mosaic was once part, located beside the Old City's Damascus Gate, was used as a hostel for pilgrims.
The Damascus Gate was the main northern entrance to Jerusalem for hundreds of years, Dr Gellman said, and the area become one of the most important and active areas of the city with the emergence of Christianity in the Byzantine period.
The mosaic was discovered earlier this (northern) summer.
Conservation experts have removed the mosaic and are treating it in a specialist workshop.