A thousand and one World Book Nights, please
Here at the Telegraph Books desk we are more than mildly enamoured of World Book Night, an ingenious and heartfelt scheme by which one million books will be given away for free across the UK and Ireland on March 5 2011.
The idea was dreamed up by Canongate MD Jamie Byng, who has a knack for discovering talent (the young unknowns Barack Obama and Philip Pullman have long been part of his stable), and whose entire life appears to be an attempt to prove that nothing is as infectious as enthusiasm. World Book Night is a wildly ambitious extension of that theory.
Here’s how it works: Between now and January 4, members of the public are being asked to choose one book they love from a list of 25 pre-selected titles (see the full list below). They – you! – fill in a form saying, in 100 words, why they would like to give this book to others. The recommendation must be personal, and passionate. Each of 20,000 “givers” will then be sent 48 copies of that book to hand out on the night of March 5 at the venue they have chosen, resulting in what promises to be a national, simultaneous frenzy of book-loving.
The books will be specially printed; the authors have all waived their royalty fees. At a time when libraries are being threatened with closure and the publishing industry is under threat, this spectacular yet simple mass gesture will have what Byng describes as “an unquantifiable impact” on reading. It’s a much-needed celebration, and he has swept up the likes of Damon Albarn and Dave Eggers, Gil Scott-Heron and Damien Hirst in the wake of his idea (other patrons include Seamus Heaney, Margaret Atwood, JK Rowling and Roddy Doyle). Nick Cave hopes to hand out books on Speakers’ Corner. DBC Pierre wants to get on a plane, take over the PA system, and force his favourite novel on the passengers. John Le Carre, whose classic The Spy Who Came in from the Cold is on the list of 25 titles, has said that “no writer can ask for more than this: that his book should be handed in thousands to people who might otherwise never get to read it,” and readers should be grateful too. May World Book Night be repeated for at least a thousand and one.