ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Australian artist Gotye has won three Grammy awards, including the coveted record of the year for his global smash hit Somebody That I Used To Know.
Gotye and Kimbra also won best pop duo performance for the song, while the Melbourne singer-songwriter also won best alternative album for Making Mirrors.
Somebody That I Used To Know has peaked at number one in 18 countries and has been the top iTunes single in 46 countries.
The only other Australian to win record of the year was Olivia Newton-John with I Honestly Love You in 1975.
Gotye said he was humbled by the honour, saying he felt "unworthy" to receive it.
"I just have to say there are so many incredible songs in this category, not only in the Grammys more generally, but also so many artists and pieces of music that aren't recognised by the Grammys this year," he said.
"So I just want to say thank you for everybody who puts great energy into the world of making music.
"I feel unworthy to be up here receiving this, but thank you to all musicians and people who listen to music."
Somebody That I Used To Know beat Lonely Boy by The Black Keys, Stronger (What Doesn't Kill You) by Kelly Clarkson, We Are Young by fun., Thinkin Bout You by Frank Ocean and We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together by Taylor Swift.
Babel by British folk band Mumford & Sons won album of the year, while Taylor Swift, Beyonce, Rihanna, Jay-Z and Kanye West also won gongs as winners in more than 60 categories were announced.
Country-pop singer Swift won a Grammy for her collaboration with T-Bone Burnett and The Civil Wars on the song Safe and Sound from The Hunger Games movie soundtrack.
Jay-Z and Kanye West picked up two awards - best rap performance and best rap song for their collaboration N****s in Paris.
Jay-Z's wife Beyonce won best traditional R&B performance for Love on Top.
DJ Skrillex, who won three Grammy awards last year, picked up three more this year, including best dance/electronica album for Bangarang.
Brian Wilson of The Beach Boys picked up a Grammy for best historical album for The Smile Sessions.
Mumford & Sons, Edward Sharpe and the Magnetic Zeros, and Old Crowe Medicine Show have won best long form music video for Big Easy Express - a documentary which followed the bands as they travelled together by train from San Francisco to New Orleans in the spring of 2011.