Sky's 3D channel tees off with Ryder Cup
It has been difficult to miss the wild amounts of excitement around 3D television of late, although there has been a noticable absence of hype about one important element – the content. But today Sky launches its 3D service, giving those who have already splurged a great load of cash on a new 3D set-up a reason to feel smug, and the rest of us cause to assess whether it's worth shelling out for the kit – you'll need a 3D screen, the glasses to go with it and a Sky box – in order to watch it.
Golf fans may be more persuaded than others, given that a great chunk of the weekend's 3D broadcast will be live Ryder Cup coverage – if play isn't completely rained off, of course. Sport is going to be a big driver for 3D take-up, and golf in particular is regarded as working well in 3D, which transforms flat backgrounds. "You actually see the undulations on the green," Sony chief executive and chairman Howard Stringer told my colleague Steve Busfield this summer. Certainly the golfers themselves are keen. The final three holes of the Sony Open in Hawaii were filmed in 3D and screened in a tent at the event. "Every golfer is narcissistic, looking at their swing. When they saw it in 3D there were long lines of golfers around the tent," Stringer said.
Queuing to watch people playing golf might not be everyone's idea of fun, however. So what else does Sky have this week for 3D viewers? To be honest, it all looks a little thin on the ground. There are various sports events – finals of the US Open tennis, UEFA Champions League and World Matchplay Darts, along with Superleague coverage. The variety will at least be useful in terms of working out which sports 3D is really good for. "It is not as effective when play is going away from the camera as it is when it is coming towards the camera," said Stringer. American football, for example which needs to be watched from the side for the best view, is "awkward" in 3D.
And for those who only watch sports coverage as a sop to their partner? What else does Sky's 3D channel offer? Movies such as Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs, Fly Me To The Moon and Bugs! A 3D Keane video. Dance Dance Dance – about, erm, dancing, which I'm told looks amazing in 3D. Given how young 3D television is, it's not a bad line-up. And while there might currently be large blocks of 3D Previews filling in the gaps where there should be programming, Sky does at least have the ambition to run the channel from 9am until gone midnight. It's not a spectacular start – but then how many people will really be watching?
Sky is hoping that number of viewers with 3D TVs will grow of course. But their current offering wouldn't convince me to fork out for an expensive new telly and specs. Will that be different for sports fans? Are you considering investing – or even been watching the Ryder cup this morning? Let us know you thoughts.