Leila Lopes Miss Angola Wins Miss Universe 2011
LOS ANGELES (LALATE) – Leila Lopes Miss Angola (photos below) is the Miss Universe 2011 winner. Leila Lopes Miss Angola won the Miss Universe 2011 beauty pageant moments ago. Before being named the winner tonight (la ganadora de Miss Universo 2011), some shocking results were revealed to news and viewers. Earlier in the night, special awards were handed out. Miss Sweden Ronnia Fornstedt won Miss Photogenic; Panama Sheldry Sáez won Best National Costume; and Montenegro’s Nikolina Lon?ar won Miss Congeniality.
Alyssa Campanella was America’s hope tonight. While Alyssa Campanella made the top 16, that is as far as she went in the competition. She made the top sixteen cut with Venezuela, Netherlands, Puerto Rico, Colombia and Kosovo. But those six women didn’t advance any further in tonight’s competition. It was a result that shocked news, and especially fans in America and Venezuela.
Later in the telecast, a news announcement drew massive applause from the São Paulo audience. Miss Brazil (Priscila Machado) was heading to the top ten. Also advancing were Australia, Costa Rica, Panama, and Portugal. Rounding off the top ten were France, Ukraine, Philippines, China, and Angola.
The telecast hosts included familiar faces for U.S. audiences, but not so famous faces for Brazilian audiences. Adrienne Maloof-Nassif joined Connie Chung as judges tonight while hosts included Natalie Morales and Andy Cohen.
The top 10 finalists were Australia, Costa Rica, France, Ukraine,  Portugal, Panama, Philippines, Angola,  China, and  Brazil (Priscila Machado). In the final thirty minutes of the telecast, more good news came for the host country. Brazil advanced to the top five with Ukraine, Philippines, China, Brazil and Angola. But in the end, Miss Angola won tonight.
ABOUT THIS AUTHOR || Editor in Chief: Maria Stabile | Maria in ten years has propelled LALATE to become a leading news authority in sports, entertainment, and national news, LALATE has been cited in countless international newspapers (including the Wall Street Journal, New York Times and LA Times), international television news broadcasts including ABC News, books including The Iraq War: Origins and Consequences, tv programs including MTV News, and magazines. For over a decade, LALATE has been a proud licensed member of the St Louis, MO Press Club. || TO CONTACT THIS AUTHOR | Email Address: mstabile@lalate.com | Telephone: 314-400-8010 | Follow on Twitter: Twitter.com/LALATE | Biography: http://news.lalate.com/author/maria-stabile/ | LALATE Staff & Physical Address: http://news.lalate.com/staff/