Glastonbury abbey apologises over Nicolas Cage trailer
The director of Glastonbury abbey today apologised for any offence caused after allowing the Hollywood actor Nicolas Cage to promote his new film, The Sorcerer's Apprentice, from the site said to be King Arthur's grave.
Cage and a film crew were allowed into the abbey in the early hours of the morning so they could broadcast live to an American chat show earlier this year.
But some local people were upset that a film featuring magic was promoted in a place important for many Christians. One resident said he was "horrified and disgusted" that the abbey had been used to sell a film "full of sorcery and black magic".
The director of the abbey, Katherine Gorbing, apologised to "anyone who was offended" but argued that churches and cathedrals were often used as film locations. Gloucester cathedral has been used as a setting in some Harry Potter films while the big screen version of The Da Vinci Code had been partly filmed in Lincoln cathedral, she said.
"We continue to take great care when considering activities ... to ensure the abbey's spiritual significance, its Christian heritage and rich history and traditions are respected," Gorbing said.
During the broadcast, beamed live to ABC's Jimmy Kimmel Live, Cage appears dressed in a thigh-length black leather jacket. Standing next to the spot reputed to be the resting place of King Arthur, he explains he is in a "very magical and sacred" place and says he could not think of a better place from which to launch the new trailer for his film.
Gorbing said Cage, who has a home nearby, personally requested to film at the abbey. She said: "Besides talking about his role in the film, Mr Cage demonstrated generosity in voluntarily promoting Glastonbury and the abbey to millions of Americans ... We hope Mr Cage's promotion will attract more American visitors to Glastonbury."
In a letter in today's Western Daily Press, Gorbing said Cage and his crew "took great care to honour the dignity and spiritual sanctity of the abbey", adding: "We wish everyone involved in activities at the abbey was as respectful."
A spokesman for the abbey said Gorbing had felt it necessary to apologise and explain because there had been "murmurings" in the Somerset town.
One letter writer to a local paper, Mike Derbidge, said he was "horrified and disgusted" that Cage "was let into Glastonbury abbey in the middle of the night to promote his latest film".
He continued: "This film (called The Sorcerer's Apprentice) is full of sorcery and black magic and I am shocked to think that the management of the abbey would allow this to take place. Glastonbury abbey first and foremost is a church and a place of worship.
"I am sure by using the abbey to advertise this film, it has given them a lot of money and confirms what a lot of locals are thinking - and that is that the management would like to see the wonderful abbey with all its history turned into a theme park."
Jane Bentley, a member of the grounds team at the abbey, argued that it had featured in "many (possibly hundreds) of television programmes over the years", many focusing on the "spiritual and mystical side of the abbey's allure". She added: "In these days of multi-faith inclusiveness, to be offended by such a minor thing as a Hollywood film is rather old-fashioned, surely?"