Bobbi Kristina Brown dies at 22
Atlanta (CNN)Two days before she was found face-down in the bathtub at her home outside Atlanta in January, it seemed like Bobbi Kristina Brown's career might have been picking up.
"Let's start this career up&&moving OUT to TO YOU ALLLL quick shall we !?!???!" she said in an enthusiastic tweet
It's not clear what projects she may have been working on, and sadly, the world may never know.
Brown, the daughter of late superstar Whitney Houston and singer Bobby Brown, died Sunday at the age of 22, a representative of the Houston family said in a statement.
"Bobbi Kristina Brown passed away Sunday, July, 26 2015, surrounded by her family," the statement said. "She is finally at peace in the arms of God. We want to again thank everyone for their tremendous amount of love and support during these last few months."
then a hospice facility She was treated in a hospital and then a hospice facility in the nearly six months since she was found unresponsive and not breathing in the bathtub at her Roswell, Georgia, home on January 31 -- nearly three years to the day after her mother accidentally drowned in a bathtub in Beverly Hills, a victim of the vices she had fought for much of her career.
"God knows, I have been in front of millions and millions of people, and that has been incredible, to feel that give-take thing," Houston said. "But, man, when I gave birth to her and when they put her in my arms, I thought: 'This has got to be it. This is the ultimate.' I haven't experienced anything greater."
It was Gordon and a male friend who discovered Brown unconscious in her townhome. While Brown called Gordon her husband (she had tweeted a picture believed to be of their hands wearing wedding rings with the hashtag #HappilyMarried) there is no court record of a marriage between the two, and family members say the couple was never legally wed.
"He was saying for the last week or so, 'I love her. I don't want to lose her. I just want to see her,' " Walker said. "All he wanted to do was see her, hold her hand, talk to her. He was not allowed to do that."
Brown said in a statement "I am making decisions with (Bobbi Kristina's aunt) Pat Houston and we are working together for the medical care of my daughter," Brown said in a statement . "Right now we are focused on Bobbi Kristina's medical prognosis and the criminal investigation. These are the priorities for us. Whoever had a hand in causing my daughter's injuries needs to be brought to justice."