Louisa Johnson becomes youngest EVER X Factor winner amid claims she'll be 'bigger than Leona Lewis'
Louisa Johnson became The X Factor's youngest ever winner on Sunday night when she was crowned champion of the 2015 series of the TV talent show.
The 17-year-old singing sensation beat double act Reggie ‘N’ Bollie to the title as the eleventh season of the ITV series came to a dramatic conclusion at the live finale held at London’s Wembley Arena.
Louisa - who was mentored to success by new judge Rita Ora - has been the bookies’ favourite since the beginning of the competition and it's now claimed she could be bigger than 2006 champion Leona Lewis, who has had 14 top 40 singles and acquired a fortune of a staggering £13million.
Louisa – whose version of Bob Dylan’s Forever Young is being rush-released – is predicted to enjoy levels of popularity similar to Bleeding Love hitmaker Leona and earn at least £6million in the next year alone.
Her record deal with Simon Cowell's Syco label comes with an estimates £125,000 advance and she is expected to earn a further £100,000 from the X Factor tour next year.
An insider told The Sun: 'Louisa is the whole package, she has a great voice, she is pretty and is young enough to have a long career. Simon thinks she could even go on to outshine Leona.'
Leona, who was mentored by Cowell, has achieved international success since her win and remains the richest ever winner of the competition, having amassed a fortune of £13million, closely followed by 2011 champions Little Mix with £12million.
Mentor Rita Ora couldn’t contain her glee, while Louisa sobbed helplessly after hosts Olly Murs and Caroline Flack declared, ‘The winner of The X Factor 2015 is… Louisa Johnson!’ 
Rita enthused: ‘Thank you to everyone who voted! And thank you to Louisa for being the most talented, hardworking and gorgeous winner!’
Fighting back her tears, Essex schoolgirl Louisa wailed: ‘I’ve imagined this day for so many years, it’s incredible. You have no idea how much this means to me.'  
The teen made history as the youngest ever contestant to win the show, while also securing a first win for Rita, who jumped ship from BBC show The Voice this year. 
And after her win, she went straight to Twitter to thank her fans as she gushed: 'OMG. Thank YOU!! U are seriously the most loyal supporters EVER. This was my dream & u have made it come true.'
Despite Louisa's surprise, the teen dominated the votes throughout the series as can be seen from newly released X Factor voting figures.
She had 53.9 per cent of the votes compared to Reggie 'N' Bollie's 38.9 per cent on Sunday night's show. She came out on top with the public vote every week, with just two exceptions.
On the fourth week, she missed out on the top spot by just 0.1 per cent with Reggie 'N' Bollie taking the lead, but in week five she dropped to third place behind both them and Che Chesterman.  
Ghanaian duo Reggie ‘N’ Bollie, who have consistently surprised the judges by winning the public over, took their defeat graciously, saying, ‘We are not devastated, we’re just happy to be here! '
Louisa's win came as little surprise since she blew the audience away with her amazing vocals earlier in the show, exuding confidence far beyond her young years as she belted out James Brown’s It`s A Man's World.
A flabbergasted Cowell exclaimed: ‘That is called The X Factor. No exaggeration. In all the years I have done the show, I have never ever heard anything like that. You are not human!’
‘That was absolutely fantastic!’ Cheryl Fernandez-Versini raved, while Nick enthused, ‘You forget how incredible you are until you perform. It’s like a slap in the face.’
‘Louisa, to see how you’ve evolved as an artist, an individual. You’re just 17 – it blows my mind’, her proud mentor Rita said, as the humble teen fought back tears. 
The grand finale was packed with stellar performances from both the finalists and A-list musical guests Adele, One Direction and Coldplay, as well as an array of sensational sartorial statements.
Despite Louisa's success, the show itself suffered it's lowest ever ratings for a final.
While last year's final drew in 8.93million viewers, Sunday night's live episode only managed to pull 8.4million viewers and for five minutes the two hour show saw 9.9million viewers.
In 2004, 8.1million were glued to their screens as they watched Steve Brookstein win the first ever series and 11 years on only 300,000 more tuned in to see this year's star-studded final.
Winning the ratings battle, Strictly Come Dancing had an average viewership of 10.8million.
Rita, 25, looked absolutely incredible in her glittering grey gown, making the most of her ample cleavage thanks to the feathered number's low-cut neckline.
Meanwhile, Cheryl had clearly saved the best til last, looking equally fantastic in a billowing red princess gown with a full tulle skirt. 
The 32-year-old Girls Aloud singer surpassed herself in her dramatic satin dress, styling her brunette locks in voluminous curls and accessorising with dazzling drop earrings.
While it seemed like it could be anyone's game early on in the show, it soon became apparent that Louisa was the clear winner from both the audience and the judge's reaction.  
The finale kicked off with a live performance from the finalists, including Seann Miley Moore and 4th Impact, as they belted out a mash-up of Petula Clark's Downtown.
Next up were eight-time BRIT Award winners and regular X Factor guest vocalists, Coldplay, who performed new single Adventure Of A Lifetime from album A Head Full Of Dreams. 
Frontman Chris Martin, who worked up a visible sweat as he danced around with a troupe of gorillas, enthused how excited he was to be on the show and said he didn't have a favourite for the win.
Reggie ‘N’ Bollie then performed their song of the series, a mash-up of 1D’s What Makes You Beautiful and OMI's Cheerleader, earning just as much praise as Louisa. 
The pair mixed things up by launching into a version of I Like To Move It, which had both the audience and the judges on their feet dancing along.
Show boss Simon Cowell enthused: 'Yesterday you were good... tonight was a whole new level. Your energy, your enthusiasm - after that, we may be in for a surprise!'
Nick Grimshaw agreed, saying, 'You guys could win, I've never seen a reaction like that in here.' 
The finalists both had a second chance to sway the vote, each performing the winner's single, Forever Young, a soulful Bob Dylan cover that could see Louisa scoring the coveted Christmas number one.
Reggie 'N' Bollie brought the judges to tears as they praised the dynamic double act and there wasn't a dry eye in the house as their families shared their messages of support for them.
It seemed the win was already in the bag for Louisa since Simon enthused after her winner's single performance, 'I feel like we're witnessing the birth of a star', while Grimmy said she was giving him 'Whitney and Mariah vibes'.
The action-packed live final also boasted a host of A-list artists and surprise celebrity video messages.
One Direction, who were formed on the show in 2010, returned to perform for the last time before the band take a break from March 2016 onwards.
Harry Styles, Louis Tomlinson, Liam Payne and Niall Horan - minus original member Zayn Malik - set their fans wild in the emotional set.
Mentor Simon looked overwhelmed as he told them: 'Well, this takes me back five years ago when I met five guys, singing as solo artists, then I never could have predicted what happened next. I know you're gonna take a break, you deserve it.
'I want to take a chance now to say, thank you, you've been an absolute pleasure to work with. Five of the nicest guys I ever met. Enjoy the time off, have a fantastic time.'
Messages were then shown on a video tape from James Corden, Robbie Williams, Wayne Rooney, Danny DeVito (who told them to 'spend some of that money' they earn), Jack Whitehall, Little Mix, 5 Seconds Of Summer and David Beckham.
Not bowing out quietly, One Direction then performed for a second time, giving a rather jazzy rendition of another song from their new album Made In The A.M, History.
Liam said: 'We've had the most amazing five years. We're sad we're going away for a little while but we need it. You can see how happy we are, it's genuine happiness.'  
Will Ferrell also made a surprise appearance in a video message, recalling some of the show’s most memorable contestants from years past, including eccentric singer Chico.
Discussing bongo-banging Wagner, the American comedian joked: ‘He’s one of the greats! The way he plays those drums, he could teach Phil Collins a thing or two!’  
The grand final saved the best for last thanks to a performance from Adele, who took to the show's stage to sing record-breaking hit Hello.
She cackled: 'That was amazing! I feel like I've been waiting half my life to be here!... I feel like I'm in East 17 being at Wembley!' The superstar backed Louisa for the win, but cited Lauren Murray as her favourite.
On The Xtra Factor on Sunday night, following the results, hosts Rochelle Humes and Melvin Odoom revealed to the judges their initial predictions as to who they originally thought would win the competition.
Rita, Cheryl and Simon all correctly predicted Louisa, while Nick predicted Josh Daniel would triumph– despite not putting him through to the live shows in his Boys category.
As the hosts pointed out to him, Josh couldn’t have won if his mentor Nick didn’t send him to the lives, to which the Radio One DJ responded: ‘I do love you Josh Daniel!’
Meanwhile, one person who didn't enjoy the night was controversial contestant Mason Noise. 
He shunned the finalists' collaboration on Sunday night's final show before posting an antagonistic jibe about One Direction on Instagram.
The finalists from The X Factor lives shows performed the Macklemore and Ryan Lewis hit Downtown on the Wembley Arena stage, with one notable exception: series badboy Mason.
Instead, the 22-year-old took to Twitter to post a cryptic tweet. He wrote: 'I stand for what I believe in #AWE.'
And then the singer posted a snap of him and Liam Payne from earlier in the series on Instagram with the caption: 'One of the highlights of my experience, meeting one of Harry Styles backing singers @onedirection #XfactorFinal #onedirection'
Live show favourites 4th Impact, Lauren Murray and Seann Miley-Moore all returned to perform the upbeat track, which had the arena bouncing as the contestants took it in turns to sing lines from the retro-tinged song.
Mason is due to appear in next year's X Factor arena tour, although it is not yet known if his latest comments have jeopardised his place on the bill. 
The MailOnline has contacted an X Factor representative for comment. 
The stars let their hair down on the night when they headed to the show's after party at the Edition hotel in London. 
Winner Louisa kept her spangly dress on for the occasion, teaming it with a pair of grey Dior boots and a purple tote bag. 
She was joined by her mentor, Rita Ora, who wore a bright lilac two-piece by Chanel for the occasion. 
Simon Cowell was pictured looking pretty pleased with himself as he jumped into a car with his girlfriend Lauren Silverman, who looked ravishing in red. 
Of course, Sinitta wasn't too far behind as she headed out wearing a sexy black number. 
Also pictured at the event were fellow former contestants, Che Chesterman, 4th Impact and Lauren Murray. 
Olly Murs was pictured looking suited and booted, while One Direction were also pictured getting ready to let their hair down. 
But it was straight back to work on Monday morning for Louisa, despite the fact that she probably had little sleep.
The pretty blonde was pictured leaving the BBC Radio 1 studios after beginning her first round of interviews following the show.
She looked incredible in a slogan Not Your Doll T-shirt by Wildfox and a funky leopard print jacket as she posed for snaps outside the venue. 