Ed Miliband to marry partner Justine Thornton
But in a surprise move, Mr Miliband, 41, said he would not have a best man – a position widely expected to go to his brother and former leadership rival, David Miliband.
The couple, who have been together for five years, will tie the knot in a ceremony at a country house near Nottingham on May 27.
It comes just over four months after they celebrated the birth of their second son, Samuel.
Speaking outside their home in north London, Mr Miliband disclosed that he had proposed on nearby Primrose Hill which commands a panoramic view of the capital.
He said that the wedding would involve only "family and very close family friends" adding that his brother was the second person to whom he had broken the news - after their mother, Marion.
"He is delighted for me and he will obviously be there," the Labour leader said.
Mr Miliband, who previously said he was “too busy” to get married, made the initial announcement in an interview in the Doncaster Free Press, the local newspaper in his constituency.
“I feel incredibly privileged to be marrying someone so beautiful and who is such a special person,” he told the paper.
“It’s the right time for us to do this and I’m really looking forward to a lovely day.”
Miss Thornton, 40, a Cambridge-educated environmental lawyer, has largely avoided the limelight during the couple's relationship and was seen as a reluctant political partner.
She said: “I am marrying him because of who he is and not because of what he’s doing now.
“We’re planning on a small ceremony, all at the hotel with everything at the same place and we’re looking forward to it very much.”
The couple have chosen Langar Hall hotel near Nottingham, close to where Miss Thornton grew up, and are inviting around 50 guests.
They then plan to go on honeymoon at a secret location.
A former child actress who starred in the television show Dramarama, Miss Thornton met Mr Miliband in 2004 and they began a relationship the following year.
The pair were sharing a home in north London when, in March 2009, The Daily Telegraph disclosed her identity for the first time – reporting that she worked in the nuclear industry at a time when Mr Miliband was responsible for energy policy.
Mr Miliband had provided officials at the Department for Energy and Climate Change with her name, but did not publish it on the register of ministerial interests, merely reporting that his girlfriend was an "environmental lawyer."
In fact, Miss Thornton was the "preferred counsel" for E. On, which was bidding for Government contracts worth more than £20 billion to build new power stations.
When their first child, Daniel, was born only Miss Thornton’s name appeared on his birth certificate.
Mr Miliband is understood to have failed to have found the time to make an appointment to attend the register office to name himself as the father.
Nor did he fill in a "statutory declaration form," the other option available to the fathers of babies born out of wedlock.
When asked last year why he and Miss Thornton had never married, Mr Miliband explained that he had been too busy with the general election, the birth of Daniel and — to the horror of press aides concerned at the unromantic image he was portraying — the strains of attending the Copenhagen climate summit.
The couple had put on hold any wedding plans after Miss Thornton became pregnant again so soon after Daniel's birth.