Alan Ayckbourn archive to be available to the public
A huge stash of insights into the work of the world's most popular living dramatist is to be made public online and at a university research centre, with conditions to encourage its widest possible use.
More than a tonne of material on the career of Sir Alan Ayckbourn, from school exercise books to CDs tracking his meticulous revisions, has been bought by the University of York for £240,000 with the help of the Heritage Lottery Fund and charitable trusts.
Thousands of sketches and plans illuminate the progress of Ayckbourn's 75 plays and hundreds of minor works, with more to come as the playwright, now 72 and recovering from a stroke, works on. Ayckbourn, who is based in the Yorkshire resort of Scarborough where international critics must travel to watch premieres of his plays at the Stephen Joseph Theatre, has also handed over half a century's worth of correspondence, much of it with celebrated theatrical names.
Professor Brian Cantor, vice-chancellor of the University of York, said the material illuminated the methods of a dramatist who managed the unusual feat of being both extremely popular and critically acclaimed.
Ayckbourn is the most performed playwright in the world after Shakespeare and is a staple of both the Royal National Theatre and the Royal Shakespeare Company. Researchers for a forthcoming BBC documentary found at least one of his plays was performed or in rehearsal in the UK every day of the year.
"It has been an unusual experience going through some of the pile with the archivists," said Ayckbourn, who had to overcome an instinctive preference for getting on with the next of his many projects. "I'm not one for looking back, but then you will find a letter to Peggy [Ashcroft] or an email from an actor who got the wrong part sent to them, and it brings back all the thoughts you had at the time and the way the plays developed."
Ayckbourn has been writing and producing for 52 years after working initially as a stage manager and actor. Because of demand for his work, the hoard contains no unperformed material, but there are curiosities which may now get a revival. He said: "I was intrigued to rediscover a short piece I did to showcase the backstage talents of the National Theatre, called Ron and Julie. It was a take on Romeo and Juliet involving a lovely lighting assistant, a humble sound engineer who courted her and a special effects man who kept trying to stop them getting together."
The archive includes very early influences from his mother, a freelance journalist, who would sweep away the breakfast things and type short stories all morning, while Alan sat under the table doing his own juvenilia on a toy typewriter. It also has boxes of more recent digital material saved since the playwright finally shifted from pen, paper and correction fluid to computers.
"I thought that all my drafts would be lost that way, but then I discovered a button called 'corrections'," he said. "I was astonished. All the changes I'd made came up on screen. It looked like a battlefield. Shortly after, a file like that was sent to an actor by mistake. He rang me up and said: 'Why have you sent me 44 versions of the part?'"
The archive will particularly intrigue students of stagecraft, which has long been seen as Ayckbourn's exceptional talent, influenced by his mentor Stephen Joseph and years of practical experience backstage. Ron and Julie alone contains hundreds of detailed sound, lighting and special effects instructions, and Ayckbourn classics such as Absurd Person Singular and The Norman Conquests have won praise for intricate staging as well as their perceptions about the habits of the British middle class.
His regional base is reckoned to have given edge to his observation, although life in Scarborough is not always quiet. Ayckbourn recently mistook a burglar in his home for one of his regular flow of visitors, and was caught up in a brief but passionate debate over whether his theatre was as important as threatened local public lavatories.
He said his own work had many influences from past masters, although the nearest he had got to archival study himself was a look at material left by another perfectionist at staging, Noël Coward. He said: "The memory that sticks in my mind is about his song Nina from Argentina, and how he worked away at the lyrics on a train.
"I expect I'll be one of the users of the archive at York. Our top two floors here at home are a lot clearer, but it's nice to feel that it's only 60 miles down the road. It's also good to feel that it may prove to be fertile ground for ideas and to inspire others to write."
Making practical use of the material was a condition agreed by York, with both Ayckbourn and the Heritage Lottery Fund. Availability of the scripts, directions and letters is expected to extend the curriculum for A and AS-level drama and the university will appoint an educational outreach officer to promote the archive as part of the deal.
Digital material will go online shortly and staff hope to add more soon. Mike Cordner, the Ken Dixon professor of drama in York's department of theatre, film and television, said: "Sir Alan is a uniquely prolific, radically innovative, and supremely inventive dramatist. We're proud to have it, and to make it available for use not only by the university community but also the wider public."