The Beatles and Apple finally come together, right now … on iTunes
Think of it as the long and winding download: after a decade of wrangling the Beatles, their heirs and their record company EMI finally came together to agree to appear on Apple's iTunes today.
In the 10 years since iTunes launched, the Beatles were the most notable absentees, prompting endless questions about when the Fab Four would embrace the digital technology of the current generation.
Or as Ringo Starr put it: "I am particularly glad to no longer be asked when the Beatles are coming to iTunes," before signing off with the hopeful sixties refrain of "peace and love".
Behind the scenes, though, relations have been anything but harmonious. Not only have the Beatles and their company Apple Corps been in and out of the courts fighting with Steve Jobs's Apple Computer over the past 30 years over the use of the Apple name, but rows over copyright and royalties with EMI, which controls the recordings, had made digitisation impossible.
For a long time Yoko Ono and Olivia Harrison – the widows of John and George – were concerned that it would be easy to copy songs if they were released digitally, to the frustration of EMI executives who believed they misunderstood the technological issues. Meanwhile millions of people continued to purchase Beatles CDs and simply rip the songs on to their computer or illegally share them online.
"For 10 years you've been able to steal the songs, now you can actually buy them," quipped a senior record executive at a rival label. Industry insiders said they understood that EMI will have paid Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr and the two widows a multimillion-pound advance to secure their acceptance – with EMI struggling under debt it was under pressure to pay up in order to secure a badly needed digital windfall.
An exclusive deal into 2011 means iTunes will be the only place to buy Beatles songs digitally – with albums such as Sgt Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band priced at £10.99. Individual songs are charged at 99p and for the digital completist, the entire catalogue is at £125 .
The former X Factor band JLS remain favourites to top the singles chart this week, with Love You More, but industry insiders expect some of the most popular Beatles songs to creep into the top 10, over forty years after they were first releasedLast night, Hey Jude, Let It Be and Twist And Shout were making early showings in the iTunes charts. Martin Talbot, the chief executive of the Official Charts Company, which compiles the charts, said: "I'd think you could see a handful of Beatles songs back in the top ten, but the only problem is that they have released so much material that it is not obvious what songs will prove the most popular".
Now that the Beatles are on board, the Highway to Hell band AC/DC are the most significant digital holdouts. But there was little sign that the heavy metal outfit was having a change of heart. A frustrated spokesman for Sony Music, their record company, said: "It'd be great for Sony – but I don't think the band will be changing their mind any time soon. They believe that their albums should be consumed in their entirety".