Sweden's Loreen takes out controversial Eurovision
Sweden's Loreen has taken out the Eurovision Song Contest in Azerbaijan before an international television audience of 100 million, days after angering Azeri authorities by meeting human rights activists critical of the host country.
The 28-year-old won with the song Euphoria in the annual competition of 42 countries, delighting viewers and the contest's professional judges and dancing barefoot as she sang.
Loreen's club anthem Euphoria easily outscored entries from her nearest rivals from Russia, Serbia and hosts Azerbaijan to be declared winner of the contest in Baku, the local host broadcaster announced.
The win marks Sweden's fifth victory in the annual music extravaganza - famous for its heavy-duty kitsch - and will see Sweden host the competition next year.
Sweden is a veteran competitor at Eurovision, entering the competition in 1958. However its last victory goes back to Take Me to Your Heaven by Charlotte Nilsson in 1999, when competition was held in Jerusalem.
The country first won the contest in Brighton, England in 1974 with the instantly memorable hit Waterloo by the iconic group ABBA.
For many the band and the song that defined the competition for ever.
Second place went to Buranovskiye Babushki or Russia, a choir of elderly women from a remote village who warmed the hearts of audiences with their disco song in traditional dress.
Serbia, represented by the hugely popular Eurovision veteran Zeljko Joksimovic, came third with 214 points.
The votes are decided on a point basis drawn from merging text message and phone votes cast by the audience with the decisions of professional juries from Eurovision member countries. Audience members are unable to vote for their own country.
But opposition groups have capitalised on the attention on Eurovision - intended by Azerbaijan to promote the country as a destination for tourism and business - to demand democracy and the resignation of the government.
Dozens of peaceful protesters have been arrested this month in the Caspian coastal capital, Baku.
Activists claim some buildings in the centre of the city were torn down to make way for the Eurovision arena and residents were forcibly evicted without proper compensation.
Winner Loreen met activists who accuse the government of forcing people from their homes for the building of the hall, an accusation Baku denies. Azeri authorities accused her of making political statements that did not belong in a musical event.
To promote talent over politically and geographically motivated bloc voting, professional judges now account for 50 per cent of a performer's score.