Coronation Street: 50 years on and still the pride of the north-west
Some might say ITV's soap is stuck in a timewarp – but as Corrie celebrates 50 years with tonight's live episode, locals, politicians and TV stars hail its powerful sense of place
There's no map to tell you where Coronation Street is. Let alone the Red Rec or The Flying Horse. "The Queen asked me: 'Where is the real Coronation Street?' recalls its creator Tony Warren. "I said to her: 'It's wherever you want it to be in your own heart.' And she said, 'I like that.' So that's on the authority of the Queen of England."
But Coronation Street has, for many viewers, always been firmly set in the north-west – and the north-west has always been an important part of Corrie. It is among that handful of shows that seem as much about a place as about the people.
When Warren brought Weatherfield to the screen half a century ago, it was shaped by the backstreet Salford of his childhood and the theatre of places such as Cross Lane market. "Second-hand Mary the human ragbag, the man who sold plates by wearing long gangly earrings and smashing a plate with a toffee hammer every now and then. Barmy Mick, who threw firelighters out into the crowd," Warren remembers.
Now, 50 years on, Weatherfield is described as a suburb of Manchester, albeit still linked to Salford. And both cities remain in the very DNA of what makes Corrie tick. "Although we have modernised all the cobbles and terraced houses, the spirit and the characters of the street live in every corner of Manchester," maintains Manchester councillor Pat Karney, lead member for the city centre.
"It's a spirit of community and togetherness; looking after – and out for – each other, and adapting to our ever-changing world. Every Manchester neighbourhood has a host of recognisable Corrie characters, and we get a sense of watching ourselves on screen, which makes us all part of the Street."
Coronation Street broke new ground in introducing a working-class drama with a Lancashire accent, firmly set in the north-west. "I was canny enough at the time to realise that the flat Manchester accent makes comedy funnier and drama more intense," says Warren. William Roache, who has played Ken Barlow from the very first episode, believes that Lancashire sense of humour, evident even in the worst of times, provides the heartbeat of Coronation Street: "Tony set the criteria and as long as we stick with that, it can go on forever." Certainly it's impossible to imagine Corrie without it.
But how do the people who share their city with the soap feel about its on-screen depiction? Walk up the road from the Coronation Street cobbles to a tram stop in the shadow of Deansgate's gleaming Beetham Tower and you'll find all shades of opinion about the show. There are some who live in the city who resent the terraced view of Manchester the drama presents to the world compared with the vibrant, modern city of today.
But many feel pride in the locally-produced TV drama – it's a familiar sight to glimpse off-duty cast members on the city streets as if they'd hopped on the 33 bus by Audrey's hair salon.
Student David Hatton, of Chorlton, has watched for as long as he can remember. "It's second nature for me to now see the odd Corrie star in the local supermarket," he says. "But at times I forget they are actors and have said 'hello' like they're an old friend."
Graham Williams is another lifelong viewer. "It makes me proud to live in Salford," he insists. "No other TV series has stood the test of time or adapted and evolved to reflect the changing life of the city that surrounds it."
Warren wanted to preserve the people and places he saw "like flies in amber". Yet Weatherfield has also moved with the times: when Carla Connor comes close to exhausting the Rovers Return's supply of red wine, she sups champagne in the 23rd floor bar of the Beetham, where the real life cocktail list includes an "Ena Sparkles".
"There are many who say Corrie gives a poor reflection of our region, that somehow it's stuck in a timewarp," argues Corrie location tour guide Mark Llewellin. "Well, it was never a documentary but what it does capture is the essence of the north – colourful characters, a wicked sense of fun and a spirit that simply doesn't exist in the home counties."