Grammys: Taylor Swift makes history as Kendrick Lamar wins big, Ed Sheeran and Meghan Trainor also honoured
Pop superstar Taylor Swift has become the first woman to win the top Grammy Award twice, as rapper Kendrick Lamar picked up a swag of accolades on the music industry's biggest night.
The Grammy gongs mainly went to mainstream chart-toppers, with Swift taking the album of the year prize for 1989 and the retro party anthem Uptown Funk winning record of the year.
Swift, who has transformed from her days as a country prodigy, won three prizes on the night, all for work off 1989, which was one of the best-selling US albums of the past decade.
Taking the stage to accept the best album award, Swift sent a message to "all the young women out there".
"There are going to be people along the way who will try to undercut your success or take credit for your accomplishments or your fame," she said.
"But if you just focus on the work and you don't let those people sidetrack you, someday when you get where you are going, you will look around and you will know that it was you and the people who love you who put you there."
Swift also made history in 2010 when she won album of the year for Fearless, becoming the youngest artist to take the prize as the album was recorded when she was 20.
1989 marked the former country prodigy's transformation into a pop icon, and also netted her two other awards — best pop vocal album for 1989 and best music video for her song Bad Blood.
That award that also went to Lamar, who appeared in the action-themed clip.
While Swift won the top award, the most Grammys went to Lamar, whose album To Pimp a Butterfly offered an innovative meditation on race relations with infusions of jazz and spoken word.
Lamar, whose song Alright has become an unofficial anthem for protesters against police abuse, took five awards out of 11 nominations - the most nods for a single artist in one night since Michael Jackson earned 12 following his massive Thriller.
In a politically charged yet genre-spanning appearance, Lamar shuffled onto stage as part of a chain-gang as a jazz saxophone merged with a heavy guitar on The Blacker the Berry.
As his performance transitioned to Alright, Lamar - his face painted with a bruise - metaphorically walked back to his African roots in a performance with rhythmic dancers in traditional garb before a firepit.
"This is for hip-hop," the 28-year-old said, receiving the best rap album award from gangsta rap legend Ice Cube.
"We will live forever - believe that."
Record of the Year went to Uptown Funk, a dance track with echoes of early Prince by Mark Ronson featuring Bruno Mars.
Ronson, a longtime producer from Britain who has notably worked with superstar Adele, found unprecedented success in his own right with Uptown Funk, which spent a near record 14 weeks at the top of the US Billboard singles chart.
The 40-year-old, who also put on a well-received performance at last week's Super Bowl, said he was still getting used to his success.
"I would be just as happy and proud if I produced it. I'm a record producer, not a pop star," he said of the song.
English singer and guitarist Ed Sheeran won for song of the year, which recognises songwriting whereas record of the year looks at overall singles, for Thinking Out Loud - a bare love ballad.
Meghan Trainor, 22, won another key award, Best New Artist, after the breakthrough success of All About That Bass, her tongue-in-cheek doo wop take on weight struggles and self-acceptance.
Trainor beat out Australian hope Courtney Barnett in the category, and broke down in tears as she accepted the award.
Alabama Shakes, the bluesy indie rock band defined by Brittany Howard's thunderous voice, won three Grammys - best alternative music album, rock song and rock performance.
Alabama Shakes hail from the small town of Athens, Alabama, where Howard was a postal delivery woman before the band made it big on a trip to New York.
"When we started this, we were in high school ... and we just did it for fun. We never thought we would be getting any awards, any recognition, like this," Howard said in her thick Southern drawl.
Canadian R&B singer The Weeknd also had two wins including best urban contemporary album.
The Grammys also paid tribute to a number of artists who recently died, chief among them the rock icon David Bowie.
Pop diva Lady Gaga stole the show with an extravagant, multimedia Bowie tribute that befitted the flamboyant rock legend, who died last month.
She blazed through the singer's era-defining hits including Space Oddity, Changes, and Ziggy Stardust, accompanied on guitar by Nile Rodgers, who co-produced Bowie's biggest-selling album, Let's Dance.
Gaga set the chaotic tone from the start, appearing in a bright orange wig with the trademark Aladdin Sane flash on her face, and affected an odd English accent as a huge spider was projected onto her face.
Gaga, born as Stefani Germanotta, won the longest ovation of the night as she finished the medley with Heroes, one of Bowie's best-known songs.
The performance featured special effects provided by chip-maker Intel, including "digital make-up" projected onto her face that enabled her to take on a number of Bowie's iconic looks without leaving the stage.
Bowie died on January 10 from a publicly undisclosed battle with cancer, two days after he turned 69 and released his final album, Blackstar.
While the experimental album also came out too late for this year's Grammys, composer Maria Schneider won a Grammy for best arrangements for one of the songs, Sue (Or in a Season of Crime).
Other performers included British singer Adele, whose album 25 has smashed early sales records but came out too early for Grammys contention.
Adele sang her powerful new ballad All I Ask, although her performance was marred by a technical glitch when a microphone fell and she drifted out of tune.
"The piano mics fell on to the piano strings, that's what the guitar sound was. It made it sound out of tune. Shit happens," she tweeted.
One non-performer was the R&B superstar Rihanna, who cancelled at the last minute, citing voice problems due to illness.
"So sorry I couldn't be there," she tweeted.