CBS Cancels Production On ‘Two And A Half Men’ For Remainder Of Season Following Sheen’s Radio Rant; Actor Fires Back
CBS has pulled the plug on “Two and a Half Men”… for now.
Just hours after Charlie Sheen went on a radio rampage, blasting his bosses at the television show, CBS issued a statement on behalf of the network and “…Men’s” production company, announcing they were pulling the show from production of new episodes.
“Based on the totality of Charlie Sheen’s statements, conduct and condition, CBS and Warner Bros. Television have decided to discontinue production of ‘Two and a Half Men’ for the remainder of the season,” CBS said in a statement late Thursday night.
Not long after CBS and Warner Bros. issued their statement, Sheen had some words of his own, specifically aimed at show creator Chuck Lorre.
“What does this say about Haim Levine [Chuck Lorre] after he tried to use his words to judge and attempt to degrade me. I gracefully ignored this folly for 177 shows … I fire back once and this contaminated little maggot can’t handle my power and can’t handle the truth,” Sheen said in an open letter, posted on TMZ’s website.
Sheen went even further, attacking Lorre, suggesting this is a battle and claiming the fans will support him.
“I wish him nothing but pain in his silly travels especially if they wind up in my octagon. Clearly I have defeated this earthworm with my words — imagine what I would have done with my fire breathing fists,” Sheen’s statement continued. “I urge all my beautiful and loyal fans who embraced this show for almost a decade to walk with me side-by-side as we march up the steps of justice to right this unconscionable wrong.
“Remember these are my people … not yours…we will continue on together,” he added.
AH Nation Poll: Were CBS & Warner Bros. right to pull the plug on the production of “Two and A Half Men” for the remainder of the season following Charlie Sheen’s radio rant? Click HERE to vote!
As previously reported on AccessHollywood.com, Sheen called into a nationally syndicated radio show on Thursday and unleashed a shocking rant in which he attacked Alcoholics Anonymous and his hit CBS show.
“I was told if I went on the attack, they would cancel the show and all that and so I’m just sort of seeing if they’re telling the truth or not,” Charlie claimed to host Alex Jones in an interview for his radio show, “The Alex Jones Show,” on Thursday, referring to his CBS bosses.
“Are they happy with the $5 billion they already made off me or do they think they can turn it into $10 [billion] in a couple more seasons?” Charlie continued. “I’m just saying, you know [the show] is a runaway freakin’ juggernaut.”
Charlie made it abundantly clear he doesn’t believe the show can survive without him, telling Alex, “Watch your ratings, dudes. Watch your stupid ratings.
“Do what you’ve gotta do — I’ll go make movies with superstars and not work with idiots,” he threatened.
The 45-year-old also blasted show creator Chuck Lorre, calling him a “turd” while claiming that he embarrassed Chuck “in front of his children and the world by healing at a pace that his un-evolved mind cannot process.”