Last of the Summer Wine, BBC One, review
When the BBC announced in June tha Last of the Summer Wine was to end after its next series, I wondered what would happen in its closing scene. Something grand and final, perhaps, with mourners gathering round the deathbed of Clegg (Peter Sallis)? Something soapy and uplifting, with weasel-faced adulterer Howard (Robert Fyfe) and vinegar-voiced Pearl (Juliette Kaplan) renewing their vows? Or maybe it would plump for the same denouement as Lost and Ashes to Ashes – both of which finished in May – and reveal that for the past 37 years Clegg has been pushing his bicycle not around the tranquil West Yorkshire village of Holmfirth, but purgatory.
In the event, as we saw on BBC One yesterday, TV’s longest-running sitcom concluded in a way that was rather more in keeping with its character: the elderly cast chugging over the horizon in a coach, bound for a merry meal out, while watched from a field by two policemen with no trousers on.
The no-trousers bit won’t make much sense if you didn’t see the episode. Actually, it didn’t make much sense even if you did. But then, Last of the Summer Wine never pretended to be a bastion of documentary realism.
There isn’t much point asking why Last of the Summer Wine was cancelled: its viewing figures had slid from 19 million in 1985 to 3 million last year. The more interesting question is how it thrived for so long. Not even its staunchest fan would claim it was a byword for sophisticated humour: its acting was often pantomime, and its scripts’ stock-in-trade was slapstick and tepid sexual innuendo (“What big… shoulders you have!” as Toby squeaked to Marina last night).
But the Beano-level obviousness of the jokes didn’t matter. At heart, Last of the Summer Wine wasn’t so much a comedy as a comfort. It was the TV equivalent of a hot water bottle. Nothing upsetting ever happened, or at least nothing more upsetting than a trio of elderly men in a bathtub on wheels clattering without injury into a dry-stone wall. It was, despite the innuendo, sex-free: Howard the adulterer never actually got into bed with his mistress (I’m not sure we even saw them kiss). Throughout the Seventies and Eighties, the programme’s heyday, Britain was changing at unsettling speed – yet here we could seek solace in a dear old village in the Dales where nobody had changed so much as his vest since 1922.
All the men in it were petrified of women; all the women in it were tyrants, scolds or trollops (and more intelligent than their cowed, gulping menfolk). Very British, that; very music hall – and, in a way that suggests peculiar things about our national psyche, reassuring.
For a show that depended on familiarity, its final years suffered from too many enforced changes. The actors who played most of the important characters (Compo, Nora Batty, Foggy, Wesley, Edie) died in quick succession.
So to anyone who hadn’t watched Last of the Summer Wine since its peak, but tuned in yesterday to pay their respects, the episode may have seemed confusing. The storyline (everybody getting ready for a wedding that, in the end, was called off because the groom did a runner) jerked from scene to scene with atypical haste. Clegg was barely in it. Still, thanks to the soothing pastoral panorama of its opening credits, accompanied as always by Ronnie Hazlehurst’s winsomely meandering theme tune, we were at least reminded of the main reason the programme was cherished so deeply and for so long.
In Notes from a Small Island, his travel book about Britain, Bill Bryson said he loved the Dales because of the “snug air of self-containment that the enclosing hills give, a sense that the rest of the world is far away and unnecessary”. Last of the Summer Wine gave us that, too.
As if to continue an evening of Northern nostalgia, BBC Four ran a sequence of programmes about Blackpool. Blackpool on Film was the only new one – although, in a sense, it wasn’t new at all, being a higgledy-piggledy compilation of archive footage showing Blackpool as captured by TV crews down the decades.
One of the hallmarks of archive footage is that everyone looks naïve and gawky and endearingly comic. Someday, documentaries will be made about 2010, and we’ll look naïve and gawky and endearingly comic too. Honestly, though: all those holiday-makers from the Fifties, Sixties and Seventies, with their headscarves and splayed teeth and bottle-thick specs and hedge-sized sideburns; scowling brats on donkeys, old men in flat caps with their trousers rolled up to their pasty white knees, Rod Hull and Emu capering on the pier…
Like Last of the Summer Wine, it showed us a past that was quaint, silly, and now sadly out of reach.