ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The brightly coloured plastic vuvuzela has achieved its own form of immortality by being included in the latest edition of the Oxford Dictionary of English.
The 2010 edition of the Oxford Dictionary of English still manages to cram 2,112 pages into a single volume.
With a new edition coming out about every five years, the competition can be fierce to get a word recognised.
But it seems the dictionary's editors were among the huge global audience taking in this year's soccer World Cup.
The trumpet's monotone drone could be heard throughout matches during the World Cup, and came under criticism from both players and spectators.
The ANU's Australian National Dictionary Centre director, Bruce Moore, has a big say on what new Australian phrases and words make the grade.
"It's interesting how quickly a world catches - vuvuzelas has found its way into the dictionary," he said.
"Twenty years ago the rule would have been you really had to wait five or so years and be sure that a word was hearing and being heard in many contexts before you put it into the dictionary."
The new accolade for the horns, whose buzzing has been compared to a hornet's nest, came after "vuvuzela" was voted the word of the World Cup in a survey of global linguists last month.
It was chosen by 75 per cent of more than 320 linguists from more than 60 countries, who were asked to choose the word with the biggest impact on the tournament.
Vuvuzela was just one of more than 2,000 new entries in the third edition of the dictionary, which was first published in 1998.
The battle to deal with climate change provided carbon capture and storage, the process of trapping and storing carbon dioxide produced by burning fossil fuels.
The economic crisis also introduced new terms. These included toxic debt, debt which has a high risk of default, and quantitative easing, which is the introduction of new money into the national supply by a central bank.
Dr Moore says social media has presented a challenge to dictionary editors keen to pick enduring words and reject the faddish ones.
"It's now almost exactly two years ago and I can recall sitting around at a meeting saying, 'what do you make of these new words people are talking about tweets and twitters and so on - do you think this one's a stayer?'," he said.