Claude Chabrol, Pioneer French Filmmaker, Dies at 80
Like the Hollywood professionals he admired, Mr. Chabrol refused few of the projects that came his way. As a result he averaged two or three films a year through the 1960s and 1970s, alternating personal films like “La Femme Infidèle”(1968) with international co-productions like the dual-language “La Decade Prodigieuse”/“Ten Days Wonder” (1971), starring Anthony Perkins, Michel Piccoli and Orson Welles.
Frequently working with the cameraman Jean Rabier and the screenwriter Paul Gégauff, Mr. Chabrol, in more than 50 films, developed an elegant, formally distant style, built around controlled camera movements that often seemed to be describing the imprisonment of his characters in a stifling social order. His style was studiously cool, his detachment from his characters disguising a deeper compassion for their plight as victims of a hypocritical middle-class moralism. He employed close-ups with discretion, as if he were declining to violate the privacy of his characters out of a concern for bourgeois propriety. But behind the well-bred manners could be found a sly, mocking sense of humor — a quality Mr. Chabrol carried over to his frequent appearances on French talk shows.
“Stupidity is infinitely more fascinating that intelligence,” Mr. Chabrol once observed. “Intelligence has its limits while stupidity has none. To observe a profoundly stupid individual can be very enriching, and that’s why we should never feel contempt for them.”
“Le Boucher” (1969), a Hitchcockian suspense film starring Stéphane Audran as a schoolteacher attracted to an Algerian war veteran (Jean Yanne) who may be a serial killer, became a commercial and critical hit in the United States. Other films, like the broadly comic “Docteur Popaul” (1972) starring Jean-Paul Belmondo, were barely seen outside France. Referring to the uneven critical reception of his work, Mr. Chabrol is said to have remarked, “You have to accept the fact that sometimes you are the pigeon, and sometimes you are the statue.”
Mr. Chabrol made some 25 films with Ms. Audran, who was his wife from 1964 to 1980. Many of those belong to what has come to be known as the “Hélène” cycle after the name Mr. Chabrol frequently gave to the elegant, reserved but erotically vulnerable characters he created for her. In “Violette” (1977), Ms. Audran appeared as the mother of the main character, Violette Nozière, a young woman secretly addicted to depravity, memorably played by Isabelle Huppert.
It was Ms. Huppert who took up the role of Mr. Chabrol’s muse when she was reunited with him for the 1988 “Story of Women,” and they worked together in a long series of films that included “Madame Bovary” (1990), “La Cérémonie” (1995) and “Comedy of Power” (2006).
In 2008 he celebrated his 50th year as a filmmaker by working for the first time with another giant of the French cinema, the actor Gérard Depardieu, on the police thriller “Bellamy.” Mr. Chabrol’s final film, “Bellamy” is a low-key thriller about a Parisian police commissioner (Mr. Depardieu) who interrupts his vacation to investigate a murder. It was released in France in 2009 and will open in the United States on Oct. 1 through IFC Films.
Mr. Chabrol was born in Paris on June 24, 1930, the son of a pharmacist who dwelt in the same sort of bourgeois social environment that he went on to satirize. He spent much of his childhood in Sardent, a village in central France, where he passed the war years running a film club. He returned to Paris to study law, but he dropped out to study pharmacology (his father’s profession), eventually ending up with a degree in literature.
His passion for the cinema led him first to a job as a publicist for Twentieth Century Fox, then to writing reviews and interviews for various publications including Art and Les Cahiers du Cinéma. He immersed himself in the city’s film culture and met other aspiring directors. In 1955, he and Mr. Truffaut interviewed Mr. Hitchcock on the set of “To Catch a Thief,” and two years later he and Mr. Rohmer wrote a study of Mr. Hitchcock’s films.
He married Agnès Marie-Madeleine Goute, whose inheritance allowed him to establish his production company, in 1952, and had two sons with her, Jean-Yves and Mathieu Chabrol, the latter a composer who has scored most of his father’s films since the 1980s. His marriage to Stéphane Audran produced one son, Thomas, an actor who has appeared in many films for his father and other directors. Mr. Chabrol’s survivors also include his third wife, Aurore Pajot, who acted as his script supervisor on nearly all of his movies from 1968 on and whom he married in 1981; and Ms. Pajot’s daughter, Cécile Maistre, who was an assistant director on his films and wrote the script with him for “The Girl Cut in Two” (2007).
In 2004 Mr. Chabrol was awarded the European Film Prize for his body of work. In a 2003 interview, Mr. Chabrol shrugged off those who labeled him the Gallic Hitchcock, but reassured his admirers that he would continue to make thrillers.
“I like using the thriller genre because when people go see a thriller — unless it’s really worthless — they never say, ‘We’ve wasted our time,’ ” he said. “It’s a good way to make people feel like going and not complain too much. Because you don’t make a film to express your ideas. You make a film to distract people, to interest them, perhaps to make them think, perhaps to help them be a little less naïve, a little better than they were.”