Nobel Prize Literature winner 2014: Patrick Modiano
Modiano, the author of Missing Person and of the screenplay for Lacombe Lucien – a film by Louis Malle which won the Oscar for Best Foreign Language film in 1975 – was the bookies' favourite overnight. He beat a competitive field that included Kenyan writer Ngugi wa Thiong'o, Japanese author Haruki Murakami, Belarusian investigative journalist and author Svetlana Alexievich, and Syrian poet Adonis.
He reportedly reacted with his customary modesty, calling it a "weird" experience. "I had Modiano on the telephone. I congratulated him and with his customary modesty he told me 'it's weird', but he was very happy," Antoine Gallimard of the French publishing house Gallimard told AFP.
Modiano, 69, published his first novel, La Place de l'Etoile, in 1968; he won the Prix Goncourt in 1978, and over the following three decades he has confirmed his status with a celebrated body of work, including Out of the Dark and Dora Bruder. "Actually, I never thought of doing anything else," he said of his literary career in 2011 to France Today. "I had no diploma, no definite goal to achieve. But it is tough for a young writer to begin so early. Really, I prefer not to read my early books. Not that I don't like them, but I don't recognise myself anymore, like an old actor watching himself as a young leading man."
Modiano was born in a west Paris suburb two months after World War II ended in Europe in July 1945. His father was of Jewish Italian origins and met his Belgian actress mother during the occupation of Paris – and his beginnings have strongly influenced his writing. The Swedish Academy, which selects Nobel Literature winners, praised Modiano "for the art of memory with which he has evoked the most ungraspable human destinies and uncovered the life-world of the occupation".
"You could say he's a Marcel Proust of our time," Peter Englund, permanent secretary of the Swedish Academy, added. Modiano's latest work is the novel "Pour que tu ne te perdes pas dans le quartier".
Modiano has also written children's books, including Catherine Certitude, and was a member of the jury at the Cannes Film Festival in 2000.French President Francois Hollande "warmly congratulated" Modiano, saying the prize recognises "a considerable body of work which explores the subtleties of memory and the complexity of identity".
In 2013, the award went to Canadian writer Alice Munro, who was described by the Academy as a "master of the contemporary short story".
The American authors Philip Roth and Thomas Pynchon were once again overlooked for the biggest prize in literature. Modiano takes home eight million kronor (£693,000).