Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows 3D release cancelled
It's the most eagerly-awaited film of the year and has millions of fans excitedly counting down the days until its release.
But tonight it was revealed that Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Part 1 won't be as dimensional as they thought was going to be.
Warner Bros announced that the first part of the last film in the series will now not be shown in 3D.
The studios says the seventh installment in the popular boy-wizard franchise will be released only in standard 2-D and not 3-D as planned.
It said it had hoped to be able to transform the film into 3D format, which has taken off this year as an ever-growing number of blockbusters are produced using the eye-popping technology.
But it will now only release it in in 2D, in both conventional and IMAX theaters, as they would not have a completed 3D version of the film within the release date window.
A statement said that 'despite everyone's best efforts, we were unable to convert the film in its entirety and meet the highest standards of quality'
It added: 'We do not want to disappoint fans who have long anticipated the conclusion of this extraordinary journey, and to that end, we are releasing our film day-and-date on November 19, 2010, as planned.
'We, in alignment with our filmmakers, believe this is the best course to take in order to ensure that our audiences enjoy the consummate "Harry Potter" experience.'
Producer David Heyman said: 'For 10 years, we have worked alongside Alan Horn and the studio, whose priority has always been to preserve the integrity of Jo Rowling’s books as we have adapted them to the screen, and this decision reflects that commitment.'
Director David Yates added: 'This decision, which we completely support, underscores the fact that Warner Bros. has always put quality first.'
But Warner Bros said it was still planning to 'deliver' Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Part 2, due for release on Jukly 15 2011, in both 2D and 3D formats.