Emmys: Game of Thrones becomes the most-awarded narrative series of all time
Game of Thrones has become the most successful narrative series ever at television's night of nights, the Emmy Awards.
The show broke the record after winning Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series, Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series and Outstanding Drama Series.
The HBO series already had nine statuettes from last weekend's Creative Arts Emmys, which mainly reward behind-the-scenes personnel, giving it a total haul over the years of 35 heading into the 2016 ceremony — more than any other drama series.
Before the 2016 Emmy Awards, the record for the most-awarded narrative series belonged to long-running sitcom Frasier, which won 37 Emmys.
The all-time Emmy list of winners — which includes non-fiction — is topped by NBC comedy sketch show Saturday Night Live, with 44 awards.
Game of Thrones is now the most-awarded narrative series since the first Television Academy prize-giving in 1949.
Australian actor Ben Mendelsohn won Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for his role in Bloodline.
The most nominated show of 2016, The People v OJ Simpson: American Crime Story, picked up five wins to add to its four technical Emmys.
Actors Sarah Paulson and Courtney B Vance were rewarded for their acclaimed portrayals of sparring attorneys Marcia Clark and Johnnie Cochran.
Sterling K Brown took home a statuette for his supporting actor role, while DV DeVincentis was recognised for the show's writing.
"Playing a real person, you want to get it right for them," Paulson said.
"The more I learned about Marcia Clark ... the more I had to recognise that I, along with the rest of the world, had been superficial and careless in my judgment [of her]."
Tatiana Maslany won Lead Actress in a Drama Series for her role in Orphan Black, and Rami Malek won Lead Actor in a Drama Series for his role in Mr Robot.
Veep took home the most Outstanding Comedy Series award and its star Julia Louis-Dreyfus claimed the Lead Actress in a Comedy award.
Louis-Dreyfus, who plays Veep's acting US president Selina Meyer, apologised during her acceptance speech for what she called "the current political climate".
Jeffrey Tambor won Lead Actor in a Comedy for his role in Transparent.
During his speech, Tambor urged producers and directors to give transgender talent a chance in television.