Pope John Paul II to be made a saint, Vatican announces
John Paul is to be canonised along with another former pontiff, John XXIII, nicknamed "the Good Pope", who initiated reforms to the Church under the Second Vatican Council in the 1960s. He was beatified in 2000.
Pope Francis has cleared the two for sainthood, officials said, including approving a miracle attributed to John Paul's intercession.
The two popes could be canonised in the autumn or on Dec 8, the feast of the Immaculate Conception, an important day for the Church.
Vatican spokesman Father Federico Lombardi said: “No date has been set but it is very likely that there will be one canonisation ceremony before the end of the year.”
The two popes are among the most loved in history and each played a substantial role in reshaping the Catholic Church in the modern era.
The Polish pope John Paul reigned from 1978 until he died in 2005 and played a key role in the fall of Communism in Eastern Europe, while his ambitious missions abroad attracted millions of faithful.
John XXIII was pope from 1958 to his death in mid 1963, and behind the historic Second Vatican Council (1962-1965) which sought to modernize the Catholic Church.
Two miracles are normally required for canonisation. The first linked to John Paul, regarding a French nun whose recovery from Parkinson's disease could not be explained by a Vatican panel of medical experts, had been attributed to the Polish pontiff previously. It paved the way for his beatification in 2011, six years after his death in 2005.
The Vatican has yet to release details of the second miracle, but it is understood to concern the healing of a severely ill woman from Costa Rica on the very day that John Paul II was beatified.
She and her family had prayed to the late pope for his intercession.
The exact details of the miracle would "amaze the world", according to Vatican insiders. Doctors in Costa Rica are expected to reveal more on this case later today.
The canonisation of John XXIII is unusual as there has been no second miracle attributed to his intercession. The Vatican said Francis approved a decision by cardinals and bishops.
"The Supreme Pontiff approved... the canonisation of Blessed John XXIII... and decided to call a consistory also concerning the canonisation of Blessed John Paul II," it said in a statement.