London riots: Harry Potter actor Jamie Waylett jailed
An actor who featured in the Harry Potter films has been jailed for two years for his part in the London riots.
Jamie Waylett, 22, who played Hogwarts bully Vincent Crabbe, was found guilty of violent disorder at London's Wood Green Crown Court.
Waylett, of Hillfield Road, Hampstead, north-west London, admitted swigging from a stolen bottle of Champagne.
But the actor was cleared of intending to destroy or damage property with a petrol bomb he was pictured holding.
Waylett was with a gang of at least four people who went into Chalk Farm on 8 August.
There he was captured on CCTV with his hood over his head.
The images showed him accepting a bottle of Champagne from a rioter who had just looted a Sainsbury's supermarket and glugging down the expensive contents.
Judge Simon Carr said: "A considerable amount has been said about what happened over those few days.
"Anyone watching the footage in this case can only imagine the mayhem that took place on the streets.
"You chose to go out on to the streets on what was the third day of the violence."
He continued: "The footage shows you in the near vicinity of a Sainsbury's in Camden which was being looted.
"You were pictured on a number of occasions with a bottle full of petrol with a rag as a wick.
"I accept entirely the jury's verdict that you did not throw or have any intention of throwing it but merely being in possession of it would have been terrifying to anyone who saw you."
Waylett's lawyer Emily Dummatt said in mitigation that her client had become a "withered actor by the age of 22".
She went on: "Although he had the good fortune to be in the Harry Potter films, it turned out to be not so good fortune."
Ms Dummatt said Waylett - who has three low-grade GCSEs and a qualification in painting and decorating - had struggled with his fame and began to use cannabis.
He will be eligible for release after a year behind bars.
The actor received a two year sentence for violent disorder and 12 months for handling stolen goods, to run concurrently.
He has a previous conviction for cannabis possession.