Monty Python live (mostly), review: poignant and predictable, but tremendous fun
So this was it, the final performance by the most influential comedy troupe of all time. Forty-odd years since Monty Python's Flying Circus revolutionized television humour and unleashed a legion of surreal catchphrases John Cleese, Eric Idle, Terry Gilliam, Terry Jones and Michael Palin departed the stage at London's O2 Arena to the strains of their darkly hilarious (or is it hilariously dark?) anthem Always Look On The Bright Side Of Life.
Watching the swan-song was a 15,000 live audience, with many more viewing via cinema simulcasts across the globe and on the digital television channel Gold (aka the station where it feels an Only Fools And Horses repeat is just an ad break away). The Python special had been heartily hyped by Gold, which went so far as to install a fifty foot-long expired tropical bird in central London, in reference to Python's much loved Dead Parrot sketch.
Starting with a half hour behind-the-scenes broadcast presented by stand-up Dara Ó Briain, Gold's coverage was brash and boisterous. Emanating turbo-charged avuncularity, O Briain chinwagged with actor Martin Freeman and comedian Eddie Izzard (he'd already seen the comeback six times). It was a nice appetizer though things got a bit farcical as comic after comic squeezed alongside Ó Briain, vying to sing their Python praises in the heaving VIP Lounge.
Such uncomplicated jollity was in contrast to the actual show, which was at moments deeply poignant. Comedy functions best pushing hard against sentimentality yet it was impossible not to experience a tingle of sadness knowing Python would never again tread the boards together (there was also the fact they are all in their 70s and visibly weighed down by the decades).
The evening had the whiff of a greatest hits procession, a celebration of the group's esoteric japery and the shadow it has cast (without Python we would have no Fast Show no Father Ted, no Mighty Boosh). Surprises were at a minimum and the big reveals were in the form of cameos: Eddie Izzard as an auxiliary Australian philosopher, Mike 'Austin Powers' Myers (cringefully earnest) popping up on a fake quiz segment, astrophysicists Brian Cox and Stephen Hawking in a funny pre-recorded piece.
If the best parts were predictable they were tremendous fun too. The arrival of the Spanish Inquisition showcased Python's gift for high-strung irascibility; Dead Parrot blurred the divide between end-of-pier and Beckett-esque existentialism (Palin briefly floundered, blindsided by what felt like an impromptu swipe by Cleese against the Daily Mail). Four Yorkshiremen, arguably their cleverest, least over-egged routine, was reprised beat for beat – ironic considering it skewers the same impulse to mythologize the past Python were now party to.
Broadcasts of live theatrical events can be hit-or-miss. Here the camera work was measured, conveying both the scale of proceedings and a crucial intimacy. While it didn't quite feel you had the finest seat in the house you weren't straining to follow the action. The major intrusion was a pre-watershed cutaway from a naughty sailor tune. In its place Gold viewers were treated to a clip of Michael Palin in drag eulogizing sheep (elsewhere x-rated material was shrilly bleeped out ) .
The crowd stood and applauded as Always Look On The Bright Side Of Life was dutifully unpacked at the end. Outwardly throwaway, the tune yielded an undertow of sincerity, even profundity (it may be enjoyed simultaneously as cheery ditty and muffled shriek of anguish). Wielding conductor batons as the audience joined in Python were red-cheeked and wistful - and perhaps, after two and a half hours and 45 years, relieved it was finally over.