Xbox One: Your Top Questions Answered
Someplease check here for the latest.Update on June 19, 2013: As a result of feedback from the Xbox community, we have changed certain policies for Xbox One reflected in this blog. of this information is no longer accurate —  please check here for the latest.
Q:    Does Xbox One require an “always on” Internet connection? A:    No, it does not have to be always connected, but Xbox One does require a connection to the Internet. We’re designing Xbox One to be your all-in-one entertainment system that is connected to the cloud and always ready. We are also designing it so you can play games and watch Blu-ray movies and live TV if you lose your connection.
Q:    How do consumers benefit by being connected to the cloud? A:    The cloud makes every experience better and more accessible.  Because Xbox One is powered by the cloud:
You can discover what your friends are playing, watching and listening to if they choose to share. These are just a few examples of how customers benefit from our platform being connected to the Internet. It brings the future of TV and games to our consumers—and it’s designed for today and the decade ahead.
Q:    When will Xbox One launch and in what markets? A:    Xbox One will launch in markets around the world later this year. We’ll have more to share later.
Q:    Can I use my current gamertag on Xbox One and will my Gamerscore and Achievements transfer? A:    Yes. Your current Xbox Live Gamertag will stay with you on Xbox One if you choose to keep it, and your hard-earned Gamerscore and Achievements will indeed carry over from Xbox 360.
Q:    Will Xbox One be backward compatible with my existing games? A:    Xbox One hardware is not compatible with Xbox 360 games. We designed Xbox One to play an entirely new generation of games—games that are architected to take full advantage of state-of-the-art processors and the infinite power of the cloud. We care very much about the investment you have made in Xbox 360 and will continue to support it with a pipeline of new games and new apps well into the future.
Q:    Will Xbox One allow players to trade in, purchase and play pre-owned games?  A:    We are designing Xbox One to enable customers to trade in and resell games. We’ll have more details to share later.
Q:    Will my current Xbox Live Gold membership work with Xbox One or will I have to buy a new one? A:    You do not need to buy a new Xbox Live Gold membership. Your current membership will work on both Xbox 360 and Xbox One.
Q:   Why require Kinect with every Xbox One? A:    The all new Kinect is now an essential and integrated part of the platform.  By having it as a consistent part of every Xbox One, game and entertainment creators can build experiences that assume the availability of voice, gesture and natural sensing, leading to unrivaled ease of use, premium experiences and interactivity for you.
Q:    Do I need to have a specific cable or satellite TV provider to watch live TV on Xbox? A:    Our goal is to enable live TV through Xbox One in every way that it is delivered throughout the world, whether that’s television service providers, over the air or over the Internet, or HDMI-in via a set top box (as is the case with many providers in the US). The delivery of TV is complex and we are working through the many technologies and policies around the world to make live TV available where Xbox One is available.
Q:    Xbox One is a more powerful product compared to Xbox 360, but does it also use more power? A:   By providing multiple power states in Xbox One, we’ve balanced energy efficiency with functionality. We’ve taken a completely different approach to how Xbox One consumes power. It only uses the power it needs at that particular moment for the task at hand.