Nokia X, Nokia X+ and Nokia XL dual-SIM Android-based smartphones launched
Nokia has announced its first-ever smartphones based on the Android Open Source Project (AOSP), that can run Android apps and are powered by Microsoft and Nokia services.
Nokia X and Nokia X+ are dual-SIM phones that come with 4-inch 480x800 displays and are powered by 1GHz dual-core Qualcomm Snapdragon S4 processor. Both have identical 4GB internal storage, with expandable support up to 32GB via microSD card, and are powered by a 1500mAh battery. While the Nokia X comes with 512MB RAM, the Nokia X+ comes with 768MB RAM. Both phones have a 3-megapixel rear camera, but no front shooter. They are powered by a 1500mAh battery.
Nokia XL comes with a 5-inch 480x800 display, a 5-megapixel camera, a 720p front camera, 768MB RAM and a 2000mAh battery, while sharing other specifications with its younger siblings.
All three phones come with 3G support and take Micro-SIMs instead of regular ones.
The Nokia X will go on sale immediately, starting at EUR 89 (approximately Rs. 7,500 not including duties and taxes) in Asia-Pacific, Europe, India, Latin America, the Middle East and Africa. The Nokia X+ and Nokia XL are expected to roll out in these markets starting early second quarter, priced at EUR 99 (approximately Rs. 8,400 not including duties and taxes) and EUR 109 (approximately Rs. 9,300 not including duties and taxes), respectively.
The highlight of the three devices of course is the highly customised version of Android, with its Metro-inspired UI and access to Nokia's own store. While there's no access to Google's Play Store, users can side-load Android apps from any third-party source. Nokia has used AOSP corresponding to Android 4.1 Jelly Bean as the baseline for its operating system.
All devices come with free access to Here Maps, with offline maps and integrated turn-by-turn navigation, and Nokia MixRadio for free music streaming and downloadable playlists. All devices are also pre-loaded with a variety of third-party apps and games.
Nokia X, Nokia X+ and Nokia XL come with free cloud storage from Microsoft's OneDrive (earlier called SkyDrive). With the purchase of any Nokia X family smartphone in select markets, people will get one month of Skype's Unlimited World Subscription for a limited time.
Both the Nokia X and Nokia X+ will be available in bright green, bright red, cyan, yellow, black and white. The Nokia XL will be available in bright green, orange, cyan, yellow, black and white. Colour availability may vary across regions.
Nokia also unveiled Nokia 220 and Asha 230 feature phones at MWC 2014.