Whale sets new mammal depth record
A CUVIER'S beaked whale has set a new deep diving record for a sea mammal by plunging around three kilometres below the ocean surface.
The creature was one of eight whales studied off the coast of southern California whose movements were tracked by satellite-linked tags.
The deepest was one that descended a distance of around 3.2km, and the longest lasted 137 minutes.
The dives broke the current records for sea mammals set by the southern elephant seal of 2.4km and 120 minutes.
At a depth of three kilometres, the water pressure is equal to 320 atmospheres.
Lead scientist Dr Gregory Schorr, from the Cascadia Research Collective, a non-profit organisation based in Washington, US, that studies marine mammals, said it was remarkable to imagine the social, warm-blooded mammals actively pursuing prey in the darkness at such astounding depths, "literally miles away from their most basic physiological need: air".
Cuvier's beaked whales are distributed around the world, and are famous for their diving ability.
Previous studies recording long-duration dives of more than 1.6km had indicated that the species might be the most extreme air-breathing diver in the ocean.
Unlike its deep-diving rivals, the elephant seal and sperm whale, the Cuvier's beaked whale does not need a long recovery time after extended periods at the bottom of the ocean and averages less than two minutes at the surface between dives.
The new study, published in the online journal Public Library of Science ONE, provides a better understanding of the diving behaviour of Cuvier's beaked whales, according to the authors.
The species accounts for 69 per cent of reported marine mammal strandings associated with military sonar operations.
However, all eight whales studied were tagged on a US Navy sonar training range off the California coast and spent a significant portion of their time there, suggesting the Cuvier's beaked whales in that locality may have learned to cope with the kind of human disturbance that has led to strandings elsewhere.
In addition to the deep dives, the scientists recorded data on 5600 shallow dives.