Altered protein found to cause rare Parkinson’s-like disease
When Stanley B. Prusiner, a UCSF neurologist, first proposed that inert proteins he called prions could somehow fold into strange shapes and infect humans with rare diseases of the brain, his idea 30 years ago was widely dismissed as nonsense.
Twenty years later, those infectious prions — which Prusiner coined from two words, protein and infection — won him a Nobel Prize, and today his Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease has its own building on the medical center’s Mission Bay campus. It’s a scientific hive where researchers, lab technicians and medical students labor to understand the many disorders that endanger the human brain and the nervous system.
Now Kurt Giles, a British-born neurologist at the UCSF Institute, is reporting that he and his colleagues have found that a new type of prion is the direct cause of a rare and fatal brain disorder whose symptoms are similar to Parkinson’s disease.
Their discovery adds new evidence that varied types of the once-disdained prions might be involved in causing other fatal brain disorders like Parkinson’s, as well as Alzheimer’s disease, Giles and Prusiner suggest.
In a report published Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Giles and an international group of colleagues conclude that their newly discovered type of misfolded prion, called alpha-synuclein, causes a rare disease named multiple-system atrophy, known as MSA. Around the world, the brain disorder affects only 3 out of 100,000 people, all older than 50. It is incurable and inevitably fatal.
To prove their point, Giles and colleagues in the U.S., Britain and Australia took tissue samples containing prions from the brains of people who had died of MSA. And in experiment after experiment, the researchers found evidence that the prions then transmitted the infection to laboratory cultures of human and mouse tissue. The prions in bits of tissue also transmitted the disease to living laboratory mice. And, in still more experiments, the newly infected mouse tissue samples also spread the disease to other living mice, they found.
“It’s quite clear that this is the first new type of prion to be discovered in the last 50 years, and that it clearly causes MSA,” Giles said.
When Prusiner first reported the existence of the strange proteins he called prions in 1982, he found they were the cause of the rare and fatal human disorder called Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, or CJD, and that claim is now widely recognized. The same prions were also found to cause animal diseases like scrapie in sheep and bovine spongiform encephalopathy, better known as mad cow disease, in cattle.
About 300 people in the U.S. die of CJD every year, according to the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. The symptoms occur at about age 60, and about 90 percent of people who get the disease die within a year. The early symptoms are often similar to patients with Parkinson’s disease.
Prion proteins exist in two shapes, and the normally shaped prions found throughout the bodies of humans and animals are harmless. But when they fold into new shapes — “misfolded,” scientists call them — they become infectious, like viruses. At the same time, those same misfolded prions can cause normal prions to become misshapen, and they become infectious as well, Prusiner said.
As prion research at the institute continues, it is becoming increasingly clear that different misfolded prions will turn out to be involved in causing both Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases, Prusiner said. But the proof is yet to come.