Juvenile killers can't get life without parole
Iowa teenagers convicted of murder can no longer receive a life sentence without the possibility of parole, after the Iowa Supreme Court ruled Friday that the sentence constitutes cruel and unusual punishment.
Locking away young convicted killers for good is simply too “speculative” when they have not been given any chance to show rehabilitation in prison, Justice Brent Appel wrote in a majority opinion.
The ruling forbids the sentence under a provision of the Iowa Constitution that bars cruel and unusual punishment. It will be up to the Iowa Board of Parole to make individual determinations about whether to release a juvenile convicted of murder.
The split 4-3 ruling makes Iowa the 19th state to institute an outright ban on the punishment, said Joshua Rovner, a state advocacy associate with The Sentencing Project, a group that hopes to end life without parole for juveniles.
Most of those states ended the practice through legislation, after a landmark U.S. Supreme Court ruling that said life without parole could not be a mandatory punishment for teens convicted of first-degree murder.
“This is not a blue state or a red state thing,” Rovner said. “It’s quite clear the direction the country is going on this.”
The ruling was lauded by advocates, who said it’s important to treat violent children differently than adults. There has been an “emerging consensus” among neuroscientists that the human brain does not fully develop until the mid-20s, making teens more likely to be influenced by peer pressure or impulses, Appel wrote in the ruling.
“Today’s important decision is an appropriate recognition of what parents of teenagers have long understood: children are different than adults,” ACLU of Iowa Legal Director Rita Bettis said in a statement Friday. “And a court, when sentencing a child, simply does not have the ability to accurately predict whether she will grow up to be a rehabilitated adult.”
The ruling upended bipartisan legislation signed into law last year by Gov. Terry Branstad that kept life-without-parole sentences as an option that prosecutors could seek for some convicted juveniles. The law required district court judges to consider a variety of factors, such as a convicted killer’s home life, mental health and maturity, before settling on a sentence.
“Gov. Branstad is deeply disturbed by the Supreme Court’s decision of not allowing life sentences without the possibility of parole for juvenile murderers and the impact their decision will have on the safety of Iowa’s communities and the victims of these heinous crimes,” Branstad communications director Ben Hammes said in a statement.
Kevin Cmelik, director of the criminal appeals division at the Iowa attorney general’s office, said sentencing judges are now left with one less option: A judge can give a juvenile a sentence of life with the possibility of parole after a certain number of years, as well as an option for immediate parole eligibility upon entering prison.
Friday’s ruling was the latest in a string from the state’s highest court on juvenile sentencing since the U.S. Supreme Court banned mandatory life without parole in 2012.
The ruling Friday dealt with the case of Isaiah Sweet, who pleaded guilty to two first-degree murder charges in the May 11, 2012, shooting deaths of his grandparents in their Manchester home.
Sweet, who was 17 at the time of the deaths, was the first teenage killer to receive the harshest punishment under Iowa law since the key U.S. Supreme Court ruling. In that ruling, Justice Elena Kagan wrote that such sentences should be uncommon, because of the difficulty posed by telling the difference between “the juvenile offender whose crime reflects unfortunate yet transient immaturity, and the rare juvenile offender whose crime reflects irreparable corruption.”
At Sweet’s 2014 sentencing hearing, District Judge Michael Shubatt sentenced him to life without parole, saying Sweet was “extremely dangerous” and that allowing him a chance at parole would put society at risk. Sweet went to several parties and used drugs after murdering his grandparents with an assault rifle.
At the sentencing hearing, defense attorneys offered testimony from a clinical psychologist who found that the teen had matured only to the level of a 12- to 14-year-old. The psychologist, Stephen Hart, said he believed the chances of Sweet being rehabilitated in prison were “mixed,” but he noted that it would be hard to fully evaluate him before he turned 30.
Appel pointed to this logic in his 55-page majority ruling joined by Chief Justice Mark Cady and justices David Wiggins and Daryl Hecht. He compared juvenile life without parole to the death penalty, arguing that forcing a sentencing judge to make a decision based on complicated factors makes the possibility of an error “unacceptably high.”
“For example, what significance should a sentencing court attach to a juvenile offender’s stable home environment?” Appel wrote. “Would the fact that the adolescent offender failed to benefit from a comparatively positive home environment suggest he or she is irreparable and an unlikely candidate for rehabilitation? Or conversely, would the offender’s experience with a stable home environment suggest that his or her character and personality have not been irreparably damaged and prospects for rehabilitation are therefore greater?
“We should not ask our district court judges to predict future prospects for maturation and rehabilitation when highly trained professionals say such predictions are impossible.”
Iowa state Sen. Steven Sodders, a Democrat who chairs the Senate judiciary committee, said he supported last year's bill keeping life without parole as an option for some juveniles. But he was not troubled by the ruling, noting that the parole board has a variety of risk assessments and other tools it can use to determine whether someone is still dangerous.
"I think the parole board will do the right things, based on victim accounts, evaluations and risk assessments," said Sodders, who is a deputy sheriff in Marshall County.
But Muscatine County Attorney Alan Ostergren said the ruling will have significant impacts on family members of Iowa victims, who will be forced to deal with legal proceedings for years into the future.
“You need to go to watch a parole hearing, you need to write letters and you need to relive what happened and you need to go tell the parole board why this person shouldn’t get out,” he said. “They have to constantly live with it.”
Justices Edward Mansfield and Bruce Zager wrote dissents that were joined by Justice Thomas Waterman.
In his dissent, Zager questioned whether the Iowa Department of Corrections will be able to hire the types of psychologists necessary to get a reliable opinion on whether a convicted murderer can be safely released. He also questioned whether the parole board truly would be better situated to make decisions about eventual release.
“The board of parole has an extremely busy schedule handling literally hundreds of cases a month,” he wrote. “Also, parole decisions may be made for a variety of reasons. Some parole decisions may be the result of a change in the rules or overcrowding. The point is, many parole decisions may be made based on factors unrelated to a consideration of maturity and rehabilitation."
A state Supreme Court ruling Friday makes Iowa the 19th state to have a categorical ban on life-without-parole sentences for juveniles convicted of first-degree murder, according to The Sentencing Project, a nonprofit that tracks the issue.
But the Iowa Supreme Court is only the second state court nationwide, after Massachusetts, to impose such a ban through a ruling. Many were done through legislation, said Joshua Rovner, a state advocacy associate with The Sentencing Project.
The states that have bans: Alaska, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Vermont, West Virginia and Wyoming. 