WikiLeaks: Julian Assange 'could face spying charges'
Jennifer Robinson, Mr Assange's lawyer, said that she believes US prosecutors are finalising their case and charges could be "imminent".
Were he to be charged, it is likely to be under the Espionage Act, which makes prosecutes the gathering of national defence information if it is known to have been obtained illegally and could be used to the detriment of the US. It is also illegal to fail to return information to the US government.
Speaking to ABC News, Miss Robinson said she had heard a number of rumours from "several different US lawyers", but added that she did not believe the Espionage Act applied to Assange, who is she added is currently in solitary confinement in Wandsworth prison in London.
The speculation came amid reports that computer hackers allegedly attacked the websites of Dutch police and prosecutors in revenge for the arrest of a 16-year-old schoolboy who was allegedly part of a worldwide army of "cyber guerrillas" sympathetic to WikiLeaks.
Both sites were only sporadically available on Friday after being attacked by a group of "hacktivists" called Anonymous, Dutch media reported.
Computer experts warned Wikileaks supporters were downloading increasing amounts of spam-shooting software that has been used to attack companies regarded as hostile to Wikileaks, including MasterCard, PayPal and Amazon.
Downloads of a programme used to bombard websites with bogus requests for data have jumped to more than 40,000 in the last few days, according to Imperva, an American data security company.
WikiLeaks advocates have accused MasterCard, Amazon and other corporations of caving into pressure from the American government, which has condemned the freedom of information website for publishing some of the 250,000 secret or classified diplomatic cables that it acquired.
Anonymous appeared to backtrack from attacks launched earlier this week, saying that it now does not plan to target the "critical infrastructure of companies such as MasterCard, Visa, PayPal, or Amazon."
A press release circulated under the Anonymous name said its members did not want to alienate the public by causing online havoc over Christmas as it would be "in bad taste".
Amazon was accused of hypocrisy, meanwhile, after repackaging the Wikileaks diplomatic cables and offering them for sale to customers, just days after cutting off the website from its servers.