Police probe possible racial motive in Tulsa killings
"We're going to explore any possible motives," Police Chief Chuck Jordan told reporters Sunday afternoon. But he said the investigation was still going on, and Jim Finch, the head of the FBI's Oklahoma office, said Sunday that it was "premature" to talk about hate crimes.
England had written a racial slur on his Facebook page in a post marking the anniversary of his father's 2010 killing. But the entry also noted his girlfriend's recent suicide, and a man at England's home told CNN, "You don't know what this family's been through."
The shootings began about 1 a.m. Friday in predominantly black neighborhoods in north Tulsa. The first victim, 49-year-old Dannaer Fields, died at a hospital. Two others were shot just three minutes later, but survived and were released from the hospital Sunday, Jordan said.
Another person was shot and killed about 2 a.m., while the third victim was found around 8 a.m. next to a funeral home. Jordan identified the other two victims as William Allen and Bobby Clark.
Investigators have found a weapon they believe was involved the case, said Tulsa Police Maj. Walter Evans, who led the task force assembled to probe the shootings. But he said investigators did not yet know which of the suspects may have fired the fatal shots.
Police put out an appeal for tips over the weekend, and there was an "outpouring" after a Saturday afternoon news conference, Evans said. Those tips led to England, with one reporting that he was planning to burn a white pickup truck that had been identified at the shooting scenes, according to the arrest reports.
Police found the burned vehicle, registered to England, on Saturday evening, leading them to put him under surveillance and get warrants to arrest him and search his home. England and Watts were arrested a few blocks away from England's residence shortly before 2 a.m. Sunday, according to the reports.
"In my 23 years of law enforcement, I don't think I've ever seen any crime as heinous as this," Evans said. "But at the same time, I don't think I've seen such an outpouring of support and cooperation from the community."
Police reports listed the same address for England and Watts, a home in a rural area on the northern outskirts of Tulsa. An arriving couple who identified themselves only as England's relatives said England's father had been shot to death in April 2010, and England had been left to care for his 6-month-old child after his girlfriend shot and killed herself in front of him a few months ago.
"He would help me over here," Bowers said. "When his dogs turn over my trash cans, he comes and cleans it up -- very nice young man."
"It's hard not to go off between that and sheran I'm gone in the head," he wrote, referring to his girlfriend. The Facebook page was taken down Sunday afternoon.
"When five black people appear to be shot by a white person, then the immediate reaction is there is a racial component," Tulsa Mayor Dewey Bartlett told CNN. "If that's how the prosecution comes out, we certainly support and will help in any manner, shape or form to bring an end to that point of view."
"I get a feeling from my community that there's going to be a better relationship with the Police Department," he said. "The Police Department has shown they can solve crimes, they can solve them fast."