Raja conspired with bureaucrats, industrialists in 2G scam: CBI
NEW DELHI: A Raja conspired with top bureaucrats, including a retired IAS officer, and corporate honchos to cause a loss of Rs 30,984 crore in the allocation of 2G spectrum, the CBI said in its indictment of the former telecom minister who has been chargesheeted along with eight others and three telecom companies. The agency, which filed its first chargesheet before a special court, alleged that former telecom secretary Siddharth Behura , Raja's personal secretary RK Chandolia and Swan Telecom promoter Shahid Usman Balwa and Sanjay Chandra, MD of Unitech wireless, entered into a conspiracy for manipulating the procedure for allocation of spectrum with the aim of favouring companies like Swan Telecom and Unitech Group The chargesheet, running into about 80,000 pages and brought in seven steel trunks, was filed before CBI judge OP Saini in the special court constituted exclusively to try the case that is being monitored by the Supreme Court. Attorney General GE Vahanvati and corporate lobbyist Niira Radia have been named among 125 witnesses in the case. This will be the first time the topmost law officer of the government will be appearing as a witness in a corruption case. CBI will file the supplementary chargesheet by April 25 and is likely to complete its probe by May 31 in the case that has dented the UPA government's image in less than two years of its return to power. Others named in the chargesheet include Vinod Goenka , a Director of Mumbai-based DB Realty , which was also the promoter of Etisalat DB, Sanjay Chandra, Managing Director of Gurgaon-based real estate company Unitech and Unitech Wireless(Tamil Nadu) Pvt Ltd and Gautam Doshi, Hari Nair and Surendra Pipara, Group Managing Director and two senior vice presidents of Mumbai-based Reliance telecom company. The 47-year-old DMK leader, who is at present in jail, has been charged with cheating, forgery and abuse of official position under the provisions of Indian Penal Code and Prevention of Corruption Act. Raja has been charged with "manipulating" procedures like advancing the cut-off date in conspiracy with officials and industrialists by privately conveying to them the resheduled date and grant of licences to ineligible applicants. In the chargsheet, CBI said Swan Telecom, which was acting as a front company for Reliance ADAG , and Unitech Wireless (Tamil Nadu) were ineligible for getting the licences. CBI said the gamut of offences were five-fold including the advancing of cut-off date for receiving applications for new Unified Access Services Licenses to help accused companies Swan Telecom and Unitech.