Georgia death row woman set to die despite Pope Francis' pleas for clemmency
Decision comes despite pleas from the pope and her children for c
Pope Francis called for to end death penalty saying 'every life is sacred'
The only woman on Georgia's death row is set to die tonight after the state parole board refused her last minute plea for clemency - despite Pope Francis' calls to halt her execution.
Kelly Renee Gissendaner will receive a lethal injection at 7pm tonight for plotting the murder of her husband, following the appeal hearing with Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles this morning.
The decision comes after a local archbishop made an appeal to the board on the pontiff's behalf, which referenced the pope's historic speech to Congress condemning the death penalty as 'every life is sacred.'
'While not wishing to minimize the gravity of the crime for which Ms. Gissendander has been convicted, and while sympathizing with the victims, I nonetheless implore you, in consideration of the reasons that have been expressed to your board, to commute the sentence to one that would better express both justice and mercy,' Archbishop Carlo Maria Vigano wrote in a letter to board, NBC Newsreported.
Gissendaner's children had also asked the state of Georgia to have mercy on their mother - despite her killing their father - saying they could not bear to lose another parent.
In this morning's hearing, Gissendander's attorneys called on the board to commute her sentence, saying it was disproportionate to the crime as she was not the 'trigger-person' in her husband's death.
They also submitted accounts from fellow prisoners testifying about Gissendaner's positive influence in their lives and in the prison system. 
But both their arguments, the the pontiff's appeal, were ignored and at 2.30pm today, the board announced their decision to execute the convicted murderer tonight.
Gissendaner now looks set to become the first woman executed in the state of Gerogia for 70 years 
It's a move which will surely be seen as a step backwards for Pope Francis who used his address to Congress to advocate for the global abolition of the death penalty.
'Society can only benefit from the rehabilitation of those convicted of crimes,' he said during the speech on his six-day U.S. tour last week.
'Recently my brother bishops here in the United States renewed their call for the abolition of the death penalty. Not only do I support them, but I also offer encouragement to all those who are convinced that a just and necessary punishment must never exclude the dimension of hope and the goal of rehabilitation.' 
The mother was sentenced to death in 1997 for convincing her lover Gregory Owen to kill her husband Douglas Gissendaner.
Owen, pleaded guilty and testified against her in exchange for a life sentence. He told the jury how the mother of three carefully planned her husband's death.  
Gissendaner's children Kayla and Dakota, who were 7 and 5 when their father died, horrified by their mother's crime, shunned her up until six years ago when Kayla went to visit her mother in prison to talk about the gruesome murder for the first time.
Kayla's anger turned to understanding for her mother and after years of healing she was finally able to forgive her and says she cannot bear to lose another parent 18 years after she lost her father and best friend.
Gissendaner will be put to death at 7pm and has requested a last meal of cheese dip and chips, Texas fajita nachos and a diet frosted lemonade, reports CNN.
The menu is considerably smaller than her 'last meal' on the day on her scheduled execution on March 2, which was called off because of a problem with the drugs.
Gissendaner's request included cornbread, buttermilk, two Burger King Whoppers with cheese and all the trimmings, two large orders of French fries, cherry vanilla ice cream, popcorn and lemonade. 
She also had a salad with boiled eggs, tomatoes, green peppers, onions, carrots, cheese and Paul Newman buttermilk dressing.
Prison officials confirmed she ate nearly all of the calorific feast which was estimated to contain more than 4,200 calories.
Gissendaner's death has been postponed twice before. The first time there was a big winter storm and the second time was because of the controversy surrounding the lethal drugs used for executions in the state.
'The nature of the crime justified the state seeking the ultimate penalty. The jury agreed with that,' said Danny Porter, the district attorney in Georgia's Gwinnet County.
'In the years that have intervened, we have had no reason to change our position about that.'
Her children pleaded for her clemency and argue that their mother has changed drastically and even saved people's lives during the 18 years she was incarcerated. The Georgia Board of Pardons and Paroles denied her application.
Douglas Gissendaner's parents and family disagree with Kayla and Dakota and think that she should be punished for her crime. 
The children, however, say that their father would not want their mother to be executed because he would not want them to endure the pain they did when he died all over again. 
'My dad would not want my mom to be executed, even knowing her role in his murder,' said Kayla Gissendaner in a statement.
'He would not want us to endure another devastating loss.'
Gissendaner's daughter Kayla says she does not feel as though she got enough time to spend with her mother and get to know her who she says has changed tremendously behind bars.
'I had to face what my mom had done and find a way to forgive her,' Kayla Gissendaner said.
'In the process, I saw that my mom had struggled through the years to come to grips with what she had done and face her own horror about her actions.'
Gissendaner's lawyers and her family had filed to stop Tuesday's execution and questioned whether or not the lethal injection process is 'cruel and unusual punishment'. 
Her lawyers had argued that Gissendaner's good behavior in prison was crucial in her clemency case but that the board denied any testimony from prison employees. That case is currently pending before the Supreme County.
Gissendaner owns up to the fact that when she entered prison she was angry, violent, and selfish but in her time behind bars she sought some sort of resolution by helping her fellow inmates.
Inmate Kara Stephens who spent ten years behind bars for armed robbery says that Gissendaner saved her life by giving her enough hope to move past her crimes.
'Kelly told me God loved me,' said Stephens, who since her release started a women's support system for formerly incarcerated women called the Struggle Sisters.
'Kelly taught me to hope. I know a lot of people who deserve to die. But there is no way Kelly is the same person she was back then.'
Stephens and the Struggle Sisters joined faith leaders in asking the state to switch her sentence to life without parole and say that Gissendaner's children are being unnecessarily victimized.
'They are the ultimate victims in this,' she added.
Gissendaner's former professor, Jennifer McBride, and German theologian Jurgen Moltmann have also been rallying behind her.
'If we care about the prison system being a place of rehabilitation, then she is a success case,' said McBride
'Kelly has had really a complete transformation. There is clear evidence of that in the reconciliation with her children and the day-in and day-out of how she treats prison staff and her fellow inmates, she added.
'We are not asking for her to get out of prison,' McBride said.
'We are asking for her sentence to be life in prison without parole. That's what she wants. She wants to stay in prison. She is doing so much good there.'
Gissendaner, who thought she was being put to death in March, recorded a brief statement for her children to hear.
'I just want to tell my kids that I love them, and I am proud of them,' she said.
'And no matter what happens love does beat out hate.'
Kayla said that she supports her mother even though her life took a tragic turn when her father died 18 years ago.
'He was my primary caregiver, and he always made sure that my brothers and I came first,' said Kayla Gissendaner in her statement.
'He made sure we knew what it meant to be unconditionally loved. The night my father was murdered the world was changed.'
Kayla says that forgiving Gissendaner is the best way to honor her father and has since come to love and need her mother.