Oregon high school shooting: 'This is not a drill'
According to multiple law enforcement officials, the shooter was a student at the school. The gunman appears to have died from a self-inflicted wound, the sources told CNN.
Speaking to reporters, Troutdale Police Department Chief Scott Anderson said he could not confirm how the shooter died. He identified the student killed as 14-year-old Emilio Hoffman, a freshman.
Anderson met with the student's parents Tuesday afternoon and "they want you to know that Emilio was a great kid and he was loved by all," he said.
Officials believe they know who the gunman was, but they are "not confident enough" to reveal details yet, Anderson said.
He added: "This is a tragedy that affects our whole community. This is not supposed to happen to any school or to any child, but we will get through this together."
The shooting happened at about 8 a.m. (11 a.m. ET) at Reynolds High School in Troutdale, about 12 miles east of Portland. The city has a population of 16,400 people.
When it started, student Hannah League ducked into a classroom, where she and others huddled in a corner with no lights -- hiding.
"I heard these pops and I thought they were firecrackers, but then I saw a teacher run out with his side kind of bloody," League told CNN's "Erin Burnett OutFront."
"You don't think something's going to happen like that -- especially to your school. It's kind of, like, crazy," she said.
Details about what led to the shooting weren't immediately available. The gunman is believed to have used a rifle.
Anderson said the shooter entered the building that houses the school gym. Hoffman was shot and killed in a locker room. The shooter was found in a separate restroom, Anderson said.
"Without the quick and well-executed response, this tragedy could have been much worse," the Reynolds School District said in a statement.
affiliate KGW Anxious parents waited for news that their children were safe. One couple, Craig Tuholski and Tawnjia Reimer, were talking with CNN affiliate KGW , about how agonizing the wait for news was, when Tuholski's cell phone rang.
Most members of Congress are "terrified" of the National Rifle Association, the President said, adding that nothing will change until public opinion demands it.
"The country has to do some soul searching about this. This is becoming the norm, and we take it for granted, in ways that as a parent are terrifying to me," Obama said.
CNN first learned of the shooting through reports on Twitter.