3 shot at Seattle Pacific University before student tackles gunman
A gunman opened fire Thursday at Seattle Pacific University, killing one person and wounding two before being tackled by a student security guard, Seattle police said.
used pepper spray and knocked him down The gunman was reloading a shotgun when the student, working as a building monitor, used pepper spray and knocked him down , Police Capt. Chris Fowler told reporters.
"Once on the ground, other students jumped on top of them and subdued the shooter," he said.
The suspect, a 26-year-old man who was not a student at the school, is in custody.
Authorities are withholding his name until he is formally charged. They believe he acted alone, but the investigation is going on. Police did not disclose a motive.
"This story is not about an evil act but about the people that actually lived through this scenario and assisted each other when things were pretty tragic."
The shooting began inside the foyer of Otto Miller Hall, which houses the university's science, math and engineering departments, when the gunman confronted three people and shot them, Fowler said.
A 20-year-old man was declared dead at Harborview Medical Center, hospital spokeswoman Leila Grey said.A 20-year-old woman was in critical condition and a 24-year-old man was in satisfactory condition, she said. A fourth person was hospitalized for emotional trauma, she said.
Briana Clarke told CNN she was in Otto Miller Hall when she heard two loud but muffled shots that sounded like "helium balloons popping."
"I thought it was another one of my professors that was giving a demonstration," she said.
"I walked into the hallway and saw a classmate of mine running frantically, saying that someone had been shot."
University President Daniel J. Martin told CNN affiliate KCPQ he turned on a monitor to view security camera images from Otto Miller Hall after he was alerted to the shooting.
"The students acted without regard for their own safety," he said, his voice breaking with emotion.
Jillian Smith was taking a math test when she learned the campus was on lockdown. She said she kept taking the test until she heard police officers yelling.
"I saw blood ... on the ground," he told CNN. "There were two or three big (pools) and some small ones scattered throughout the hallway."
Seattle Pacific is a Christian university with a student population of 4,270. It is located in Seattle's Queen Anne neighborhood.