ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Serbia's last major war crimes fugitive, a Croatian Serb wartime leader indicted for crimes against humanity during the 1991-95 Croatian war, has been arrested, Serbian president Boris Tadic says.
Goran Hadzic was a key figure in the breakaway Krajina Serb republic in Croatia, and after the arrest of wartime general Ratko Mladic earlier this year, he was Serbia's last remaining figure sought by the United Nations war crimes tribunal in the Hague.
Serbia's leader held a press conference to announce the capture shortly after Hadzic's arrest at 8:24am (local time).
"With this, Serbia ends the most difficult chapter in its cooperation with the court," Mr Tadic told the conference.
Hadzic is charged with ordering the killing of hundreds and the deportation of thousands of Croats and other non-Serbs from the area.
Mr Tadic said Hadzic was tracked down in the idyllic mountain region of Fruska Gora, near the northern city of Novi Sad, and arrested near Krusedol village.
The village is home to a famous Serbian Orthodox monastery, a popular tourist destination known for its icons.
The European Union, which hailed Belgrade for finding Mladic in May, has continued to insist on the arrest of Hadzic for Serbia to make progress towards European Union membership.
Hadzic lived openly in the northern Serbian city of Novi Sad until July 13, 2004, when The Hague sent an indictment and arrest warrant to Belgrade.
He fled immediately, tipped off by nationalist hardliners in Serbia's security services.
His escape was kept a secret for days, while relatives said he was at home and police denied having orders to arrest him.
The Hague later made public surveillance pictures showing him leaving his house with a bag on the afternoon of July 13.
At the press conference Mr Tadic dismissed criticism that Serbia had been slow to arrest Hadzic and Mladic.
"I have been explaining everything we have been doing in the past few years that it has been very difficult for us to investigate those kind of people," he said.
"I will confirm once again we did everything possible and I am very proud of everybody who has been working on this issue."
In Serbia, Hadzic gained notoriety in the past for his involvement in murky deals including illegal exports of oak wood, wine as well as crude oil from an oil well which was under Serb control.
He was frequently seen in the company of Zeljko "Arkan" Raznatovic, a paramilitary leader and the head of Belgrade's underworld at the time.
Mr Ban's spokesman said the secretary-general "commended" the Serbian president and authorities for their "leadership in ending impunity for those indicted for serious violations of international humanitarian law".
"Mr Hadzic's apprehension sends a powerful message that those who are alleged to have committed such crimes cannot evade justice," the spokesman said, quoting Mr Ban.