Corby, Bali Nine in Bali prison evacuation
SECURITY forces have mobilised outside Bali's Kerobokan jail where they are in the final stages of preparations for an evacuation of foreign prisoners, including 12 Australians.
Riot police armed with shields began moving into the prison compound at about 2.45pm local time today (5.45pm AEDT) to start the evacuation process. However, they have since been forced to reassess the planned removal of foreign inmates, as well as juveniles and female prisoners. A police spokesman told AAP that officers were negotiating with the inmates believed to be responsible for the unrest during which prison authorities lost control of the jail twice in two days. The evacuation process was being delayed by the negotiations, he said. All foreign and female inmates, including the Gold Coast's Schapelle Corby and members of the so-called Bali Nine drug trafficking group, were being removed from the jail amid fears for their safety. A spokesperson for the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in Canberra said that Consular staff in Bali had spoken individually to Australian prisoners and confirmed that they remained safe. The spokesperson also confirmed that the Australians would be taken to a detention facility at Klungkung, about 70km from Kerobokan. "Preparations are underway for the immediate transfer," the spokesperson said. Earlier, provincial military command spokesman Wing Handoko told AAP that all foreign inmates, as well as female and juvenile prisoners, were being removed amid fears they could be taken hostage. "We are evacuating the prisoners to avoid them being taken hostage by other prisoners, or being used to by others prisoners as bargaining chips in negotiations (with authorities)." Mr Handoko said authorities would conduct a larger security operation aimed at retaking the jail after the evacuation was complete. "After the evacuation, we will be able to restore order in the prison," he said. The overcrowded jail, which houses more than 1000 male and female inmates, has been the subject of a major security operation since Tuesday night when inmates began rioting and then seized control of the prison. Authorities were able to regain control of the prison early on Wednesday morning but were forced out onto the streets again on Wednesday night. A number of offices close to the entrance of the jail, which is without electricity, were destroyed by fire during the first night of rioting on Tuesday. The jail was built to hold just over 300 prisoners and overcrowding is believed to be a major source of discontent among the inmates.