Oklahoma uses animal-euthanizing drug to execute inmate
A man on Oklahoma's death row is believed to be the first U.S. inmate to be executed using a sedative commonly used to euthanize animals.
John David Duty, 58, was pronounced dead at 6:18 p.m. at the Oklahoma State Penitentiary on Thursday. He is believed to be the first person in the United States whose execution included the use of pentobarbital.
Strapped to a gurney and wearing an eye patch over his right eye, the heavyset Duty apologized to his victim's family.
'I hope one day you'll be able to forgive me, not for my sake, but for your own,' Duty said. 'Thank you, Lord Jesus. I'm ready to go home.'
He also acknowledged three of his attorneys and his brother and sister-in-law, all of whom witnessed the execution from an adjacent room.
'You've all been a blessing,' he told them.
The lethal drugs began to flow at 6:12 p.m., and Duty's breathing became labored one minute later. At 6:15 p.m., he appeared to stop breathing and the color began to drain from his face.
'There didn't appear to be any issues with the new drug,' Oklahoma Department of Corrections spokesman Jerry Massie said afterward.
A federal appeals court this week upheld a ruling that allows the state to substitute pentobarbital for sodium thiopental, an anesthetic normally used in the state's lethal injection formula.
A nationwide shortage of sodium thiopental led Oklahoma to alter its three-drug cocktail.
Attorneys for Duty and two other death-row inmates argued during a November hearing that pentobarbital had not been used before in executions and could be inhumane.
But one anesthesiologist testified that the 5,000 milligrams of pentobarbital the state plans to use is enough to cause unconsciousness and even death within minutes.
Duty was convicted of the December 2001 slaying of his 22-year-old cellmate Curtis Wise. At the time, Duty was serving three life sentences for rape, robbery and shooting with intent to kill, all dating to 1978.
According to court records, Duty convinced Wise that he could get some cigarettes if Wise pretended to be his hostage so that Duty could be transferred into administrative segregation. 
Wise agreed to let Duty bind his hands behind his back. Duty then strangled him with a sheet, court records state.
Investigators said Duty penned a letter to Wise's mother, Mary Wise, writing, 'Well by the time you get this letter you will already know that your son is dead.
'I know now because I just killed him an hour ago. Gee you'd think I'd be feeling some remorse but I'm not.'
Oklahoma is among several states that have been scrambling after Hospira Inc. — the sole U.S. manufacturer of sodium thiopental — said new batches would not be available until January because of problems with its raw-material suppliers.
Earlier this month it was revealed that California prison officials called off an execution in part because a two-month search for sodium thiopental had turned up nothing.