Judge halts deportation of Iraqis detained by ICE
A Detroit judge has blocked the potential deportation of Iraqi immigrants with criminal records who were arrested by federal immigration agents in June. 
On Monday, U.S. District  Judge Mark Goldsmith granted a preliminary injunction request made by attorneys for the Iraqi nationals who had asked him to halt their deportation, saying they would be persecuted in Iraq. 
In his decision, Goldsmith wrote that the case involved "extraordinary circumstances," noting that the Iraqis suddenly faced deportation after years of many of their cases being "dormant."
More: Iraqis detained by ICE ask Gov. Snyder for pardons
Goldsmith said the constitutional rights of the Iraqis were being violated, writing that "the writ of habeas corpus — the fundamental guarantor of liberty — must not be suspended, unless in the rare case of foreign invasion or domestic rebellion."
"This is the biggest relief we have received during this crisis, and it is exactly what we have been hoping for — a halt to the deportations and an opportunity to be heard," said Clarence Dass, an attorney who represents about 25 of the 114 Iraqis arrested by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) last month in Michigan.
Dass said the injunction will last 90 days. 
"For people who have been learning their fate every two weeks, 90 days is a lifetime," Dass said. "All we are asking is for a chance to show that deportation of these particular individuals is a death sentence, and the judge's decision today allows us to do that. Once we show those facts and circumstances, I am hopeful we will be able to save their lives."
A spokesman for ICE said the agency declined to comment on the ruling.   ICE has said previously that the Iraqis detained have criminal records, pose safety threats, and have already had their cases heard in courts. The crimes they were convicted of range from marijuana possession to homicide.
The ruling allows attorneys for the Iraqis time to make their appeals in immigration courts, county criminal courts, and through the governor's office. 
More: Judge: Federal district court has jurisdiction in Iraqi immigrants case
Goldsmith said that the government made legal representation of the immigrants difficult because many of them have been moved around from state to state to different immigration centers.
Goldsmith said there were "transfers ... separating them from their lawyers and the families and communities who can assist in those legal efforts."
In addition to the 114 arrested in Michigan, the judge's order applies to 85 other Iraqis arrested outside the state. In total, there are 1,444 Iraqi nationals in the U.S. with final orders of deportation who could be affected by the judge's ruling. 
Families of Iraqis detained by ICE worry about future
On June 11, ICE agents swept across metro Detroit, arresting 114 Iraqi nationals with criminal records. ICE has said the Iragis pose safety threats and already had final orders of deportation by immigration judges. The roundup came after Iraq and the U.S. reached an agreement this year in March for the Iraqi nationals to be removed to Iraq.
Families and attorneys say that the Iraqis, many of them Christian, would face persecution in Iraq because they belong to a religious minority targeted by extremists.
Some of the Iraqis have lived in the U.S. most of their lives and say they will be unable to live in Iraq.
The ACLU Michigan, Michigan Immigrant Rights Center, and Code Legal Aid filed a lawsuit challenging the arrests, saying the Iraqis would face persecution in Iraq. 
The arrests of the Iraqi immigrants drew several protests in metro Detroit by Iraqi-Americans. Many Iraqi-American Christians had voted for Donald Trump and were upset over the arrests.
Rebecca Adducci, field office director for ICE Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO) Detroit, said in a statement last month: "The operation in this region was specifically conducted to address the very real public safety threat represented by the criminal aliens arrested. The vast majority of those arrested in the Detroit metropolitan area have very serious felony convictions, multiple felony convictions in many cases."
Contact Niraj Warikoo: nwarikoo@freepress.com or 313-223-4792. Follow him on Twitter @nwarikoo.