Texas DA, wife killed 2 months after deputy's slaying
A Texas community is on edge after a district attorney who said he would put away the "scum" who killed a colleague two months ago was shot to death alongside his wife in his home Saturday night.
Kaufman County Judge Bruce Wood said he thought there was a "strong connection" between the slayings of Mike and Cynthia McLelland and the shooting death of Kaufman County Assistant District Attorney Mark Hasse, who was killed on his way to work in January.
"That's the logical conclusion, and I don't have any information that directs me to think that's the case, but that's what you would assume under the circumstances, since they targeted two people from our prosecutors."
"I don't know of anyone who would want to cause him harm," Fortner said. "As far as I could tell, he was doing a really good job as a district attorney."
"He never stated to me that he was worried," Wood said. "But everybody that works in the courthouse has been on edge, but he never indicated any fear to me."
A law enforcement source told CNN that investigators at the McLellands' home recovered several shell casings at the scene of the crime. The casings are from a .223-caliber rifle, the source said.
district attorney's website McLelland was an Army veteran who later earned a master's degree in psychology and became a psychologist for the Texas Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation, the district attorney's website said.
He was raised in the small town of Wortham, Texas, where his parents had a ranch. He joined the Army after attending the University of Texas and spent 23 years in the service.
Colleen A. Dunbar said she spoke with Hasse on January 24. She said the prosecutor told her he had begun carrying a gun in and out of the county courthouse daily.
"It's going to have a chilling effect on people who do want to step into those roles and (have to think about whether to) start arming themselves," he said. "I mean, that's the risk that we're going to face now because of this happening."
Schulte told the station that after someone shot through the windows of his Dallas offices in November, he began to carry a gun more often.