Man arrested in Paraguay over alleged rape of stepdaughter whose case prompted abortion debate
The man who allegedly sexually abused and impregnated his 10-year-old stepdaughter, sparking a debate on abortion in Paraguay, has been arrested after 15 days on the run, police say.
Gilberto Benitez, 42, insisted he was innocent and set up by his girlfriend, the stepdaughter's mother.
He faces 15 years in prison if convicted of rape.
"I will do any [paternity] test to show it wasn't me," he said, adding: "I've been with tonnes of women, and I never got anybody pregnant."
The rape and impregnation of the girl prompted a heated abortion discussion in both houses of the country's congress.
Abortion is a criminal offence in Paraguay, a conservative mostly Roman Catholic country, except in cases when the mother's life is in danger.
Humanitarian groups said that is the case: the girl's 34 kilogram body cannot support her pregnancy, now at five months, and her life is at risk.
The government, courts, the Catholic Church and other groups have insisted that her pregnancy not be terminated, partly due to its advanced stage.
"The pregnancy will not be interrupted," health minister Antonio Barrios has said. "We've already completely ruled out abortion."
The girl's pregnancy was not discovered until April 21 when her mother brought her to a public health clinic believing she had a tumour.
The mother is now under arrest by authorities who believe she enabled her daughter's abuse.
"This girl was always in the hands of that man because the woman would leave to go to work," prosecutor Monalisa Munoz said.
"She was at his mercy."
The girl is under medical care in a special ward for pregnant adolescents at a Red Cross Hospital.
Her doctors said she is doing well, and her pregnancy is progressing normally.
"She has no pain or complications," said Dolores Castellanos, the doctor who heads the section and who has been tasked by the health ministry with supervising the girl's care.
Dr Castellanos described the girl as tiny, talkative and friendly, and said she has gained weight as her pregnancy proceeds on a diet of proteins, iron and liquids.
But she acknowledged that her high blood pressure and low body weight pose risks, "as with all the others who conceive precociously".
"We've had experience with this before," she said.
"Last year a 10-year-old girl who conceived as a nine-year-old gave birth.
The case has cast a harsh light on the prevalence of adolescent pregnancies in the largely rural South American country.
UNICEF recently reported that two girls a day between the ages of 10 and 14 give birth in Paraguay.
Adolescent pregnancies are not only a problem in Paraguay.
UNICEF said that Latin America and the Caribbean have the second highest rate of adolescent pregnancies in the world.
In Uruguay, a similar debate has been sparked by the case of an 11-year-old who is four months' pregnant and does not want an abortion.
Uruguay limits abortion to the first 12 weeks of pregnancy, or the first 14 weeks in cases of rape.