London riots: CCTV shows thugs blasting man defending shop with fire extinguisher
Dramatic CCTV footage released by police shows the innocent man confronting a “large group” of rioters outside the Carphone Warehouse branch at Clapham Junction last week.
On Thursday night detectives launched a national appeal for information about the suited man, who has not been identified, and urged him to contact police.
They also appealed for witnesses to the incident, which occurred at the peak of the London riots last Monday.
The CCTV footage, aired on a special BBC Crimewatch programme, shows the man trying to stop the gang continuing their rampage on the store, located on the corner of St John’s Road and Battersea Rise.
The clip, taken about 10.20pm, shows the hooded and masked rioters smashing the damaged store’s windows with fire extinguishers in an attempt to break into the store.
But as the man stands his ground and remonstrates with the group of youths, one of them then attacks him with an extinguisher, spraying him directly in the face.
The attacker covers the man with foam, leaving his victim dazed and confused.
The group can then be seen ripping off the window before storming the shop, looting it of valuable mobile phones.
Clapham Junction was badly hit by the riot, when more than 1,000 youths besiegedone of the capital's bustling shopping districts and most affluent areas.
“Police would like to hear from the victim who is yet to be identified; they would also like to speak to anyone who witnessed the incident,” a Scotland Yard spokesman said.
A spokesman for Carphone Warehouse said the man was not a staff member from the store.
A total of 125 detectives from Operation Withern are trawling through more than 20,000 hours of CCTV footage from the riots, which police say will increase as more material is handed to authorities.
Forensic examiners have established more than 1,100 crime scenes while more than 300 submissions are being tested in labs. Almost 1300 people have been charged over their involvement in riots across Britain.
A total of 1,015 people have been charged with various offences throughout London from 1,781 arrests.
There have been more than 7.8 million hits on “suspect images” on the Yard’s Flickr page, established to “name and shame” suspected rioters and looters.
Stephen Kavanagh, the Metropolitan Police’s Deputy Assistant Commissioner, urged people yesterday to continue handing information to police.
"It is with the public's support that we will make a real difference and continue to fill the courts with the people who shattered our communities on those nights," he added.