Kim Jong Nam death: 2 women charged with murder
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (CNN)Two women accused of killing the estranged half brother of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un were charged with murder Wednesday.
Siti Aisyah and Doan Thi Huong both said they were not guilty in the killing of Kim Jong Nam, who died suddenly February 13 in Malaysia.
Police said they killed Kim by smearing VX, a deadly nerve agent, on his face while he was waiting to catch a flight at Kuala Lumpur International Airport.
Siti Aisyah, 25, from Indonesia, has been charged with the murder of Kim Jong Nam at Kuala Lumpur International Airport on February 13. She was seen on closed circuit security camera approaching Kim from behind as he tried to check in for a flight to Macau. She has not entered a formal plea but told the court that she was not guilty.
Doan Thi Huong, 30, from Vietnam, is also alleged to have played a role in the plot to kill Kim Jong Nam, the estranged half-brother of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un. She has not entered a formal plea but told the court on March 1 she was not guilty.
A third suspect, Ri Jong Chol, 46, from North Korea, was arrested by Malaysian police on February 17. He was due to be deported from Malaysia to North Korea on March 3.
, is one of the North Korean suspects wanted by Malaysian police. South Korean intelligence said on Monday he worked for North Korea's Foreign Ministry
O Jong Gil, 55, is also wanted by Malaysian police. According to South Korea, he is a member of North Korea's State Security. They claim he worked with Hong Song Hac to recruit Siti Aisyah.
, is considered a suspect by Malaysian police. South Korea claims he is a member of North Korea's Foreign Ministry.
According to South Korea, Ri Jae Nam, 57, is a North Korea state security official who worked with Ri Ji Hyon to recruit Huong. He is currently wanted as a suspect by Malaysia.
Kim Uk Il, 37, is wanted for questioning by Malaysian police. He is an employee of Air Koryo, North Korea's state airline.
The most high-profile North Korean allegedly involved in the case is Hyon Kwang Song, 44, second secretary at North Korea's Malaysian embassy. Malaysian police have said they want to speak to him.
Ri Ji U, 30, is also wanted for questioning by Malaysian police. The North Korean is believed to still be in Malaysia.
If found guilty, they will face the death penalty, according to charge sheets read in court Wednesday. The women have not entered formal pleas, which will take place when the case reaches the High Court.
Wearing a red T-shirt and appearing to be on the verge of tears, Aisyah, an Indonesian citizen, was led to the dock in handcuffs.
"I do not admit this," she said when an interpreter asked her whether she understood the charges, before repeating, "I am not guilty of this."
Huong, a Vietnamese who was photographed after the crime wearing a sweatshirt emblazoned with the letters "LOL," also said she was "not guilty" of murder.
The charge sheet also mentioned "four others at large" who took part in the crime. Malaysian officials have previously named four North Koreans as suspects, with another three wanted for questioning.
Aisyah thought the substance she rubbed on Kim's face was "a kind of oil, baby oil, something like that," said Andreano Erwin, Indonesia's deputy ambassador to Malaysia.
After the women wiped Kim's face with the liquid, he started feeling dizzy and died shortly afterward on his way to the hospital, Malaysian police said.
"And now the person next to me will become a (celebrity)," one friend is heard saying in the video, prompting Aisyah to laugh.
Speaking to CNN in Serang, in Indonesia's Banten province Speaking to CNN in Serang, in Indonesia's Banten province , Aisyah's aunt, Darmi, said her niece had been hired "to work as a comedian," pranking strangers by putting lotion and tomato sauce on them.
"It would be impossible for such a tiny person like her to do such a crime if she was not manipulated," she said.
"The assassination of Kim Jong Nam was an act of systematic terror ordered by Kim Jong Un," South Korean lawmaker Kim Byung-kee said in a televised address. "The operation was conducted with two assassination groups and one supporting group."
But North Korea furiously denied the allegations in an article posted Wednesday by the state-run Korean Central News Agency.
"The US and South Korean authorities are groundlessly blaming the DPRK ...," the article said, using the acronym for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. "Almost all countries have scrapped chemical weapons under the convention on ban on chemical weapons but only the US and some other countries still possess (them)," the article said.
North Korea also suggested the United States had given the nerve agent to South Korea and accused both countries of starting a "anti-DPRK smear campaign."
"The US and its vassal forces should not run amuck, clearly understanding the strategic position of the DPRK as a nuclear power," the article said.