Purdue shooting suspect surrenders after allegedly killing student
The Indiana school's police chief said that the suspect appeared to have had just one target in mind. He left the building right after the shooting, and a city police officer arrested him.
"This appears to be an isolated and intentional act," Purdue Police Chief John Cox said. "...The victim appeared to have been targeted by the suspect, and it was no more and no less than that."
By 6 p.m. West Lafayette police had executed a search warrant on Cousins' home, with city police Chief Jason Dombkowski saying his officers had "previous contact with the suspect (for what) I believe (was) an alcohol offense."
Authorities have not explained why Boldt might have been killed, nor have they detailed his relationship with the suspect, including whether he was a teaching assistant in one of Cousins' classes. Nor have they described the type of gun used in the crime.
CNN iReporter Jeff Ooms "You hear about school shootings all the time, but you never expect it to happen where you live," said CNN iReporter Jeff Ooms , who works a few blocks away from what's known as the EE Building and went to the scene. "Everyone was just confused and shocked."
video posted to IndyStar.com Cox said some on the scene claimed to hear "four to five shots fired." One of those inside the building was Ben Snyder, a Purdue senior from Fort Wayne. According to video posted to IndyStar.com , he and others inside the engineering building believed they heard two gunshots and immediately knew something was up.
He recalled "officers coming in fast," including four on the building's second floor armed with what looked like assault rifles, and saw several people "getting handcuffed" and one man "with blood on his hands."
In another video interview on the same website, sophomore Kirk Choquette said he first heard cries of "get down, get down, get down" after leaving a bathroom and didn't know what to make of it.
After he returned to a large lecture hall, Choquette said, "a cop came in and said, 'Get out, get out, everyone get out of the building.'"
"Originally, I just thought it was just people being loud," the 20-year-old Hook told CNN. "When I heard (shouting) the second time, I thought something was probably going on."
"I walked out," Hook said of the chilling scene outside -- and not just because the wind chill dipped below zero Tuesday outside -- "and there were police cars everywhere."
Cox commended the quick response by officers, as well as West Lafayette police and school authorities, saying "everyone did exactly what they should have done."
The police chief added: "You train and plan, and train and plan for one of these incidents and hope it never happens. But unfortunately, it did."
The school sent text messages about the shooting to students, asking them to take shelter where they were. That request was lifted by 1:30 p.m., though the electrical engineering building still was closed so police could investigate, school spokeswoman Liz Evans said.