France arrests 10 suspected Islamists in fresh raids
The group was reportedly linked to Mohammed Merah, who was accused of killing seven people in the south of France in March before police killed him after a 32-hour siege of his apartment in the southwestern city of Toulouse.
Presidential contender Francois Hollande declined to be drawn by French radio station RTL on Wednesday on whether he felt the arrests were linked to the upcoming elections, with the first round due later this month and a second round in May.
"That the state has the responsibility to punish them, that is one thing," he said. "But when it's done in front of journalists, in front the cameras, I think that's surprising. These kinds of police interventions should not take place like this, it's as if they are advertising."
"If these Islamic people are so dangerous, obviously we have to arrest them. But maybe it should have been done before. It's surprising that it's happened just after the Merah case," she said. "I agree on being firm, but not just for show. I'm always shocked to see the cameras there. Let justice do its job."
"I can give you an indication of the profile of these people, the whole group," he said. "They have been to Afghanistan and Pakistan, have scoured instructions, documents on the creation of explosives, have confirmed jihadist sentiments, support the actions of Mohammed Merah, who want to be martyrs themselves. And all these elements together were judged sufficient by the magistrate and led to their arrest.
An Islamic militant from Algeria who was involved in 1994 attacks in Marrakech, Morocco, was sent to his home country Monday, the statement said. In addition, a Malian imam was returned to his home country for sermons that promoted anti-Semitism and rejection of the West, it said.
"It's not just linked to Toulouse. It's all over the country. It's in connection with a form of radical Islam, and it's in agreement with the law," he said.
Sarkozy suggested then that more raids would follow, saying, "There will be other operations that will continue and that will allow us to expel from our national territory a certain number of people who have no reason to be here."
Merah was blamed for the killings of three French paratroopers, a rabbi and three Jewish children ages 4, 5 and 7 in Toulouse and the nearby city of Montauban. Two other people were seriously wounded in the shootings.