Extra police sent to quell Christmas Island riots
Immigration Minister Chris Bowen has announced an extra 70 Australian Federal Police officers are being sent to Christmas Island after another night of rioting at the island's detention centre.
Federal police on the island used tear gas and bean-bag rounds to try to control around 250 detainees who rioted for four hours on Thursday night, the fourth night of disturbances on the island in the last week.
The unrest started at 8:00pm (local time) and lasted until around midnight.
The rioters set fire to accommodation at the centre, forcing around 200 asylum seekers to be moved.
Deputy Police Commissioner Steve Lancaster says up to 250 protesters advanced aggressively at police officers during the riot.
"Whilst throwing rocks in the direction of police, the protesters were also wearing cloths and towels over their heads and faces in an attempt to avoid exposure to CS gas or other use-of-force options available to police," he said.
"Some protesters set fire to two administration buildings and seven marquees.
"Approximately 300 of the clients and staff sought refugee from the violent protests within the gymnasium... the gym was later attacked by the minority group who threw rocks and stones, and those seeking refuge inside had to be safely removed from the attack."
Refugee advocates say a number of sleeping quarters were destroyed and all staff on the site had to be evacuated.
Mr Bowen says the violence is unacceptable.
"Again a group of around 200 protesters seem to think that violent behaviour is an acceptable way to influence the outcome of their visa application or influence government decision making," he said.
"Last night buildings were damaged, fires were lit and there were violent approaches to the Australian Federal Police."
Federal police are also investigating whether a so-called bean bag bullet broke an asylum seeker's leg earlier this week.
Mr Lancaster says bean-bag bullets are an accepted ammunition in the police arsenal.
"The expectation is last night there would've been a high volume of usage of these munitions," he said.
"The broken leg was occasioned during an incident where those munitions were deployed. Now whether that caused the injury, is subject to an investigation."
Mr Bowen says the AFP has taken control of the facility and will remain in control until further notice.
Mr Bowen says police may lay criminal charges against those who led the riots and the recent events can only count against successful visa applications.
He says character is an important consideration in determining whether someone should be granted a visa.
Factors which can be taken into account in the character assessment can include a prison sentence of over 12 months and "general conduct" where that implies the subject is not of good character.
"That will be taken into account by our decision-makers and ultimately by me," Mr Bowen said.
Refugee advocates have said a letter received by detainees sparked the riot - but Mr Bowen disputed the claim.
He said the letter explained the Government was taking steps to ensure faster processing, including speeding up ASIO security checks.
But it also said that officials who were due to assess visa applications on the island this week could not come because of the riots.
"It was a very well-received letter, so comments that this letter somehow sparked this action yesterday are completely out of line, irresponsible, inaccurate and bear no resemblance to the facts," Mr Bowen said.
Mr Bowen also announced that the independent review into the Christmas Island breakouts and riots announced on Monday will be carried out by two former senior public servants, Allan Hawke and Helen Williams.
Dr Hawke is a former secretary of the Defence Department and Ms Williams a former secretary of the Immigration Department.
They will report by the middle of the year.
On the other side of the country, at the Scherger detention centre near Weipa in Queensland, the body of a 20-year-old Afghan asylum seeker was found in his quarters last night.
The Department of Immigration says staff attempted CPR but the man could not be revived.
Police are investigating the circumstances of his death and no further details will be released until his next of kin has been informed.
A spokesman says the department expresses its sympathy to the man's family and will cooperate with the coroner.
Meanwhile on Christmas Island, immigration officials have fielded angry questions from local residents concerned about unrest at the detention centre.
Locals say about 200 residents attended a community meeting last night after a series of break-outs and protests at the centre.
The island's administrator, Brian Lacy, says the majority of residents who spoke feel their community is no longer safe.
"They feel there is some sort of threat to their security and safety," he said.
"The people on this island have never had that experience [of unrest] before, they feel there is some sort of threat to their security and safety.
"So that is something very difficult for them to swallow, a difficult pill to swallow."
Resident Glenda Maberly says the riots have left many on the island fearful.
"We are absolutely fed up. We need the centre to be secured," she said.
"Yesterday officers were asked to leave the detention centre for their own safety... that is how bad things are."
Mr Lacy says locals asked Immigration officials for assurances there would be no more break-outs and that the number of asylum seekers being housed at the facility would be reduced.
Mr Bowen's Opposition counterpart Scott Morrison called it another night of chaos on the island.
"Christmas Island residents are very concerned about the security situation and so they should be. The Government's detention network on Christmas Island is out of control," he said.
He says another boat carrying asylum seekers is about to be brought to the island and will add to the pressure.
"How can you expect our officials to process applications for asylum when that sort of thing is happening?" he said.
Christmas Island Shire President Gordon Thompson says he has been told at least 500 people will be moved out of the centre in the next fortnight.