Former Fairfax Co. Police Officer Indicted on Second-Degree Murder Charge in Shooting of John Geer
Ex-Officer in Jail Without Bond After Being Indicted
Former Fairfax County police officer Adam Torres was indicted on a second-degree murder charge for shooting and killing John Geer in 2013. He was jailed on Monday and held without bond. News4's Jackie Bensen reports. (Published Monday, Aug. 17, 2015)
The former Fairfax County Police officer who shot and killed Springfield, Virginia, resident John Geer in the doorway of his home was indicted on a second-degree murder charge, police announced Monday, almost two years after Geer's death. 
Adam Torres turned himself in to detectives Monday evening and is being held without bond at the Fairfax County Adult Detention Center, the Fairfax County Police Department said in an update late Monday. 
"Finally, justice is prevailing," Geer's father, Don Geer, said. "It took a lot longer than we expected. Every step forward in this brings us closer to healing."
Torres shot John Geer Aug. 29, 2013. Geer's partner had called police, reporting a domestic dispute. The mother of Geer's two children told responding police there were weapons in the house.
During negotiations, Torres fired once, striking Geer, who was standing in the doorway.
Geer went inside and then did not respond to police. Later, a SWAT team with a tactical paramedic and rescue vehicle entered the home and found him dead with a holstered, loaded firearm to his left. 
"The loss of life in the Geer case affects all of us," Fairfax County Police Chief Ed Roessler said.
Torres told investigators he had seen Geer's hands go toward his waist, as if reaching for a weapon. However, Geer's father and other police officers said Geer's hands were held up when he was shot.
Torres was dismissed by the county because he "violated our policies and procedures on the use of force," Roessler said. 
The shooting led to protests against Fairfax County police. It also led to the creation of a county commission to review police department policies and the release of information to the public.
Fairfax County paid Geer's family almost $3 million earlier this year to settle a wrongful-death lawsuit.
Roessler said he plans to reach out to Geer's family but couldn't before due to the investigation.
Police initially refused to release information about the shooting and refused to turn over records to Commonwealth's Attorney Ray Morrogh. For more than a year, police would not say which officer had shot Geer.
The officer's name was only released after Geer's family filed their suit, initially seeking $12 million.