Ohio kidnapper Ariel Castro formally sentenced to life in jail, plus 1,000 years
Ariel Castro, the Ohio man who kidnapped three women and kept them hostage for a decade, has been formally sentenced to life plus more than 1,000 years in jail.
Castro kidnapped Amanda Berry, 27, Gina DeJesus, 23, and 32-year-old Michelle Knight and abused them while they were held hostage in his home.
He delivered a rambling defence for his actions, telling the court that he was not a monster - just addicted to porn.
"I just want to clear the record, I'm not a monster, I did not prey on these women, I just acted on my sexual instincts because of my sexual addiction," he said.
"If you asked my daughter she would say, my dad is the best dad in the world."
"I would come home and just be normal, like a normal family.  These accusations that I would beat her, beat them – those are totally wrong."
But there was nothing normal in the photos that showed the secret rooms the women were kept in, the chains they were restrained with, the helmets they were gagged with and the wigs they were forced to wear on the rare occasions they went outside.
Cuyahoga County Judge Michael Russo said by his repeated acts of violence, rape, torture, kidnapping and confinement of his victims for more than a decade, Castro was by definition a sexual predator and he had never sought help.
Judge Russo, describing Castro as suffering from "extreme narcissism," said the crimes were so extreme that the former school bus driver should never emerge from prison.
He said Castro had no place in Cleveland, the US or the world.
Survivor Michelle Knight was in court for the sentencing and said with tears streaming down her face that she will recover from her captivity.
"Days turned into nights, nights turned into days. Years turned into eternity. I knew nobody cared about me. He told me that my family didn't care," she said.
"I spent 11 years in hell. Your hell is just beginning."
In late June, Castro agreed to serve a life sentence after pleading guilty to 937 of the 977 charges against him - including aggravated murder over a miscarriage one of the women suffered.
"Because of the plea deal, I will plead guilty," Castro said.
"I knew I was going to get pretty much the book thrown at me."
When asked at the time by Judge Russo if he had any reason to think he might get out of prison before he died, Castro replied: "I don't think there is any reason, no."
The city of Cleveland has obtained the deeds to Castro's house and will bulldoze it.
Residents in Castro's former street are still getting counselling.
Castro's three victims all went missing from the west side of Cleveland between 2002 and 2004.
They were discovered on May 6 after neighbours heard Ms Berry's cries for help from Castro's home.
Ms Berry has a six-year-old daughter fathered by Castro in captivity, according to DNA evidence.
The child had a "normal" life, Castro said, and Ms Berry "is out partying" after her release, so she must be okay.
He described the little girl as his "miracle child." The only point at which he became at all emotional was when he spoke about her.
"I heard I can file for parental rights," Castro told the judge at one point.
The judge responded that he would not be allowed any contact with the girl.
Earlier in the hearing, prosecutors presented graphic evidence of the crimes, including a dollhouse-size replica of the home where he imprisoned the women.
There were also photos of the interior of the house showing chains, boarded up windows, numerous locks and curtains separating rooms.
A police officer described how Ms Knight had thrown herself into the arms of a police officer when she realised that he was there to rescue her.