Dallas police HQ attack: Suspect James Boulware killed
(CNN)A man unleashed a barrage of gunfire on Dallas' police headquarters and planted explosives outside the building early Saturday -- narrowly failing to wound anyone -- leading to a chase to a suburb that ended with SWAT officers killing him in his parked van at a restaurant parking lot.
Police shot him through the windshield of the armored van about an hour before dawn after he made more threats, sometime after they chased him to the lot outside the Jack in the Box restaurant in the suburb of Hutchins, authorities said.
But police didn't confirm his death until the early afternoon , with a bomb squad needing to inspect the vehicle after the suspect told them that the vehicle contained explosives.
"We believe this suspect meant to kill officers," police Chief David Brown told reporters. "We barely survived the intentions of this suspect."
Before he was shot, the suspect ranted to police by phone, identifying himself as James Boulware, and alleging police were responsible for his child having been taken from him, Brown said.
large apartment and office complex The attack began shortly after midnight, with the man firing an assault weapon and then a shotgun from the outside, riddling police cars and the windows of the headquarters, which sits across the street from a large apartment and office complex . Dallas Deputy Police Chief Gilberto Garza said at times the suspect was on foot as he fired an automatic rifle.
Parts of the initial attack were caught on video by several people nearby, and the police chief said he believed the sounds indicated some of the gunfire came close to those making the recordings. But based on the suspect's calls to police, "we think he was specifically targeting police officers," Brown said.
Shortly after 4:30 a.m. (5:30 a.m. ET), police used a .50-caliber rifle to hit the engine block, disabling the van, Brown said, because the man on the phone had been increasingly hostile and agitated. Police didn't want him to drive away and threaten anyone else, Brown said.
The crackling sound of the Dallas shootout got the attention of Birt, the ex-Marine who lives across the street from the police headquarters with his wife.
"We heard loud noises, my wife asked if I thought they were shots," he said. "I went over to the window and put one of them up. And we heard more shots being fired, and I turned to my wife and said, 'Yeah, that's definitely gunfire.'"
He got his cell phone and recorded video. After the van fled, police informed him and his wife that they and others to evacuate the building.
Dallas police said the complex's residents might have to stay away for hours, since officers needed to determine whether more bombs were planted in the area.
on eBay last week Investigators are looking into whether a van sold in Newnan, Georgia, on eBay last week may be the van used in the Dallas attack, a source familiar with the investigation said. They are investigating, among other things, who may have purchased the vehicle.
Witnesses initially indicated up to four people attacked the Dallas police building. But Brown said investigators concluded that only one person was involved and that witnesses were describing the same person at different times and locations.