Arrests as hundreds protest at Mall of America
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
BLOOMINGTON, Minn. — About 25 people were arrested during a police brutality protest at Mall of America Saturday afternoon, according to mall officials.
Hundreds of people gathered to demonstrate at the mall despite warnings that the facility is private property.
Official attendance figures weren't immediately available, but the group Black Lives Matter Minneapolis had more than 3,000 people confirm on their Facebook page that they would attend the event, billed as a peaceful gathering.
Protesters chanted "Black lives matter" and "No justice, no peace" as they gathered in the mall's rotunda. There was also silence as demonstrators staged a die-in.
Mall of America officials sent letters to organizers in advance to tell them that protests aren't allowed on private property, and they tried to redirect the group to a nearby parking lot.
After about 10 minutes into the protest, protesters cheered as a warning that the demonstration "is not authorized and is in clear violation of Mall of America policy" was announced over the loudspeaker and displayed on a large screen in the rotunda. The warning asked participants to disperse and stated that those who continued to demonstrate could be arrested.
Mall officials shut down all of the escalators in the rotunda, and some stores in the area closed their gates. The mall enhanced security, and police in riot gear were present.
After about a half hour, most demonstrators peacefully left the rotunda area -- many holding their hands in the air -- and left the mall. Others migrated to a shopping area and occupied two levels. A small "die-in" with people lying on the floor was staged in front of several stores.
Bloomington police said 25 people were arrested, mainly for reasons such as trespassing. Commander Mark Stehlik said he was not aware of any injuries or property damage.
Small groups of protesters also targeted retailers in Cleveland and Atlanta on Saturday.