Two Libyans identified as Lockerbie bombing suspects
Scottish prosecutors believe two individuals were involved along with Abdelbaset al-Megrahi in 1988 attack on Pan Am flight 103
Two Libyans have been identified as official suspects by Scottish and US prosecutors over the 1988 Lockerbie bombing in their investigation.
The Crown Office in Edinburgh confirmed on Thursday that Scotland’s chief prosecutor, lord advocate Frank Mulholland, had issued a formal international letter of request to the Libyan attorney general asking for permission to interview both men.
Despite the chaos and continuing violence in Libya since Muammar Gaddafi was deposed in 2011, Scottish officials and the US Federal Bureau of Investigation have been pursuing other suspects in the bombing of flight Pan Am 103 which killed 270 passengers, crew and townspeople over and in the Scottish town of Lockerbie in December 1988.
The Crown Office would not name the two new suspects, but they are believed to be Abdullah al-Senussi, Gaddafi’s brother-in-law and former head of intelligence, who is now in a Libyan jail sentenced to death, and Nasser Ali Ashour, an intelligence officer who supplied the IRA with explosives and weapons in the 1980s.
A third man also in a Libyan jail serving a ten year sentence, Abu Agila Mas’ud, has been identified as the bomb-maker and as a further suspect by Ken Dorstein, an American documentary film-maker whose brother was killed in the bombing.
Mas’ud was named in the original indictment in 1999 against Abdelbaset al-Megrahi, the only person convicted of the attack, who died in May 2012 after being released by the Scottish government on compassionate grounds in 2009.
The Crown Office said that after Mulholland recently met the US attorney general, Loretta Lynch, in Washington DC, it now wanted to arrange a visit to Tripoli to interview both men as soon as conditions were secure enough in Libya.
“The lord advocate and the US attorney general have recently agreed that there is a proper basis in law in Scotland and the United States to entitle Scottish and US investigators to treat two Libyans as suspects in the continuing investigation into the bombing of flight Pan Am 103 over Lockerbie,” a spokesman said.
“The lord advocate has today, therefore, issued an international letter of request to the Libyan attorney general in Tripoli which identifies the two Libyans as suspects in the bombing of flight Pan Am 103.
“The lord advocate and the attorney general are seeking the assistance of the Libyan judicial authorities for Scottish police officers and the FBI to interview the two named suspects in Tripoli. The two individuals are suspected of involvement, along with Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed al-Megrahi, in the bombing of flight Pan Am 103 in December 1988 and the murder of 270 people.”
Despite this apparent breakthrough, it remains unclear whether any of the new suspects can ever stand trial in Scotland since they are currently in jail, with Senussi facing death, and the fact that the Lockerbie bombing took place nearly 30 years ago. Campaigners for other Lockerbie victims insist that Libya has been wrongly accused of the bombing; Megrahi died proclaiming he was innocent.