Mystery surrounds French shooting case as police seek leads
Investigators have identified two of the four people killed in a mysterious attack in the foothills of the French Alps this week as the parents of two young girls found alive at the scene, a prosecutor said Friday.
Her 7-year-old sister was found, severely injured with a fractured skull and bullet wound to her shoulder, outside the car. She is still in a medically induced coma and cannot yet be spoken to, Maillaud said. He described her survival as "a miracle."
"We hope that she will be able to tell us what she went through, provide us with descriptions of the murderer of murderers," Maillaud said of investigators' hopes for when she gets out of the coma and can be interviewed.
The identity of a third person who was killed in the car is not yet clear. She was an older woman with a Swedish passport, but her relationship to the others has not been confirmed, Maillaud said.
Maillaud said that it seemed likely that Mollier, a local man who had a young child, was in the wrong place at the wrong time, but that it was too early to say for certain that he was not the intended target.
By Saturday, four French investigators will be in the United Kingdom working on the case in collaboration with their British counterparts, he said. Surrey police officers have been stationed outside the Claygate house identified by neighbors as that of al-Hilli.
French authorities hope to return the 4-year-old girl to family members in Britain soon, once they assess to whom she can be entrusted, the prosecutor said. Although physically unharmed, she is being cared for by specialist pediatric medical personnel under the watchful eye of police and British consular officials.
What is known about the victims is that Saad al-Hilli was an Iraqi-born engineer who lived in Claygate in Surrey, south of London, with his wife and two daughters. He was born in 1962 and was a naturalized British citizen.
He promised that British authorities will cooperate "very closely with the French authorities" to "help those poor children" and "get to the bottom of what happened in this clearly very tragic and awful case."
"Both a French and a British family have been impacted by this terrible event, and we will do our utmost to identify the perpetrators," said Hollande in a joint news conference after the two leaders met.