Kerala fire sparked by fireworks kills 109
(CNN)At least 10 people associated with a temple that went up in flames early Sunday, killing more than 100, are on the run, authorities said.
Police are looking for the individuals in relation to the fireworks accident at the Puttingal temple in the southern Indian city of Kollam, police spokesman Anantha Krishnean told CNN.
More than 500 people were injuredand 109 were killedafter an errant firework ignited a stockpile of other fireworks at the temple, causing a larger blaze.
The temple, which which was celebrating the Hindu new year over Saturday night into Sunday, has a long history of using fireworks in celebrations, sometimes setting off pyrotechnics that appear low to the ground
The temple did not have permission for the fireworks celebration, police official M.S. Santosh said.
Five workers from the company that supplied fireworks to the temple have been detained, Kollam Commissioner of Police P. Prakash told CNN.
The inferno destroyed a temple office building and a storage shed while also damaging nearby houses in Kollam, which is in Kerala state in southwest India. The temple's main shrine was not severely damaged.
It's not uncommon for people to pray at temples early in the morning in southern India, Prakash said. Hundreds were still at the temple at 3:15 a.m. Sunday, when the explosion occurred.
Bhadran, a reveler, said that the accident happened quickly, making it difficult to register what had happened.
One moment, he and two friends were celebrating. Minutes later, his friends were dead.
"I did not know what happened," Bhadran, who gave only one name, said. "There was a huge fireball, and it was all over in five minutes. Once I reached the ground, there were dead bodies all around."
Nirmala, 58, was sleeping in her house nearby with her daughter and granddaughter when the blast occurred.
"I thought there was an earthquake and hid under the bed," she said. "When I came out, there was no electricity. People were running everywhere, and burnt bodies were on the ground. The smell was really bad."
Some of those killed died from burns; others died from suffocation or from the crush of collapsed buildings.
"Catherine and I would like to offer our condolences to all those affected by the terrible fire at the temple in Kollam," he said.
"I know all of you in this room will join us in the sentiments."
The century-old Puttingal temple is named after a goddess whom worshippers believe lived inside an ant hill.