Mozambique beer poisoning death toll rises to 69, with 169 in hospital
Officials in Mozambique say at least 69 people have now died after drinking home-brewed beer last week.
The mass poisoning occurred when people attending a funeral on Friday, in the village of Chitima, fell ill.
Seven fatalities were initially confirmed on Saturday morning.
"As we prepared to determine the cause of death of people, we began to receive a lot of people with diarrhoea and other muscle aches," local government official Paula Bernardo said.
"After that we began to receive dead bodies from several neighbourhoods."
Ms Bernardo, who is the district director for Health, Women and Social Action, told the public broadcaster at least 169 people remained in hospital.
Samples of the brew and suspicious objects found inside the drum have been sent to the capital Maputo for testing.
The woman who brewed the beer and several members of her family were among the dead, making it difficult for investigators to ascertain what could have contaminated the brew.
Home brews concocted from corn, sorghum or other crops are commonly consumed in many parts of Africa and funerals on the continent are often accompanied by drinking and feasting.
The outgoing president, Armando Guebuza, declared three days of national mourning.
Meanwhile, at least 14 people have died and dozens of others left seriously ill after consuming toxic liquor in northern India, officials said.
The victims were rushed to various hospitals after the incident was reported in Kharta village near the capital of Uttar Pradesh state.
"The number of people who have now lost their lives due to alcohol poisoning has increased to 14 and around two dozen are being treated in the trauma centre of King George's Medical University," a local police spokesman said.
Local media reports gave a much higher number of victims in serious condition.
"At present 117 persons are admitted at the medical university and six are undergoing treatment at Balrampur hospital," the Press Trust of India news agency quoted the state's chief medical officer, SNS Yadav, as saying.
The state government said it was taking a serious view of the incident.