Dave Lee Travis held by police in sexual abuse investigation
The 67-year-old was detained at his home in Leighton Buzzard, Beds, at 7.45am on suspicion of sexual offences as part of the Metropolitan Police’s Operation Yewtree.
He is the fourth person to be arrested as part of the investigation which began after scores of allegations were made against the late presenter Jimmy Savile.
Scotland Yard’s investigation is looking at three categories of alleged offences; those involving Jimmy Savile, those involving Savile and others and those involving others.
The first person arrested as part of Operation Yewtree was former glam rock star Gary Glitter, followed by comedian Freddie Starr and former BBC producer Wilfred De'ath.
A spokesman for the Metropolitan Police would not confirm the identity of the person arrested today, but said they came under the ‘others’ strand of the investigation.
A neighbour of the former disc jockey confirmed that the broadcaster is being held in Aylesbury Police Station, Bucks.
The neighbour, who lives next door to the home of Travis visited the DJ's home to lend support to the broadcaster's wife, Marianne.
Mr Travis made his name as a DJ on the pirate station Radio Caroline in the mid 1960s before joining Radio 1 in 1968.
He became one of the station’s most established presenters, becoming known as the Hairy Cornflake, when he took over from Noel Edmonds as presenter of the Breakfast Show in May 1978.
He also presented Top of the Pops between 1974 and 1984, but left the Corporation in dramatic style in 1993, resigning live on air, in protest at changes being made to Radio 1.
Since then he has worked for a number of commercial radio stations, most recently appearing on the Magic Network.
Aung San Suu Kyi met DJ Dave Lee Travis when she visited the BBC World Service in London in June 2012 (BBC/Getty)
Last year Burmese pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi said Mr Travis’s BBC World Service music request show had given her a lifeline during her many years under house arrest.
The Nobel Peace Prize winner said, A Jolly Good Show, which was broadcast between 1981- and 2001 had made her world “much more complete”.
There is no suggestion that any allegations of paedophilia have been made against Mr Travis, but two women have come forward in recent weeks claiming he groped them during the 1970s and 1980s.
One of the women, who was aged 17 at the time alleged that Mr Travis had invited her into his studio in 1977 and put his hand up her skirt.
Speaking last month when the allegations surfaced, Mr Travis said: “I categorically deny that there is any substance in either allegation and I’m genuinely surprised that allegations of this nature have been made. I totally refute any impropriety.”
Mr Travis also said he would be more than happy to speak to the police to clear up the matter.
He had been due to present an episode of Top of the Pops, looking at the charts from this week in 1977, on BBC4 tonight, but a spokesman for the Corporation said the episode has been postponed following his arrest.
The spokesman said: "In the light of today’s news, we have postponed tonight’s Top of the Pops. In its place we are showing next week’s edition of TOTPs presented by Kid Jensen."
Mr Travis was bailed on Thursday evening pending further inquiries, to return on a date in early January.