Nurul Izzah released on bail, will have to report to police a month later, SE Asia News & Top Stories
KUALA LUMPUR - Malaysian Member of Parliament Nurul Izzah Anwar was released on Tuesday on a month-long bail after recording her statement in a sedition investigation.
"Nurul Izzah released on police bail. Thank you for all the support and prayers. Will continue to fight," tweeted her politician mother Wan Azizah Wan Ismail after she left the police district headquarters on Tuesday afternoon.
Ms Nurul Izzah, 34, a two-term lawmaker and the eldest daughter of opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim, was arrested on Monday for a parliamentary speech she made last week on behalf of her father who is serving five years imprisonment for sodomy.
But Malaysian police had said on their Facebook page that the arrest was made for her remarks at the Kita Lawan rally, Malaysian Insider reported.
Kita Lawan (We will fight) is a coalition that has been holding rallies and events to ramp up support for opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim, who is serving a five-year sentence after the Federal Court upheld his second sodomy conviction on Feb 10.
"She will be released once her statement has been recorded," Inspector-General of Police Khalid Abu Bakar said in a two-paragraph statement posted on the police Facebook page.
On Tuesday morning, she was released from detention for a short while and allowed to go home before being taken back to the police station to record her statement. She was finally released on bail at 12.20 pm.
"Nurul Izzah Anwar is released!" DAP lawmaker Teo Nie Ching tweeted, and shared a photograph of the leader raising her arm and smiling as she walked out of the station, flanked by her sister Nurul Nuha, lawyer R. Sivarasa and several others.
However, she will have to report back to the police on April 16.
"I think its quite clear that my arrest is blatant abuse of power by none other than the IGP and Prime Minister Najib Abdul Razak," she said to reporters after her release.
"The prime minister is responsible for allowing transgressions against Parliament," she said, according to Malaysiakini.