Second riot at Moorland Young Offenders Institution
Inmates have been involved in a second night of rioting at a young offenders institution in South Yorkshire.
About 55 prisoners at Moorland Young Offenders Institution near Doncaster refused to return to their cells on Wednesday evening.
They surrendered more than eight hours later after officers in riot gear were called in, the Prison Service said.
Prison officers said the riot started when they tried to stop inmates attacking another prisoner.
Prison Officers' Association (POA) General Secretary Steve Gillan said: "It has been brought to my attention that a prisoner had received a severe beating from other prisoners and it was the bravery of staff in pulling the prisoner to safety that potentially saved his life.
"But for the prompt action of professional prison officers these incidents could have been much worse."
The Prison Service said one inmate had been taken to hospital with head injuries, but no prison officers had been injured.
As a result of damage caused to the buildings, 86 inmates were being transferred to other prisons.
In the first disturbance on Tuesday night, a fight broke out and 42 inmates refused to return to their cells, the Ministry of Justice (MOJ) said.
A Prison Service spokeswoman said: "There was a second incident of concerted indiscipline at Moorland prison last night."
She said about 55 prisoners on C Spur refused to return to their cells. They surrendered at 0210 BST when a Prison Service team in riot gear arrived.
There was damage to parts of the prison and 86 prisoners are being transferred to other jails.
She added: "We will always press for the most serious charges to be laid against those who commit acts of violence in our prisons."
In both incidents prison officers in riot gear, known as Tornado response teams, were deployed.
The Prison Officers Association (POA) said a number of suspected ringleaders were segregated following the first riot.
"They continue in the only way they know which is in a violent and anti-social manner that our members confront and manage on a daily basis."
Tuesday's incident at Moorland happened at the same time as about 60 offenders at Warren Hill in Woodbridge, Suffolk, refused to return to their cells.
Two staff were injured and three inmates treated for minor injuries.
The POA said 48 inmates needed to be transferred after about 100 prison places were lost as a result of the damage.