Israeli court convicts former president of rape
Moshe Katsav faces at least four years in jail on two counts of raping an employee when he was tourism minister
Israel's former president Moshe Katsav has been found guilty of rape and sexual harassment following a year-long trial, largely held behind closed doors to respect the privacy of the three complainants, all former subordinates.
Political leaders and analysts praised the ruling, saying it showed that the law applied to everyone, including the president. But many expressed shame and embarrassment that a former head of state had been found guilty of such serious offences.
Iranian-born Katsav, 65, abandoned a plea bargain two years ago that could have kept him out of jail, saying he wanted to prove his innocence. The panel of judges on the Tel Aviv district court said, however, that he had lied in his account of the events.
The sexual offences took place during Katsav's terms as president and as minister of tourism. Complainant A accused him of raping her on two occasions, while complainants H and L accused him of sexual harassment. The verdict confirmed all the three accusations. Katsav was acquitted only of charges that he had harassed a witness.
The Israeli prime minister, Binyamin Netanyahu, said it was "a sad day for the state of Israel and its residents". He added: "Today the court conveyed two clear-cut messages, that all are equal before the law and that every woman has exclusive rights to her body".
Under Israeli law, rape is punishable by a minimum of four and a maximum of 16 years in prison. Katsav was also charged with obstruction of justice. Although the full verdict has still not been disclosed, his lawyers announced that they would appeal to the supreme court.
Leon Amiras, the deputy chairman of the Israeli Bar Association said: "Even if they appeal, I would not expect any substantial change in the sentencing." He added: "Legal experts calculate he could end up spending 10 years in prison."
The rightwing former president has portrayed himself as a victim of ethnic discrimination. Israeli political life has long been dominated by Jews of European origin, while Katsav and many of his supporters are of Middle Eastern origin.
Katsav became the eighth president of Israel in 2000 and was forced to resign in disgrace in July 2007, after the accusations emerged in 2006.
The judge, George Karra, who read the core part of the verdict at the Tel Aviv court, said Katsav started harassing A, a former worker in the ministry of tourism, when she rejected his sexual propositions. "No basis was found to the claim that the relations took place with her agreement," he said. The court added that Katsav's version was "riddled with lies". The panel of three judges believed witnesses who confirmed A's version of events. "All the testimonies based on what A said contradict the defendant's claims that this was an invention born of emotion."
"Seven years ago I first met Moshe Katsav and I hope today marks the end of the seven worst years of my life," said A in a statement after the verdict.
The judges also said Katsav had manipulated and withheld information by presenting edited tapes as evidence that A had not been raped.
Katsav attended the reading of the verdict accompanied by his lawyer, his son and his brother, but not his wife, the Israeli press reported. Katsav's son Boaz said in a statement: "This is a hard day for the family. We will continue to be proud of our father, the eighth president of the state of Israel. Let the people of Israel know, throughout the generations, that this trial does not belong to Israel's ethics, when judges decide based on their feelings."
Outside court, women's rights groups cheered. However, in Kiryat Malachi, Katsav's hometown, some neighbours voiced anger at the verdict, and said they still supported the former president. Rami Atia told a reporter for the Israeli daily Yedioth Ahronoth: "Katsav was slaughtered in public. How can it be that the woman remembered to file a complaint after seven years? It's a sad day for Kiryat Malachi, but I'll continue to support Katsav, because I know for a fact that he's not guilty."