ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Radical Muslim cleric Abu Bakar Bashir has been found guilty of a terrorism charge in an Indonesian court.
The 72-year-old was sentenced to 15 years in jail for preparing to use violence for a terrorist act.
Bashir, who was facing up to a life sentence for allegedly raising funds for a terrorist training camp in Aceh, denies having personal links with any terrorist group.
He has been blamed for a number of bomb attacks across Indonesia, including the 2002 Bali bombings which claimed the lives of 202 people, including 88 Australians.
This timeline tracks the life and times of the controversial cleric.
1938: Bashir is born in Jombang, East Java, to parents of Hadhrami Arab and Javanese descent.
1963: Bashir graduates from Al-Irsyad University in Central Java after reportedly spending his student days as an activist within Islamic student organisations.
1972: Bashir co-founds the Al-Mukmin Islamic boarding school in Ngruki, Central Java, with friend Abdullah Sangkar. The International Crisis Group now describes the school as the "Ivy League" for recruits to militant group Jemaah Islamiah (JI).
1978: Bashir is accused of being involved in subversive activities and is imprisoned without trial until 1982.
1985: Bashir is linked to a bomb attack on the Buddhist monument Borobudur and flees to Malaysia. During exile he reportedly undertakes religious teachings in both Malaysia and Singapore. The United States believes he became involved with JI during this time. The United Nations believes Bashir is now the group's spiritual leader - an accusation the cleric rejects.
1999: Bashir returns to Indonesia after president Suharto's fall in 1998. He becomes a cleric and renews his call for Sharia law in Indonesia. After his return, he sits on the executive of the Mujahideen Council, an umbrella group for people wanting to turn Indonesia into an Islamic country.
2000: In December a spate of bombings hits churches across Indonesia. Bashir is accused of involvement but charges do not stick. Three men are convicted of involvement, including Indra Warman, 38, who was convicted of masterminding the attacks.
2002: On October 12, 202 people including 88 Australians die in bomb attacks on tourist spots in Kuta. One bomb is detonated by a suicide bomber inside Paddy's Pub, and seconds later a more powerful car bomb explodes outside the Sari Club, just across the road. Then-prime minister John Howard condemns the attacks as a "wicked and cowardly" act of terrorism. Al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden claims the attacks are retaliation for the war on terror, saying: "You will be killed just as you kill, and will be bombed just as you bomb". Bashir vows to support bin Laden's "struggle to uphold Islam". Three JI members are convicted over the deadly bombings and are executed by firing squad six years later.
2003: A car bomb attack on the Marriot Hotel kills 12 people in Jakarta on August 5. Al Qaeda claims responsibility for the bombing and JI is alleged to have executed it.
2004: Bashir is charged with involvement in the Bali bombings and Marriott Hotel attacks.
2005: Bashir is jailed for 30 months for being part of an "evil conspiracy" over the 2002 Bali bombings but is not convicted over the Marriot attacks. The cleric repeatedly denies all the charges against him, and condemns the Bali bombing as a "brutal act".
2006: Bashir is released after 26 months. Mr Howard says Australians will be "extremely disappointed, even distressed" at the news. Bashir says Mr Howard should become a Muslim if he wants to avoid going to hell. He also warns Australians to never try fighting Muslims because they "certainly can't beat Islam". Later that year, he claims the Bali bombs were replaced by the American CIA with a "micro-nuclear" weapon. In August, his conviction over the bombings is quashed by Indonesia's Supreme Court.
2008: Controversy surrounding Bashir increases after a sermon in which he allegedly refers to tourists in Bali as "worms, snakes and maggots" and calls for youth to aspire to a martyrdom death. Bashir establishes the Jemaah Ansharut Tauhid (JAT) group.
2009: On July 17, the JW Marriott and Ritz-Carlton hotels in Jakarta are hit by twin suicide bombings five minutes apart. Three of the seven victims are Australians. Both blasts were caused by suicide bombers who checked into the hotels as paying guests several days earlier. Police allege one of the bombers was a former student of Bashir's Al-Mukmin Islamic school.
2010: In May, Bashir returns to the spotlight after a raid of the headquarters of JAT. Three JAT members are arrested and accused of having links to a militant training camp in Aceh. The Aceh group is accused of plotting to form a militia capable of attacking high-level government targets. In August, Bashir is arrested and accused of having links to the Aceh camp, providing it funds and playing an active role in its formation.
2011: In May, Bashir pleads not guilty to terrorism charges. He insists he has no links with the training camp and says JAT is a legitimate Islamic group.
2011: On June 16, Bashir is found guilty of preparing to use violence for a terrorist act and is sentenced to 15 years in jail. Bashir's lawyers say he will appeal the verdict.