Officer Who Shot Philando Castile Acquitted of Manslaughter Charges
After five days and more than 25 hours of deliberation, a jury decided that the state did not meet its burden for a conviction. Yanez would have faced up to 10 years under Minnesota law if he had been convicted.
Yanez had been charged with manslaughter and reckless discharge of a firearm for fatally shooting Castile, 32, in his car while Castile's girlfriend and her 4-year-old daughter were sitting in the vehicle just outside St. Paul, Minnesota.
The jury that determined Yanez's fate consisted of seven men and five women. Two jurors were black and the rest were white.
Castile's family held each other and wept in disappointment as they left the courtroom on Friday.
"The system continues to fail black people," said Castile's mother, Valerie, following the verdict. "My son loved this city and this city killed my son and let the murderer get away," she said with high emotion.
Castile's girlfriend, Diamond Reynolds, who was a key witness for the prosecution said she was "incredibly disappointed" with the jury's decision. "It is a sad state of affairs when this type of criminal conduct is condoned simply because Yanez is a policeman," she said in a statement. "God help America," she said.
Despite the acquittal, Yanez will not be returning to “active duty” said the city of St. Anthony in a statement following the verdict. "The public will be best served if Officer Yanez is no longer a police officer in our city," the statement said. The city added that it was negotiating a voluntary separation agreement that would help Yanez transition into another career.
Castile and Yanez came face-to-face during a traffic stop last July that quickly escalated into a deadly encounter live-streamed on Facebook by Reynolds. Yanez had been with the St. Anthony Police Department fornearly five years when he pulled over Castile's car.
In the disturbing video, Reynolds says Castile was shotseveral times while reaching for his ID after telling Yanez he had a gun permit and was armed.
Yanez can be heard saying: "I told him not to reach for it."
Reynolds can be heard responding, "You told him to get his ID, sir, his driver's license."
"He's licensed to carry," she calmly tells the camera as Castile sits beside her bleeding. "He was trying to get out his ID and his wallet out of his pocket, and he let the officer know that he was — he had a firearm and he was reaching for his wallet."
Reynolds testified during the trial that she recorded the encounter out of fear for her own life.
"Because I know that the people are not protected by police,” Reynolds said, according to NBC-affiliate KARE 11. "I wanted to make sure if I was to die in front of my daughter, someone would know the truth.”
Yanez, who pulled Castile over because he looked like a possible armed robbery suspect, testified that “he had no choice” when he pulled his gun.
Related:Philando Castile Killing: Girlfriend Testifies She Began FB Live Because Feared for Her Life
The officer told jurors that Castile did not have “regard for his commands," and he felt the motorist would shoot him.