Singer Chris Brown Released on $250K Bail After Being Booked on Charges of Assault With a Deadly Weapon
Chris Brown was released from jail on $250,000 bail after he was booked on charges of assault with a deadly weapon Tuesday night. Annette Arreola reports live for Today in LA on Wednesday, Aug. 31, 2016. (Published Wednesday, Aug. 31, 2016)
Chris Brown was released on $250,000 bail Tuesday night after he was booked on charges of assault with a deadly weapon, following an hours-long standoff earlier that day between the singer and officers at his Los Angeles home, police said.
Brown's attorney Mark Geragos tweeted that the singer was "out and well" and "allegations against him are demonstrably false."
Brown was released at 11:19 p.m. and is scheduled to be arraigned on Sept. 20 at the Clara Shortridge Foltz Criminal Justice Center, jail records show.
Officers responded to the property in the typically quiet Tarzana neighborhood around 3 a.m. following a 911 call from a woman requesting help.
The woman who made the call told authorities Brown pointed a gun at her, NBC News reported.
Los Angeles police spokesman Lt. Chris Ramirez did not identify the woman, elaborate on the assistance she needed or know if she was injured. 
But model Baylee Curran later told the Los Angeles Times that Brown had pointed the gun at her face. She said Brown and another man became angry with her when she admired the man's diamond necklace. Curran said she and her friend ran outside as one of Brown's associates gave chase and hid under a neighbor's SUV. 
The model, who hasn't responded to requests for comment from The Associated Press, also told TMZ she's visited Brown's home in the past and never encountered any trouble.
Earlier Tuesday, police said several people were in the home, including Brown, who was posting videos on Instagram in which he described the police response.
"Y'all gonna stop playing with me like I'm the villain out here, like I'm going crazy," he said in one Instagram video, waving a cigarette and looking at the camera. "When you get the warrant or whatever you need to do, you're going to walk right up in here and you're going to see nothing. You idiots." 
Geragos did not immediately return a call for comment. The attorney arrived at Brown's mansion early Tuesday afternoon, parking near a fleet of exotic cars that included three Lamborghinis.
Throughout the afternoon, several of Brown's associates descended to the street below Brown's estate. They declined to identify themselves or answer questions from the media about what occurred. In some instances, the men were belligerent, flashing obscene hand gestures and grabbing recording equipment.
Aerial video showed law enforcement positioned around the sprawling property and several police vehicles at the residence. 
The LAPD's robbery-homicide division, which typically handles high-profile cases and those involving celebrities, was assigned to the investigation.
Brown moved into the Tarzana mansion about a year ago. Police have responded to the location before, including for a home invasion robbery and a report that Brown and others were illegally riding ATVs on a neighbor's property.
Brown was the subject of a domestic abuse report involving former girlfriend Rihanna in 2009. He completed five years of felony probation last year after pleading guilty to felony assault in the February 2009 attack.
Earlier this year, authorities in Las Vegas announced Brown would not be charged with a crime after a woman reported a New Year's weekend confrontation in a hotel room. Police said the woman complained that Brown hit her and took her cellphone when she tried to snap his photo during a private party, an account his publicist described as a fabrication.