Chris Brown: Australian Government blocks US singer's visa bid over domestic violence history
The Federal Government has followed through on its threat to block US R 'n' B singer Chris Brown from entering the country because of his history of domestic violence.
The performer was due to tour Australia in December, but Immigration Minister Peter Dutton confirmed that a Notice of Intention to Consider Refusal of his visa had been issued.
"People to whom these notices are issued have 28 days to present material as to why they should be given a visa to enter Australia," the spokesman said.
"Decisions on whether a visa will or will not be issued are made after that timeframe and consideration of the material presented to the Department of Immigration and Border Protection."
In 2009, Brown was convicted of assault and threatening to kill his then girlfriend, singer Rihanna.
He was sentenced to five years' probation.
Tickets for Brown's One Hell of a Nite Tour were due to go on sale Monday at midday, with shows planned for Perth, Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane.
Radio network Nova was originally one of the promoters of Brown's tour, but pulled its support for the singer last week.
On Thursday, Minister for Women Michaelia Cash foreshadowed the announcement.
"I'm clearly not going to pre-empt a decision by the Minister however I can assure you what my recommendation would be," she said.
"People need to understand, if you are going to commit domestic violence and then you want to travel around the world there are going to be countries that say to you, 'You cannot come in because you are not of the character that we expect in Australia'.
"This is a Government that's not afraid to say 'no'."
Senator Cash said she made similar decisions in her former role as assistant immigration minister.
Global boxing identity Floyd Mayweather was banned from coming to Australia earlier this year.
"I had previously not allowed a particular sportsperson to come into Australia because of his record in relation to domestic violence," she said.
"I can assure you that the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection will be looking at this very, very seriously."
"The Minister has very brilliantly expressed the thoughts of the Government," he said.
Domestic violence prevention group White Ribbon Australia said the Federal Government had made a strong statement about violence against women by refusing Brown's visa.
Chief executive Libby Davies said Brown's influence on young people could not be understated.
"He is a public figure and he is figure that young people follow and so there is a tendency by an entertainer like that and his behaviours to be seen by young people as normal behaviours, so it normalises violence and it normalises disrespect," she said.