Putin likely OK'd Alexander Litvinenko death, inquiry says
London (CNN)Russian President Vladimir Putin probably approved the operation by Russian agents to kill former FSB spy Alexander Litvinenko in 2006, a detailed UK inquiry has concluded.
Retired High Court Judge Robert Owen, who conducted the inquiry, wrote that he was "sure" that two former Russian agents poisoned the 44-year-old at a London hotel with highly radioactive polonium-210.
And Owen wrote that he was also sure that the two men who allegedly poisoned Litvinenko -- former KGB and FSB employee Andrei Lugovoi and former Russian army officer Dmitri Kovtun -- were acting on behalf of others, probably the Russian spy service, the FSB.
"The FSB operation to kill Mr. Litvinenko was probably approved by Mr. Patrushev and also by President Putin," Owen wrote. Nikolai Patrushev was head of the FSB in 2006.
Former Russian agent Alexander Litvinenko was poisoned by a lethal dose of radioactive polonium, his tea spiked during a meeting with two former Russian security servicemen. He had said the Russian Federal Security Service orchestrated a series of bombings in Russia in 1999 that left hundreds dead and led to Russia's invasion of Chechnya later that year.
Russian opposition leader Boris Nemtsov was gunned down near the Kremlin on February 27, 2015. The killing took place two days before he was supposed to lead an opposition rally.
Business magnate Mikhail Khodorkovsky supported an opposition party and accused Putin of corruption. He spent more than 10 years behind bars, accused of tax evasion and fraud.
Anti-corruption lawyer Alexey Navalny once branded Putin's United Russia party "the party of crooks and thieves." He was arrested in December 2014 on accusations of fraud.
Russian businessman Boris Berezovsky accused the Kremlin of killing Alexander Litvinenko in 2006. In 2013, he was found dead with a noose around his neck; the coroner could not say whether it was a suicide.
Anna Politkovskaya, a vocal critic of Russia's war in Chechnya, was shot four times in front of her Moscow apartment in 2006. A Moscow court sentenced five men to prison in 2014 for her death.
Human rights activist Natalya Estemirova was kidnapped outside her Chechnya home in July 2009 and was found dead later the same day. The head of the group Estemirova worked for, Memorial, accused the Kremlin-backed Chechen leadership of ordering her killing.
Russian human rights lawyer Stanislav Markelov, left, represented the family of a Chechen woman killed by a former Russian colonel in March 2000. He was shot in 2009. The gunman also killed Anastasia Baburova, right, who may have been trying to intervene.
In response, the Russian Foreign Ministry dismissed the UK inquiry as politically motivated. "We regret that a purely criminal case has been politicized and has darkened the general atmosphere of our bilateral relations," spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said Thursday.
UK Home Secretary Theresa May told Parliament on Thursday that Interpol notices and European arrest warrants were in place so that the main suspects would be arrested if they traveled abroad.
And at the request of Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond, Russian Ambassador Alexander Vladimirovich Yakovenko was summoned to the UK Foreign Office to meet with David Lidington, the minister responsible for Russia.
"The Minister set out the UK Government's deep concern regarding the findings of the independent Litvinenko Inquiry report," a Foreign Office spokeswoman said. "He made clear that the inquiry's conclusion concerning the Russian State's probable involvement in this murder was deeply disturbing, demonstrating a flagrant disregard for UK law, international law and standards of conduct, and the safety of UK citizens. The Minister said that this would further complicate bilateral relations, undermine trust, and damage Russia's reputation internationally."
The findings related to Putin -- even if his involvement is viewed as probable rather than definitively proved -- will offer some comfort to Litvinenko's widow, Marina. She said outside the High Court on Thursday she was "pleased that the words my husband spoke on his deathbed when he accused Mr. Putin of his murder have been proved true in an English court."
"Putin himself personally protected Lugovoi. He himself," she said. "He provided his immunity. ... He protected him. He grant him to be a member of parliament. It means he took all this responsibility."
Federal Security Service Litvinenko was a former Russian security agent who came to Britain in 2000 after turning whistleblower on the FSB, the successor agency to the KGB, the former Soviet secret police and intelligence agency. (FSB stands for its name in Russian, Federalnaya Sluzhba Bezopastnosti, which translates as Federal Security Service .)
Litvinenko had many enemies. His last job at the FSB was heading up its anti-corruption department. It was in the chaos of the 1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, which may have brought him into conflict with ruthless colleagues.
Chechnya After leaving the FSB, Litvinenko blamed the service for orchestrating a series of apartment bombings in Russia in 1999 that left hundreds dead and led to Russia's invasion of Chechnya later that year.
All or any of the above may have been sufficient reason to kill a man seen by his former FSB colleagues as a traitor -- a man who once even published an article, cited in Owen's report, that accused Putin of being a pedophile.
In a deathbed statement, read to the media by a friend, Litvinenko blamed Putin for ordering his poisoning, saying the rare radioactive substance polonium-210 was slipped into his tea at a meeting with the two suspects in Mayfair in 2006.
He said: "You may succeed in silencing one man but the howl of protest from around the world will reverberate, Mr. Putin, in your ears for the rest of your life."
The Kremlin has always denied the accusation, as did Lugovoi and Kovtun, whom the Russian government refuses to extradite to Britain. But the Kremlin's case isn't helped by the compelling evidence against it.
David Cameron On Thursday, she added: "Now it is time for (British Prime Minister) David Cameron . I am calling immediately for the expulsion from the UK of all Russian intelligence operatives, whether from the FSB or for other Russian agencies based in the London Embassy.
"I'm also calling for the imposing of targeted economic sanctions and travel bans against named individuals, including Mr. Putin."