Malaysia's PM gets new emergency power 01/08/2016
MARK COLVIN: A security law has come into force in Malaysia that gives the Prime Minister, Najib Razak, sweeping new powers. As well as letting him declare any area in Malaysia a security zone, the law gives police enhanced powers, including the right to use unlimited force and immunity for their acts. Mr Najib is under international investigation in a billion dollar plus embezzlement scandal. He says the law is needed to combat terrorism. Peter Lloyd reports. PETER LLOYD: Najib Razak rammed the National Security Council Act through Parliament last December. In Malaysia, the country's rotating monarch gives the final signature before a law comes into effect. But the King has been resisting, and, for the first time, a government has gone ahead with legislation without that final step in checks and balance. Linda Lakhdhir is a lawyer from Human Rights Watch. LINDA LAKHDHIR: Once you've declared a national security area, you can do warrantless arrests, you can do warrantless searches for violations of any written law, and that's a part that really, really bothers us. Because it's not that you can do a warrantless search if you think someone's about to commit violence or you think someone is about to, you know, commit a terrorist attack, you can do a warrantless search and a warrantless arrest for suspicion of violating any written law, whether that's the peaceful assembly act, the sedition act, the communications and multimedia act. The laws will be used and abused a lot in Malaysia and that makes it a really, really broad law and it's very concerning to us. PETER LLOYD: Najib Razak's a hard man under pressure, accused of kleptocracy on a grand scale. He's already removed from office an attorney general planning to lay criminal charges, and sacked a potential rival in cabinet who would have replaced him. The new sweeping security laws are fit for an autocrat, precisely what many opposition figures in Malaysia fear is Najib Razak's endgame. Wan Saiful Wan Jan is from the Institute for Democracy. WAN SAIFUL WAN JAN: The problem with this act at the moment is it gives unprecedented amount of power to the hands of one person and that is a worry. PETER LLOYD: Under these security laws, a council led by the PM can impose so called security areas for up to six months at a time. Security forces can search and arrest people, and seize property without a warrant. Officers will be protected from prosecution for any deaths that may occur. In a statement, the Prime Minister defended the laws as necessary, and some of the almost exclusively pro-government media outlets in Malaysia conveyed that message, along with harrowing images of bomb blasts in Baghdad. The only bombshells in Malaysia recently are of the political kind. Najib's under huge pressure over allegations he's a massive thief who stole more than $700 million from a state investment fund. The US Justice Department's investigation suggests $3.5 billion was siphoned off from the fund. Reports suggest it's going after Goldman Sachs bank for documents to bolster their case. Eric Paulsen is from the group Lawyers For Liberty in Malaysia. ERIC PAULSEN: I think that the Prime Minister is consolidating power. If you're to look at the (inaudible) act itself, he would have control over the military and police. And, you know, in times of crisis, as the Prime Minister is now, the temptation to abuse the power is extremely high. PETER LLOYD: It means Malaysia is under yet more international scrutiny. Linda Lakhdhir from Human Rights Watch again. LINDA LAKHDHIR: It's much broader than can be justified for what it's supposed to be justified for which is to protect national security. PETER LLOYD: How does it compare to the old days of the internal security act? Is it more draconian? LINDA LAKHDHIR: It is arguably broader than some provisions of the national security act. PETER LLOYD: The law is now in force. Malaysians are waiting to see how and when it will be used. MARK COLVIN: Peter Lloyd.