Irish police officers 'made sexually offensive remarks about protesters'
Alleged comments about woman who had been arrested are claimed to have been recorded on confiscated camera
Ireland's police force has become embroiled in controversy over allegations that two officers made sexually offensive remarks about two environmentalists.
Two separate investigations are under way following claims that remarks of a sexually suggestive and disturbing nature were made by police after the arrest of two women involved in a protest against a gas pipeline owned by Corrib Shell.
A recording claimed to be of the police officers speaking about rape in relation to one of two female campaigners they had just arrested was released by the Shell to Sea protest group on Tuesday night .
The recording is believed to have been made by accident after police took a video camera from the women. The Garda Ombudsman Commission said it had not received a report about the incident in County Mayo, but added that it was in the public interest to investigate it.
A senior officer from outside the Mayo region has been appointed to carry out a separate investigation.
The woman, who had travelled to Mayo to support the Shell to Sea protest, were arrested after one of them climbed on to a tractor while the other filmed her with the video camera.
They were put in a patrol car and driven to Belmullet Garda station. The camera was placed in a second patrol car.
Shell to Sea said police in the second car did not realise the camera was still recording and when it was handed back to the two women it contained details of a conversation between officers.
A Shell to Sea spokesperson said the alleged remarks were shocking and disturbing.
Sinn Féin had earlier requested that the commission launch an inquiry into the alleged threats.
Garda Commissioner Martin Callinan said victims of sexual crime should not be deterred from contacting police.
He said: "I want the message to go out to the community and particularly to victims of sexual crime that they should report those crimes to gardaí who can take the necessary steps to vindicate and protect their rights and I want to assure them that they will be met with compassion and sensitivity."