Supreme Court rules that states cannot bring nuisance claims for greenhouse gas emissions
On June 20, 2011, the United States Supreme Court issued an 8-0 opinion, which reversed the Second Circuit Court of Appeals decision that allowed numerous plaintiffs to pursue a nuisance claim against several power companies and the Tennessee Valley Authority for their greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (Justice Sotomayor did not take part in the decision).   As I anticipated in an earlier Green Blawg entry, the Supreme Court focused its decision on whether the Clean Air Act displaces any lawsuit based on federal common law claims.  The Supreme Court concluded that it does.
Under federal law, the Supreme Court has recognizedthat states may have a cause of action under federal common law when seeking to abate air and water pollution that is created in other states.  However, these federal common law claims cease to exist when there is federal legislation that regulates the same activity.  Once the Supreme Court ruled that the Clean Air Act governed GHG emissions in Massachusetts v EPA, and that EPA could regulate such emissions, whatever private claims under federal common law that may have existed were no longer viable.
In Justice Ginsburg's opinion there were several interesting comments that may have bearing on EPA's future enforcement efforts with respect to GHG emissions.  First, she wrote that EPA is the expert authority designated by the Clean Air Act to make decisions with respect to GHG emissions and whether they should be regulated.  Courts should not substitute their opinions in favor of the regulatory body's decisions.   Whether EPA is appropriately regulating GHG emissions, or any other regulated emissions for that matter, may be challenged through the administrative process and not through common law claims.
In fact, wrote Justice Ginsburg, "were EPA to decline to regulate carbon-dioxide emissions altogether at the conclusion of its ongoing §7411 rulemaking, the federal courts would have no warrant to employ federal common law of nuisance to upset the agency's expert determination."  Thus, the Court would honor EPA's rulemaking, at least with respect to challenges based on federal common law, even if EPA decided not to regulate GHG emissions.  The balancing between what is environmentally achievable, this country's energy needs, and the economic cost of regulating rests entirely with EPA's discretion under the Clean Air Act, subject to administrative challenges.
Another interesting item coming from the decision is that although the decision was unanimous, Justices Alito and Thomas issued a concurring opinion that still puts the future of the decision in Massachusetts v EPA in play.  The concurrence made plain that while they agreed that the Clean Air Act displaced federal common law nuisance claims in this instance, they concurred with the majority only assuming for the sake of argument that Massachusetts v EPA was correctly decided, as the merits of that opinion were not at issue in the appeal.  In short, both concurring Justices left room for reversing Massachusetts v EPA and offered no opinion on whether that decision was correctly decided.
Finally, given the deference the Supreme Court gave to EPA's regulation of GHG under the Clean Air Act, a future Administration that may not be so inclined to regulate GHG emissions, could possibly conclude that such regulation is not needed and states could not pursue their own individual claims based on federal common law.  That hypothetical Administration could revisit EPA's ruling on endangerment, reverse it, and short of a successful administrative appeal, there would be no way to control GHG emissions in the United States through the federal government.  The final decision rests in the hands of EPA, subject to alterations in the Clean Air Act by legislation.  Of course, states are still free to impose regulations and enter into compacts regulating such gases, as the Clean Air Act only sets a floor of regulation, allowing states to impose stricter regulations if they choose. 