China Moves to Stop Transplants of Organs After Executions
That means the next generation of political leaders and Health Ministry officials will have to deal with the problem of how to obtain enough organ donations voluntarily to offset the country’s heavy dependence on prisoners.
“It’s not clear to me the government is going to have the political will to fulfill this promise,” Mr. Bequelin said.
A Health Ministry official in Beijing declined to take questions about the new policy over the phone, asking that questions be submitted by fax. There was no immediate reply to a fax.
For many years, China resisted even passing national legislation for organ donation or for establishing when brain death occurs. The worry was that in poorer areas of China or areas with lax or particularly corrupt law enforcement, doctors would be tempted to act prematurely in declaring people to be brain-dead in order to harvest their organs.
China’s cabinet, the State Council, issued regulations in 2007 for voluntary organ donations. But it has struggled to popularize the practice. Chinese customs call for people to be buried or cremated with their organs intact.
People’s Daily, the official newspaper of the Chinese Communist Party, said that China had 150 people who needed organ transplants for every organ that was donated voluntarily. The newspaper did not say how much of the difference was made up from executed prisoners.
China has 300,000 patients with end-stage liver diseases, but in the first 11 weeks of this year there were only 546 transplants of livers and other major organs, the newspaper said, adding that “the majority of the sufferers die while waiting agonizingly to receive them.”
The Dui Hua Foundation, a human rights group in San Francisco, estimated in December that China executed 4,000 people a year. While that is still more than the rest of the world combined, it is down from the estimated 8,000 executed in 2007, the year that the Supreme People’s Court regained the authority to conduct a final review of death sentences approved by lower courts.
The Chinese government does not release statistics on executions. Official news media reports appear to suggest that the death penalty is used heavily against drug traffickers and gangsters, with rare instances of government officials and business executives being executed in extreme cases of corruption or endangering public safety, like during a recent scandal over faulty pharmaceuticals.
Dr. Darren Mann, a consulting surgeon with experience in organ transplants in Hong Kong, which retained an autonomous health care system after the British returned the territory to Chinese rule in 1997, said that people with histories of intravenous drug use were likely to be overrepresented in prison populations and would be more likely to have fungal and bacterial infections.
Organ transplant recipients are treated with powerful immune suppression drugs to prevent them from rejecting transplanted organs, but the drugs also leave the recipients highly vulnerable to any infections that the donor’s immune system may have been keeping in check.
“Many of the transplant units on the mainland are very well organized,” Dr. Mann said. “They take pride in their work, so they would like to have internationally comparable outcomes.”
Mr. Huang is a surgeon and has served as director of a hospital for hepatic surgery, as president of one of the country’s top medical schools and as vice president of the Chinese Medical Association, according to China Vitae, an online database of biographical information on Chinese officials.
Human rights groups have long criticized organ transplant procedures in mainland China for creating an incentive for prisons to execute prisoners and sell the organs. The groups have also assailed China for not following the World Health Organization’s recommendation that organs be taken only from people who are brain-dead. China allows organ harvests from people whose hearts have stopped.
“You can definitely imagine situations where the heart stops beating but the brain is not cognitively dead and they start removing organs — corneas have to be removed very quickly, for example,” Mr. Bequelin of Human Rights Watch said.
Another concern has been whether prisoners and their families give informed consent, without inappropriate pressure from prison officials, for the use of organs. Families of executed prisoners sometimes complain that no one gave permission but that they were given back bodies that were sewn up after the removal of organs; Chinese prison officials have contended that these prisoners may have been the subject of autopsies.
China started setting up a system only last year asking people who apply for a driver’s license whether they want to donate their organs in the event of death. And in February 2011, China’s legislature adopted changes to the country’s criminal code to ban specifically the forced removal of organs or any removal of organs from children for transplants. A spate of recent prosecutions in China indicates that the black market in organs is still a problem.
Mr. Huang said this month that as long as the demand for organs far outstripped supply, it would be hard to stop the black market.