Suspect in Colorado Theater Shooting Appears in Court
Outside the courthouse, the Arapahoe County district attorney, Carol Chambers, said Mr. Holmes could face a multitude of charges. Not only were 12 people killed and 58 injured, but the police also say that Mr. Holmes lay explosive booby traps in his Aurora apartment that appeared designed to kill police officers or any first responders.
Ms. Chambers said investigators were still poring over “an enormous amount of evidence.”
“We would never presume that it would be slam-dunk,” she said. “We will work very hard on this case to prosecute it, just like we would any other case.”
At a news conference in San Diego, where Mr. Holmes’s family lives, Lisa Damiani, a lawyer for the family, declined to answer specific questions about his relationship with his family. But, when asked, she said the family stood by him. “Yes they do,” Ms. Damiani said. “He’s their son.”
Ms. Damiani also said the family’s hearts go out to the victims of the shooting, several of whom still remain hospitalized with critical wounds. On Monday, a spokesman for University of Colorado Hospital said that two wounded patients’ conditions had been upgraded, and that another had been released.
Three days after the shooting unfolded, details were still emerging about Mr. Holmes, a budding scientist who was doing graduate work at the Anschutz Medical Campus of the University of Colorado, Denver, before he dropped out and who once received a prestigious grant from the National Institutes of Health.
Those who knew Mr. Holmes, who is from Southern California, have described him as quiet and strange, albeit talented.
The Aurora police chief, Dan Oates, has said that the authorities are making progress in the case, but he has cautioned that the investigation will take time. It appears the legal process will, too — Mr. Holmes is next due in court Monday for a preliminary hearing, and will be arraigned later. A year could pass before the case goes to trial.
Mr. Holmes’s defense lawyers did not make any public comment on Monday.
Police have said they believe that Mr. Holmes began planning his rampage months ago, when he began acquiring the guns and ammunition he used for the shooting and also to rig his apartment with explosives. Mr. Holmes was able to purchase thousands of rounds for his weapons over the Internet.
Ms. Chambers, who has a reputation in Colorado for seeking the death penalty in murder cases, declined to say what punishment she would seek. Ms. Damiani, the Holmes family’s lawyer, said she had been told the death penalty was a “strong possibility.”
David Sanchez, the father-in-law of a man wounded in the rampage, offered his view outside the courthouse when asked what penalty might be appropriate if Mr. Holmes were convicted: “I think death is.”