TIMELINE: 1 injured, 1 in custody after shooting at Fern Creek High School
LOUISVILLE, Ky. (WDRB) -- Officials say one person has been shot and one person has been taken into custody after a shooting at Fern Creek High School Tuesday. Officials say the shooting happened in a classroom and a male student was taken to University Hospital with non life-threatening injuries. The school was placed on lockdown after students reported seeing a gun.
According to LMPD spokesperson Phil Russell, the shooter left the scene immediately after the shooting. As soon as staff became aware of a weapon on campus, the school was locked down until the all clear was given for an evacuation, according to JCPS spokesperson Ben Jackey.
Jody Duncan, spokeswoman for MetroSafe dispatch, says the shooting suspect is described as a black male, age 15-16 with a gray hoodie and black pants. A Metro Police officer had previously told WDRB that the suspect is a 16-year-old sophomore at Fern Creek High School.  Russell said that it was "obviously a large crime scene," but called the shooting an "isolated incident." He says law enforcement agencies swept the school immediately following the lockdown.   Jackey said that the parents of the victim were reunited with their child at the hospital as soon as he arrived.
Students were evacuated to Fern Creek Park, where parents were asked to pick up their children using the Bardstown Road entrance. 
 was also on lockdown Tuesday afternoon -- dismissal had been delayed until LMPD cleared the area. According to police spokesperson Alicia Smiley, Fern Creek Elementary students began dismissing at the scheduled time, but bus service was delayed. Smiley says students who walk home were allowed to do so at the scheduled time.
was also placed on lockdown due to the situation. The school dismissed at the regularly scheduled time of 2:45 with police on scene to assist. Students cars were directed north onto Bardstown Road, according to parents. 
JCPS Superintendent Donna Hargens says Fern Creek High School will operate on a normal schedule Wednesday. A crisis team will be in place with counselors who will be made available to students and staff. 
“This is senseless, this is unacceptable,” Ben Jackey said outside Fern Creek High School Tuesday afternoon. “This cannot happen in our schools.”
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer sent a short, public statement via Twitter, sending his thoughts on the situation. "My thoughts first are with the injured student, who I hope will recover quickly, and his family,” Fischer said on Twitter. “My thoughts are also with the entire Fern Creek community which has been impacted by this senseless act. Our entire public safety team is working closely with JCPS to apprehend the person responsible for this act of violence."
U.S. Congressman John Yarmuth tweeted a statement as well, saying "My thoughts are with the entire #FernCreek family today. Violence has no place in our schools and communities."