ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
A jury has found the man who killed drug boss Carl Williams guilty of murder.
As Matthew Johnson, 38, learned his fate on Thursday, he stared ahead with his hands clasped, displaying a resigned indifference.
The verdict comes after three days of deliberations following a trial that lasted 14 days; one in which Johnson played only a minor role.
The focus was on the late gangland boss, four-times convicted killer and drug trafficker Williams.
Johnson pleaded not guilty to murder and maintained he bludgeoned Williams to death in self-defence, believing he was to become the next target of the baby-faced killer.
At the time he was killed, Williams was serving a minimum 35-year sentence for the gangland murders of Michael Marshall, Lewis Moran, Jason Moran and Mark Mallia.
He was also convicted of drug trafficking.
Prosecutor Mark Rochford SC asked the jurors to push aside who and what Williams was, pointing out that when he was killed he was sitting reading a newspaper and posed no threat.
"It doesn't matter if someone in the community thinks Matt Johnson did the world a favour by killing Carl Williams ... that's no excuse," he said.
CCTV cameras captured the moment on April 19, 2010 when Johnson attacked Williams unawares in Barwon Prison.
Johnson walked up behind him and bludgeoned him eight times with the stem of an exercise bike, a weapon he had moved closer to his cell after what he said was months of bullying and torment.
The first blow was so hard it knocked Williams off his chair. Johnson then dragged Williams's bloodied body back to his cell.
It was nearly another 30 minutes before prison guards stormed the unit and found Williams after Johnson told them "Carl has hit his head".
Johnson admitted on the stand it was a planned attack.
He told the court that another inmate, Tommy Ivanovic, had told him Williams was planning to kill him using a "common prison weapon" - a sock full of billiard balls.
Johnson said he took the threat seriously as Williams was "a killer".
He told the court Williams was "the boss" who would talk of murders like others talk of football.
Johnson said he had decided to "get in first"; and he said letters he wrote to other inmates on April 18, 2010 hinted of what was to come.
"I think I'll have to hang around for a while longer," he wrote to one friend.
"It doesn't matter because I love this s***. I'm the true general so I must keep things in good order."
In a second letter to Ange Goussis, he wrote: "By now you'd know that Charlie's team also lost. What can ya do, buddy? Life goes on."
On the stand, Johnson admitted he was referring to Williams's killing, which he planned to carry out at the first available opportunity the next day.
According to Johnson's lawyer, Bill Stuart, Williams was "the most dangerous man to walk the streets of Melbourne".
He was described as a master manipulator, a man who hired assassins to kill.
Mr Stuart argued the drug boss wanted to remain the "top dog" and be "the most dangerous man to walk the corridors of Victoria's prisons".
He argued that Williams's character was paramount to Johnson's decision to "kill or be killed".
The defence never shied away from the imposing figure Johnson cut - 188cm and 100 kilograms.
In Johnson's own words, he was "fairly big" without an ounce of fat on him; he was much larger than Williams, who had dropped 20 kilograms in prison.
Johnson has spent the best part of his life in jail. Since a teenager he has been in and out of prison.
Just last year he was sentenced to 16 years, to serve at least 13, for a vicious aggravated armed robbery.
Two years ago he was acquitted over the 2007 murder of an 18-year-old over a $50 drug debt.
The burnt body of Bryan Conyers was found by a security guard at a vacant house in Pakenham. He had been shot, stabbed and set alight.
Johnson and another man were cleared of the murder. His co-accused, Timothy Prentice, pleaded guilty to accessory to murder.
The trial was one of revelations, twists and turns.
Johnson was the self-titled "general" of a group of inmates known as 'Prisoners of War'. He hated "dogs", a prison term for police informers.
At an earlier and unrelated trial, later to be dubbed "the trial from hell" by the presiding judge, Johnson and four other men displayed the worse examples of contempt of court in Victoria's history.
As a fellow Barwon prisoner broke the cardinal rule and testified against them, human waste was thrown from the dock, some of the men bared their bottoms, and Johnson broke wind into the microphone.
Later his lawyer told the court of appeal the witness "knew how to push his buttons".
They were the same words he used to describe how Carl Williams got under his skin.
Williams had confided in his fellow prisoners about the help he was giving police to solve the 2004 double murder of Terence Hodson and wife Christine at their Kew home.
Three statements written by Williams detailed his cooperation and implicated former drug squad detective Paul Dale.
Williams alleged Mr Dale asked him to organise a hit on police informer Hodson for $150,000.
The statements also implicated a hit man who cannot be named, but one widely known in the prison system - someone known to Johnson.
In a secretly recorded prison phone call, Johnson whispers he had found the statements and put them on his computer. Police found copies on his computer after the killing.
The prosecution argued that was the motive behind the killing; that Williams was a "dog" and despite attempts to keep Johnson onside, his hatred spilled over.
But on the stand, Johnson said he knew the drug boss was spinning a yarn, hoping to get 15 years knocked off his sentence.
"He was pulling the wool over their eyes... Then he was going to shaft 'em," he said.
Johnson also said Williams had asked him to kill Mr Dale for $200,000 if he was granted bail.
Despite his infamous reputation, Williams died the same as many of his victims: the victim of a cold, callous and brutal death.
Johnson's legal team has 28 days to appeal the conviction.
Outside court, Detective Superintendent Doug Fryer expressed relief at the verdict.
"We're pleased obviously with the result, and [it's a] great result for everyone, certainly the family are rapt about it," he said.
"It's been a sensational trial and sensational events over the last 12 to 14 months and justice has been done today."
Victoria Police released a brief statement saying investigations into a number of matters surrounding Williams's death are continuing.