Video: WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange walks free from prison
Speaking on the steps of the High Court to dozens of journalists, Mr Assange said: "It's great to feel the fresh air of London again."
He went on to thank "all the people around the world who had faith" in him, his lawyers for putting up a "brave and ultimately successful fight", members of the press and the British justice system.
"If justice is not always an outcome, at least it is not dead yet," he added.
Mr Assange had spent the past eight nights in prison. He told the press he had been kept in solitary confinement in the depths of a Victorian prison.
During my time in solitary confinement in the bottom of a Victorian prison I had time to reflect on the conditions of those people around the world also in solitary confinement, also on remand, in conditions that are more difficult than those faced by me.
"Those people also need your attention and support.
"And with that I hope to continue my work and continue to protest my innocence in this matter and to reveal, as we get it, which we have not yet, the evidence from these allegations."
He will now stay at a manor home on the Norfolk-Suffolk border owned by Vaughan Smith, journalist and owner of the Frontline Club in London.
The 10 bedroom East Anglia property is set in 600 acres of land.
Mr Smith said: "It has advantages. I think that the judges have seen that there are some problems in terms of the shortage of police stations, but at the same time, it does offer a place where Julian might have some peace and some security.
Assange, who appeared in the dock in a jacket and open-necked shirt, has received death threats and has spent the past week in solitary confinement.
The case against him in Sweden centres on his relations with two women in Stockholm while he was visiting the city in August.
The allegations include the rape and molestation of one woman and the molestation and unlawful coercion of another.
But his supporters claim the criminal inquiry and extradition request is unfair and politically motivated.
Outside court, Assange said his legal team would be revealing evidence relating to the allegations "as we get it, which we have not yet".
Assange made powerful enemies around the world as his website published 250,000 sensitive United States diplomatic cables.
His supporters regard him as one of the most important campaigners for freedom of information and human rights.
The extent of the high-profile support for Assange was revealed by those who agreed to provide bail sureties.
His supporters have helped to put up bail totalling £240,000 (€283,000, $374,000). Mr Assange will also have to wear a security tag.
Mr Stephens said they came from Australian journalist Phillip Knightley, publisher Felix Dennis, Sir John Sulston, Lord Matthew Evans and Prof Patricia David.
Two substitute sureties on stand-by are lawyer Geoff Shears and the Marchioness of Worcester.