Cali Swag District rapper M-Bone killed in Inglewood drive-by [Video]
﻿﻿This post has been corrected. See bottom of post for details.
Rapper M-Bone, a member of the platinum hip-hop group Cali Swag District, was killed in a drive-by shooting in Inglewood on Sunday night, police said.
The shooting took place about 10:30 p.m. in the 400 block of North La Brea Avenue, Inglewood police said. M-Bone, whose real name is Montae Talbert, was shot twice in the head while seated in the driver's side of a black car. He was taken to a local hospital, where he died.
[Updated at 10:15 a.m.: At least 69 homicides have been reported within 2 miles of Sunday's shooting since January 2007, according to coroner’s data collected for The Times’ interactive Homicide Report.]
The suspects fled northbound on La Brea. Police were not immediately identifying Talbert until his relatives could be notified, but he was named in several media reports.
﻿"Ma life changed drastically in the. Blink of an eye rip mbone," Talbert's band mate, Smoove Da General, posted on his Twitter account.
Until 2009, Cali Swag District was comprised of four anonymous Inglewood teenagers making R & B/ hip-hop hybrids. Then it filmed the video for "Teach Me How to Dougie," setting off the biggest dance craze since Soulja Boy's "Crank Dat" in 2007.
"Teach Me How to Dougie" reached No. 6 on the Billboard rap singles charts and sold roughly 2 million legal downloads. Justin Bieber taught Ellen Degeneres how to Dougie, and Ryan Seacrest and Jennifer Lopez gave it a whirl on "American Idol."
M-Bone was the dancer of the quartet. In a video on the group's website, he is said his favorite artists included Eminem, Jamie Fox and R. Kelly, and Justin Timberlake. Shirtless to show off his tattoos, he also says his favorite website was Twitter because "when I'm bored I can just jump on Twitter and find a funny post."
The site says the group planned to release an album "Kickback" on Oct. 12. After the death became public, fans flooded his Facebook page with memorial messages.
﻿﻿"Missed by Millions, but Neva forgotton," read one post.
For the record, 10:15 a.m. May 16: An earlier version of this post included a crime map covering the 400 block of North La Brea Avenue in the city of Los Angeles, not Inglewood.
Everyone's doing the 'Dougie,' but what's next for Cali Swag District?
Photo: M-Bone, JayAre, Smoove and Yung of Cali Swag District. Credit: Raquel Olivo / For The Times
Map: Shows location of Sunday's shooting in purple, as well as 69 other homicides, in red, since January 2007. Credit: Homicide Report