London riots: Boris Johnson agrees to return to London
The Mayor of London had come under intense pressure to abandon his summer break after Theresa May, the Home Secretary, flew back to London in an attempt to take control of the crisis.
Mr Johnson had initially rejected calls to return but his spokesman this evening said that he will arrive back in the capital by Tuesday lunchtime.
In a statement issued earlier today, Boris Johnson said the scenes of violence and destruction were "utterly appalling".
"People have lost their homes, businesses and livelihoods through mindless violence," he said.
"I understand the need for urgent answers into the shooting incident that resulted in the death of a young local man, and I've sought reassurances that the IPCC are doing exactly that.
"But let's be clear – these acts of sheer criminality across London are nothing to do with this incident and must stop now."
Today Nick Clegg denied that the Government “hasn’t been functioning very effectively” with senior ministers on holiday, after riots convulsed the capital for a second night.
Mr Clegg, the Deputy Prime Minister, became the first senior Government minister to appear on television to talk about the riots – which he described as “needless, opportunist theft and violence” – since they erupted on Saturday night.
Previously only junior minister Lynne Featherstone had been available to go on camera to talk about the disturbances.
Mr Clegg, who is currently the most senior politician in the country, is holding talks about the weekend’s violence with top police officers and other members of the Government.
He said: "I reject completely this notion that somehow this Government hasn't been functioning very effectively indeed last week and this week.
"I have been speaking to members of the Government. I spoke to the Prime Minister this morning, to the Chancellor last night, to the Home Secretary yesterday, to the Business Secretary, to the Energy Secretary, to the Foreign Secretary; we are in constant contact with each other and we are working effectively together as a team this week as we do every week of the year."
He added: "We have arranged things to make sure this Government works effectively on all the issues of the day."
Mr Clegg said: "Let's be clear, the violence we saw last night had absolutely nothing to do with the death of Mr Duggan.
"It was needless, opportunist theft and violence – nothing more and nothing less.
A Home Office spokeswoman said Mrs May has been in "constant contact" with Mr Godwin, London's deputy mayor for policing Kit Malthouse, and Tottenham MP David Lammy, among others, while away. She was due to return on Monday afternoon.
Earlier, Mrs May warned in a statement that those responsible "will be made to face the consequences of their actions".
"Londoners have made clear that there are no excuses for violence, and I call on all members of local communities to work constructively with the police to help them bring these criminals to justice," she said.