9th Circuit deals Trump travel ban another defeat
(CNN)Another federal court has ruled against President Donald Trump's revised executive order limiting travel from six predominately Muslim countries -- and like other courts, used his tweets against him.
The ruling from a three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals is yet another stinging loss from a court that similarly refused to reinstate Trump's original executive order on travel in February.
"We conclude that the President, in issuing the Executive Order, exceeded the scope of the authority delegated to him by Congress," the three judges, all appointed by President Bill Clinton, wrote. "(I)mmigration, even for the President, is not a one-person show."
"Indeed, the President recently confirmed his assessment that it is the 'countries' that are inherently dangerous, rather than the 180 million individual nationals of those countries who are barred from entry under the President's 'travel ban,'" the judge wrote.
The judges largely affirmed US District Court Judge Derrick Watson's decision from March which found the core provisions of the revised executive order -- temporarily blocking all refugees and foreign nationals from six Muslim-majority countries from entering the US -- likely violated the Constitution because its primary purpose was to disfavor Muslims, but on slightly different grounds.
"President Trump knows that the country he has been elected to lead is threatened daily by terrorists who believe in a radical ideology, and that there are active plots to infiltrate the U.S. immigration system -- just as occurred prior to 9/11," Sessions said in a statement.
"The President is committed to protecting the American people and our national security, and we are proud to support his mission to put America first by defending his right to keep us safe," he added. "That is why the Department of Justice will continue to seek further review by the Supreme Court."
After Watson's ruling earlier this year, Sessions said he was "amazed that a judge sitting on an island in the Pacific can issue an order that stops the President of the United States from what appears to be clearly his statutory and constitutional power."
Tuesday morning tweet Trump responded to the ruling in a Tuesday morning tweet , also noting an upcoming Supreme Court review: "Well, as predicted, the 9th Circuit did it again - Ruled against the TRAVEL BAN at such a dangerous time in the history of our country. S.C."
The court went on to explain that the federal immigration law "requires that the President exercise his authority only after meeting the precondition of finding that entry of an alien or class of aliens would be detrimental to the interests of the United States. Here, the President has not done so."
Acting Solicitor General Jeffrey Wall had previously maintained that the administration was forbidden from conducting "a review of the vetting procedures" with respect to the six countries the ban covered -- but the Ninth Circuit concluded Monday that Watson "abused its discretion in enjoining inward-facing agency conduct because enjoining this conduct would not remedy the harms asserted by Plaintiffs."
"By holding that the district court was wrong to block the executive order's internal review procedures, the court of appeals allowed that review to go forward -- and, in the process, took away one of the arguments the government had been making in the Supreme Court for why the Hawaii order should be overturned," Vladeck said.
The administration appealed the Fourth Circuit ruling to the Supreme Court, which set a Monday deadline for challengers of the travel ban to deny a request to allow the ban to go into effect immediately. It has also asked to stay the Hawaii judge's ruling.
In those tweets, the President expressed regret for withdrawing a previous version of the ban that had been issued last January. After the courts roundly criticized the original ban, the current revised edition was released in March. Among other things, the current travel ban no longer includes language that arguably prioritized certain religious minorities. It also removed Iraq from the list of banned countries, and makes clear that green card holders are exempt.
"Millions of American Muslims would know that, every day, their own government was enforcing a policy that denigrated their religion and their dignity," Jadwat wrote. "To allow the ban to go forward, the courts would have had to ignore a mountain of publicly available evidence—even though everyone else in the country , including those of the disfavored faith, could not ignore it."