Dogs hit escapees' scent at gas station near prison
(CNN)Investigators are looking at surveillance video from a gas station about a mile from the New York prison where two inmates escaped over the weekend, Clinton County District Attorney Andrew Wylie told CNN on Thursday night.
Tracking dogs picked up the scent of prisoners Richard Matt and David Sweat at the station and followed it east toward the town of Cadyville, Wylie said.
There is also a Subway sandwich shop at the gas station and Wylie said the prisoners might have been looking for food in the trash bin.
The store opens at 4 a.m. so it would have been staffed about the time officials believe the convicted killers broke out. There is limited security video from the store and authorities were reviewing it.
Wylie said the dogs were still on the scent Thursday evening and they were working their way in from the perimeter.
A large-perimeter search area has been set up around the site, about 3 miles from the Clinton Correctional Facility in Dannemora, according to a state official and another source briefed on the investigation. Guards found out about the killers' escape from the maximum-security prison during a bed check early Saturday.
"I haven't left home in two days, I had to call in to work today because you wouldn't be able to return back home," Brooke Lepage said. "There were constant helicopters. Last night they had floodlights. There was a recorded (telephone) message telling us to stay in the house and make sure outside lights were on."
In addition to the scent, investigators found an imprint either from a shoe or boot as well as food wrappers in the area, one of the two sources said. Wylie said that possible bedding -- an indent in the grass or leaves -- has also been discovered.
The state police superintendent did not elaborate. But according to a source close to the investigation, authorities believe Mitchell planned to pick up the inmates after their escape but changed her mind at the last minute. Her cell phone was used to call people connected to Matt, according to another source. It's unclear who made the calls, when they were made or whether Mitchell knew about them.
Wylie, the Clinton County district attorney, said his office is considering possibly charging her with felonies. One would accuse her of being an accessory to the escape and the other would be for "promoting prison contraband."
Paige Mitchell denied that her mother-in-law was to be the getaway driver and that she helped provide the power tools used in the escape. She added that Matt may have persuaded her mother-in-law to contact people for him who knew about art, saying, "Her heart was in the right place."
The jailbreak has transformed the rural, idyllic swath of northeast New York from a place where people go to get away from the crowds and crime of urban life into something closer to a "military state," as one resident described it.
"This is a governor's nightmare," he added. "We're trying to protect the public safety and take care of our folks (because) these guys are dangerous, they are desperate, and they would do anything to continue their freedom."
State data show that most escapees in New York are captured within 24 hours. Of 29 inmates who fled between 2002 and 2013, only one was free for more than two days.