Greece bans smoking in enclosed public spaces
A ban on lighting up in enclosed public areas comes into force in Greece today as part of an effort to curb the country's high smoking rates.
Offenders will be fined up to €10,000 (£8,260), and tobacco advertising will also be prohibited under the measures.
Some 42% of Greeks over the age of 15 smoke, well above the European average of 29%. The campaign will include an advertising blitz and the distribution of anti-smoking board games to children.
The prime minister, George Papandreou, said: "It will contribute to the work we're doing today that's aimed at changing attitudes, norms and behaviour to improve our quality of life and to make our country viable – not just its economy but in everyday life."
The Greek health ministry said the measures were needed after partial smoking bans over the last eight years were generally ignored. From today, offices and businesses will ban smoking and close popular smoking rooms. Those caught violating the new law will be fined between €50 and €500 and have their names recorded in an offenders' database. Businesses will be fined between €500 and €10,000.
Martin Dockrell, of the anti-smoking campaign group Ash, said: "I would expect Greece to experience some of the greatest health benefits in Europe [from the ban] because it has such high smoking rates. If [smokers] can cope with sitting on a street corner in rainy London and windy Dublin, beautiful and sunny Greece shouldn't pose much of a challenge."
Greek bar and restaurant owners, who have already been hit by a recession and a shaky tourism season, said a dip in business could cost them their livelihood.
"Obviously, customers will not stay as long if they need to go outside for a smoke," said Nikos Louvros, who owns a bar in central Athens. "I can't understand why smokers and non-smokers can't have their own areas. You can filter the air, and everyone would gets what suits them."
Louvros was so angered by a previous attempt to impose a ban last year that he formed his own pro-smoking political party that received 1,500 votes in the 2009 national election. He plans to run again in local elections in November. "Maybe we'll win the race for mayor of Athens," he said. "Then, we'll see what happens."