Christopher Tappin denied bail in US on arms dealing claims
British businessman's wife says it is an outrage that her husband must remain in custody in New Mexico
A retired British businessman who was extradited to the US over allegations of arms dealing has been denied bail as he awaits trial, after he was deemed to be a flight risk.
Christopher Tappin, 65, from Orpington in Kent, must remain in custody following the ruling by Judge Robert Castaneda, who was told by US prosecutors at a federal court in El Paso, Texas, that he may be a "danger to the community" if released.
The judge agreed that measures could be imposed to ensure Tappin is monitored if released, but he said a discrepancy in Tappin's financial statement led to him being denied bail.
Elaine Tappin said it was an outrage that her husband has been refused bail, adding that he has spent 23 hours a day locked in his cell at the Otero County detention centre in New Mexico since his extradition.
"He's a man of his word and is certainly not at risk of fleeing – where would he go?" she asked.
"He doesn't have his passport or access to money. Why has the British government allowed him to be incarcerated in solitary confinement for 23 hours a day before he's even been tried?
Tappin, who lost his two-year battle against extradition to the US two weeks ago, will go to trial before a US District Judge in El Paso, Texas, but no date has been set.
He denies attempting to sell batteries for surface-to-air missiles which were to be shipped from the US to Tehran via the Netherlands.
The president of the Kent golf union, who faces up to 35 years in jail if convicted, was escorted into the courtroom on Friday wearing an orange-red prison jumpsuit, with his feet and one hand shackled.
US marshals allowed the other hand to remain free so he could use a cane he needs to walk.
Assistant US attorney Greg McDonald asked the judge to keep Tappin in jail for the remainder of the proceedings.
"The risk is not that he'll punch somebody in the face, but through the use of a computer and the knowledge he has, he might pose a danger to the community," McDonald said.
Tappin has no ties to the US and failed to disclose to court officials his frequent travels to Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and South Africa, he added.
But Kent Schaffer, representing Tappin, said if released, his client would have complied with any restrictions imposed by the court and his family was ready to post bail of $50,000 (£31,600).