Six dead after gunman opens fire at Texas birthday party
Police confirm deaths and several wounded at child's celebration at roller skating rink in Grand Prairie near Dallas
A gunman opened fire at a child's birthday celebration at a Texas roller skating rink, killing five people and wounding four others before killing himself.
Authorities said no young children or employees were killed during the shooting that began at about 7pm at Forum Roller World in Grand Prairie, about 20 miles west of Dallas. Some people working at nearby businesses said they watched as adults and children left the rink in horror.
"They just looked terrified," Cody Poston, a witness, told a local television station as he stood outside the rink, which was festooned with birthday decorations. "There's several people crying. The kids were just kind of oblivious."
Authorities did not immediately release the victims' names or ages or say how the gunman may have been related to those who died.
Police said the gunman began arguing with a woman in Forum Roller World, where the party was being held, although the rink was not open to the public because the family had rented it for several hours.
Grand Prairie police spokesman John Brimmer said investigators were trying to determine how many people were inside the building when the shots were fired. Police were called at about 7.10pm. Some reports said officers entered with guns drawn, encountering the dead and wounded. Wounded survivors were taken to hospitals.
Police chief Steve Dye told the Fort Worth Star-Telegram that a domestic disturbance apparently erupted between a husband and wife, but the investigation was continuing.
"We are still working on identifying the victims, and we are still working on notifying the families," Dye said. "Certainly our thoughts and prayers go out to the victims and their families."
Investigators continued working through the night and bodies were still inside the building.
Aaron Feldt told a local television station that he was standing across the street at a bowling alley when he heard shots.
"I saw family coming across the street," he said, adding he could see the "panic in their eyes".
Byron Raspberry of Grand Prairie said his children go to the rink frequently because it is near their home. "It doesn't make any sense," Raspberry said. "I don't feel safe at all."