Bali Nine: Andrew Chan, Myuran Sukumaran execution anniversary stirs tributes from Kerobokan
A long-term guard at Bali's Kerobokan prison has wept while recounting the life and work of Bali Nine member, Myuran Sukumaran.
Today marks a year to the day since Australians Sukumaran and Andrew Chan were executed by firing squad for drug trafficking.
Chan and Sukumaran were the ringleaders of the so-called Bali Nine group and were convicted of attempting to smuggle more than eight kilograms of heroin into Australia.
At the Bali prison where the pair spent almost a decade, there is a deep sadness on the anniversary.
In 2006 Sukumaran approached prison guard Hermanus Hartanto about setting up an art studio at the jail.
Mr Hermanus said over the years that followed, he developed a deep friendship with Sukumaran.
Through tears he spoke to the ABC about the loss he has felt since the Australian was executed.
"I feel so disappointed because he couldn't get remission," Mr Hermanus said.
"He was a role model in here, almost everyone liked him."
"He was like my own son."
Mr Haratanto said he would spend the day remembering and praying for Sukumaran.
"It was hard for me, very difficult because I saw him almost every day for eight years. When he sits down, I would sit beside him," he said.
"And he would always greet me, sometimes if I didn't see him he would call my name."
Sukumaran and Chan were executed on this day last year just after midnight, amid an outpouring of protest on both sides of the debate in Indonesia and at home in Australia.
The executions prompted an "unprecedented" diplomatic response, when Australia withdrew its ambassador from Indonesia in protest.
Indonesian ministers have been inconsistent about when the next round of executions will be held, although the Attorney-General has said they may resume this year.
Nicolas Ngahu is free from the prison now after serving a two-and-a-half years in jail, but he still spends time behind the prison walls as a supervisor at the art studio.
"Before Myuran died he acknowledged me as one of his best students and he said if you are free later on you can come back and help," Mr Ngahu said.
"He was a good man, he was firm and someone who had principles."
Clement Tameno was another of Sukumaran's art students. He is now free from jail too after serving more than two years for drug possession at Kerobokan.
"Not only today, every day all my life I'll be thinking about him because he helped me too much," he told the ABC.
"Of course he [Sukumaran] changed my life, he taught me how to be a good man, to be like a gentleman and to do the right thing is better than you know."
Sukumaran and Chan's lawyer at the end, Tudung Lubis, said legally everything was done to save their lives.
He said in hindsight more pressure from ASEAN nations may have helped to delay, but not stop the executions.
"Well we have done everything possible under the law," Mr Lubis said
"I know Myuran and Andrew very well already by then and I knew the families and we became very close … and of course it was devastating, I couldn't sleep.
"I'm sorry I lost … That was very emotional moment for us and for me."