Oregon standoff: All occupiers surrender
(CNN)A 41-day occupation at a federal wildlife refuge in Oregon ended Thursday when the four remaining protesters surrendered to authorities, according to a live-streamed phone call transmitted from the scene.
For a moment, the surrender took a dramatic turn when the last holdout refused to follow the other three and continued the standoff at the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge's headquarters in Harney County.
David Fry contended his grievances against the federal government hadn't been addressed, but he ultimately relented and abandoned the occupation after supporters coaxed him on the phone call, which was carried on YouTube and followed by tens of thousands of listeners for several hours.
Fry said, "I am walking to them right now" as the other people on the phone call said, "Hallelujah, keep walking."
Through the open phone line, listeners could hear officials as they arrested the man, saying "nice and easy, hands behind your back."
He was charged with conspiracy to commit an offense against the United States, assault on a federal law officer by use of a deadly and dangerous weapon, interference with commerce by extortion, and obstruction of justice. He was also charged with two counts of use and carry of a firearm in relation to a crime of violence, the complaint said.
"The occupation of the Malheur Wildlife Refuge has been a long and traumatic episode for the citizens of Harney County and the members of the Burns Paiute tribe. It is a time for healing, reconciliation amongst neighbors and friends, and allowing for life to get back to normal," U.S. Attorney Billy J. Williams said in a statement.
"Over the course of the last month, the people of Harney County have lived through an experience that is both highly emotional and physically exhausting," he said in a statement. "We have seen some residents leave their homes, fearing violence against their families. We have seen the confusion, concern and trouble that the occupiers' actions have caused for this community."
Fiore told those on the call that Mike Arnold -- Ammon Bundy's lawyer, who Fiore said was in the car with her -- spoke with the FBI. She said the agency promised it would stand down Wednesday night and allow her to be at an FBI checkpoint when the occupiers surrendered.
Fiore was indeed present at the surrender, as was Franklin Graham, the nationally known evangelist and son of legendary preacher Billy Graham, authorities said. Graham said he's been talking with "the last four holdouts ... every day by phone for the last week at their request and at the request of the FBI."
When one woman -- presumed to be Fiore -- asked two of them about their families, a man responded, "God has put us on this path. Our families are already taken care of; they weren't in our lives much before all this because God made sure we didn't have that to weigh us down so that we could do this."