Gunman Omar Mateen Described as Belligerent, Racist and 'Toxic'
Driving the point home that religion was a consideration in the mind of investigators, officials brought a member of the Muslim community to speak at a news conference.
Mateen didn't appear to have any direct ties with ISIS, sources said, although he was a follower of ISIS propaganda and referred to the Tsarnaev brothers, who carried out the Boston Marathon bombings in 2013, at the scene of the shooting.
But while law enforcement delves into what may have radicalized Mateen, who was born in New York and lived in Florida for at least the past decade, his family believes he was fueled by pure hate against the LGBT community.
Police did not explicitly say Mateen was Muslim, but Islamic groups put out statements denouncing the carnage.
"We condemn this monstrous attack and offer our heartfelt condolences to the families and loved ones of all those killed or injured. The Muslim community joins our fellow Americans in repudiating anyone or any group that would claim to justify or excuse such an appalling act of violence," Rasha Mubarak, Orlando regional coordinator for the Council on American-Islamic Relations, said in a statement.
Seddique Mir Mateen said his son was a husband and father to a 3-year-old son. He worked in security and attended Indian River State College. A spokeswoman said he got an associate of science degree in criminal justice technology in 2006.
Police say he used a handgun and AR-15-type rifle in the shooting spree.
The U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives officials tweeted Sunday that Mateen legally bought the firearms within the last week.
Records also show that he had filed a petition for a name change in 2006 from Omar Mir Seddique to Omar Mir Seddique Mateen.
His ex-wife, Sitora Yusufiy, who lives in Colorado, told reporters that Mateen was prone to violent behavior and beat her.
Besides abusing her physically, he also isolated her from her family, who worked to persuade her to leave the marriage, she said.
"When he got in his tempers, he would express hate toward everything," Yusufiy said.