1 dead, 2 wounded in Algiers triple shooting, NOPD says
A man was killed and two others wounded in a triple shooting in the area of Flanders and Socrates streets in Algiers on Sunday night (Dec. 11), New Orleans police said. Family members gathered at the scene identified Robert Rochon as the man killed.
Robert Rochon's cousin, Ceiara Rochon, said her father called in a panic to break the news. She and other family members gathered behind crime scene tape near the scene where Socrates dead-ends into Flanders.
"I don't know what happened," she said. "We just want justice for our family."
Police said one of the men who was injured was found at Flanders and De Armas streets with a gunshot wound to the head, and as of Sunday night was in critical condition.
The other man, identified by his family members as Rochon, 22, was found two blocks down at Flanders and Socrates, in the driver's seat of a red car that had crashed into an apartment building. He was pronounced dead at the scene.
Police said the third man, who arrived at a hospital later via private vehicle, was in stable condition.
At the scene, the red car appeared to have crashed first through a white wooden fence on one side of Socrates, then through a chain link fence and into a metal stairwell on the side of the apartment building across the street. White, wooden fence boards lay scattered across the ground, surrounding plastic children's toys in the yard where the fence recently stood.
Several neighbors said they did not hear any shots, but did hear a loud crash. Another neighbor said he heard two sets of shots start from down the street, then heard the crash.
A red SUV parked in a driveway down Flanders had its driver side window shot out, and another car parked on the street appeared to be pushed forward into the road from a collision.
Speaking from the scene, Ceiara Rochon described her cousin as a lighthearted young man, who relished listening to music and was close to his family. She said her cousin lived in Uptown and worked as a cashier and stocker at the Rouses Market on Airline Drive in Metairie.
"It's shocking," she said. "No one expected it to be him."
Anyone with information about the shooting is asked to call homicide detective Ravell Johnson at 504-658-5300, or Crimestoppers at 504-822-1111 or toll-free at 1-877-903-STOP.
Correction: An earlier version of this story included an incorrect age for Rochon. He was 22, according to the Orleans Parish Coroner's Office.