FLINT — Six state employees were criminally charged this morning in district court in connection with the Flint water crisis.
Charged are Michigan Department of Health and Human Services workers Nancy Peeler, Corinne Miller and Robert Scott, and Michigan Department of Environmental Quality employees  Liane Shekter-Smith; Adam Rosenthal and Patrick Cook, according to testimony this morning in Flint’s district court.
► Related: Investigator: Workers changed reports, hid data in Flint water crisis ► Related: A look at the 6 state employees charged in Flint water crisis ► Related: 6 state employees criminally charged in Flint water crisis ► Related: Flint water probe costs triple, may reach $5M
Michigan Attorney General Bill Schuette and Todd Flood, the Royal Oak attorney heading the AG's investigation, discussed the charges at an 11:30 a.m. news conference at U-M Flint.
"Some people failed to act, others minimized harm done and arrogantly chose to ignore data, some intentionally altered figures ... and covered up significant health risks," he said.
In April, Schuette announced felony charges against two Michigan Department of Environmental Quality officials and one City of Flint official. At that time, he promised more criminal charges would be forthcoming.
The city employee, Mike Glasgow, pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor and is cooperating with the investigation as other charges were dropped. The two DEQ employees, Stephen Busch and Mike Prysby, are awaiting preliminary examinations.
He later brought a civil lawsuit against engineering and consulting firms who had consulted on the Flint Water Treatment Plant.
The civil lawsuit, filed in Flint in Genesee County Circuit Court, accuses engineering firm Lockwood, Andrews & Newnam and environmental consultant  Veolia North America, plus related companies, of causing "the Flint Water Crisis to occur, continue and worsen." Both companies have denied any wrongdoing and vowed to fight the lawsuit.
► April: AG Bill Schuette: Flint water charges only the beginning ► April: A closer look at the criminal charges in the Flint water crisis ► April: Flint water defendants could lead to higher-ups ► April: Flint water crisis defendants: Who are they?​​
Flint's drinking water became contaminated in lead in April 2014 after the city, while under the control of a state-appointed emergency manager, switched from treated water supplied from Detroit to raw water from the Flint River, which was treated at the Flint Water Treatment Plant.
DEQ officials have acknowledged a mistake in failing to require corrosion control chemicals to be added to the water. As a result, lead leached from pipes, joints and fixtures into Flint households and harmful lead levels spiked in Flint children.