Don Blankenship, West Virginia’s “King of Coal,” Is Guilty
For a generation, Don Blankenship embodied a harsh shibboleth of modern Appalachian politics: running coal is still the best life that impoverished Americans in the hills of West Virginia and Kentucky should expect—and they should be grateful for it. Nicknamed the “King of Coal,” Blankenship, a large figure with a tidy mustache and epic jowls, rose to become the chairman and then, in 2000, the C.E.O. of Massey Energy. In the decade he spent as C.E.O, he nearly tripled his company’s revenue, but he was perhaps better known for building a four-story villa on a West Virginia mountaintop, and for travelling around by black helicopter. He tended to his mines and to his favored politicians; he once spent millions of dollars in campaign funds to reshape the state Supreme Court, ultimately helping to oust a progressive justice and install an obscure replacement.
In 2010, his kingdom began to disintegrate: an explosion at Massey’s Upper Big Branch mine, in Montcoal, West Virginia, killed twenty-nine coal workers, the worst U.S. mine disaster in forty years. Blankenship retired that winter, and last year authorities accused him of conspiring to maximize profits at the expense of worker safety. According to the three counts under which he was indicted, he routinely ignored health and safety rules, and lied about his role to inspectors and investors. Facing thirty years in prison, he maintained that the explosion was an “act of God.”
Today, after a six-week trial, jurors convicted Blankenship of one misdemeanor for conspiring to violate safety rules and acquitted him of felony charges of lying about it. It was a compromise verdict: the jurors had deliberated for ten days, and had twice told the judge that they could not agree, before being urged to continue until they’d reached a conclusion. For some observers, the verdict, which carries with it a maximum sentence of one year in prison, was disappointing, but it was a milestone; Blankenship became, as the Times put it, “the most prominent American coal executive ever to be convicted of a charge connected to the deaths of miners.” It was justice, of a kind. Judy Jones Peterson, whose brother died in the mine, told reporters, “Even if Don Blankenship wasn’t convicted of all of these crimes, he is guilty, my friends.”
The most lasting legacy may reside in the trial itself: the portrait, revealed in internal memos and recordings, of a toothless regulatory system and a corporate culture that exposes the men and women of Appalachia to extraordinary risk. (Last year, I wrote about the politics that contributed to one of America’s largest chemical leaks, at a facility in Charleston, West Virginia.) In one memo, from the summer of 2009, Bill Ross, a former Massey employee who was tasked with improving safety, documented a system on the edge of a tragedy. A foreman explained to Ross, “We are told to run, run, run until we get caught; when we get caught, then we will fix it.” When Blankenship was told of that memo, he did not take actions to heed its conclusions; he ordered it to stay “privileged and confidential,” saying, presciently, that, in the event of a trial, it would be “a terrible document to have in discovery.”
Some of the company’s most brazen deceptions concerned efforts to prevent black-lung disease, a potentially fatal ailment caused by inhaling dust. In a recorded phone call played for jurors, Blankenship was overheard saying, “Black lung is not an issue in this industry that is worth the effort they put into it.” According to a memo sent months later to Blankenship by Stephanie Ojeda, a Massey lawyer, Ross had warned, “Massey is plainly cheating on dust sampling at some of its operations.” The jury heard testimony that miners were told to wear dust pumps inside their coveralls, in order to skew the results, or to hang monitors in the fresh-air tunnel, far away from the dust that workers inhaled. An investigation later found that at least seventeen of the twenty-nine miners who died in the explosion had suffered from black lung.
Witnesses at the trial also described how mine workers were informally trained to avoid the rules. If a mine inspector turned up unannounced, a security guard alerted a dispatcher, who tipped off the miners. (Filings for a separate class-action case included code words used to indicate a surprise inspection, such as “It’s a cloudy day” or that a “load of cinder blocks” had arrived.) In his testimony, Chris Blanchard, a former president of the Massey subsidiary Performance Coal, which operated the Upper Big Branch Mine, provided a pithy summary of the collapse of West Virginia’s regulatory might: “It was cheaper to pay the fines than the cost of preventing violations.”
The prosecution’s case returned over and over to Blankenship’s laments that, despite all of his cost-cutting, he was not richer. Discussing a new vice-president for safety, he said that Massey needed someone “who actually understands that this game is about money.” Dissatisfied with the stock options included in a twelve-million-dollar pay package, he told a girlfriend, “You can’t go to the grocery store and buy groceries with options.”
The guilty verdict came despite the fact that Blankenship enjoyed a luxurious level of legal counsel. His team of attorneys, who numbered as many as six, included Bill Taylor, who successfully defended the former I.M.F. chief Dominique Strauss-Kahn against the accusation that he raped a hotel maid. (The charges against Strauss-Khan were dropped; he admitted to an “inappropriate” liaison but denied any violence, and settled with the accuser for an undisclosed sum.) Taylor elected not to call a single witness, a decision that can be debated, but in the end he may have helped Blankenship avoid decades in prison.
For those who wanted a reckoning for Blankenship and his practices, it is a brutal measure of our legal priorities that he faced far heavier penalties for lying to investors and regulators than he did for conspiring to break safety rules. Bruce Stanley, a lawyer who battled Blankenship in a separate case, observed, in an interview with Mother Jones, that the prospect of a thirty-year penalty had rested on a single charge: “That’s the one that says he lied to Wall Street. When it comes to human lives, he gets maybe a year.”
Stanley was right. But the trial will have a legacy. It delivered a verdict not only on Blankenship but on his punitive credo that, as brutal and unrewarding as the coal life can be, it is all that his people should hope for. There will be more fights around the coal industry in the years ahead—around its environmental practices, its political influence, and the division of its spoils. Blankenship’s words and deeds exposed the exploitation that miners can face, and his name will now serve as an indelible reminder that they, and Appalachians, deserve better.