Bank of Ireland bosses face barrage of anger and eggs
Executives at Ireland's biggest high street bank were forced to dodge eggs and a barrage of abuse at what could be the institution's last annual meeting under private ownership.
In a sign that anger is far from diminishing, Bank of Ireland's chairman, Pat Molloy, and chief executive, Richie Boucher, were subjected to three-hour verbal onslaught from shareholders, including an attack by Gary Keogh, 67, who was escorted away after throwing two eggs at the executives.
He missed, but described them as "lower than bottom-pond insects" and said the incident did wonders for his blood pressure. He said he had invested €5,000 (£4,400) in the bank in 2007 and his shares were now worth just €40.
The cash-strapped bank is trying to raise €4.2bn to recapitalise in a bid to stop the government – which currently holds a 36% share – taking virtual full control. The refinancing is being fought by bondholders, who are being asked to take haircuts of up to 90%, but pensioners at the annual meeting have already seen their investments destroyed.
They questioned what had happened to the €3.6bn raised last year and asked why they should believe anything executives say when they have "run the bank into the ground", leaving them with nothing.
Independent member of parliament Shane Ross branded the bank "a complete and utter shipwreck" and demanded those on the podium do the audience "the courtesy" of standing up and explaining why they were worth €390,000 or more a year. Molloy said he would "not permit it".
One shareholder, who was alone in praising the bank for its effort to fight nationalisation, drew guffaws of laughter.
"Figuratively speaking, you should all be taken out and bloody shot," said another, shareholder John McCormack. Others called on the directors and management to "resign in honour" before they were forced to "resign in disgrace".
Mary Clarke, who is in her 80s, said her "substantial" investment was now "worth nothing". She said: "You robbed the elderly; you are guilty of elder abuse."
Shares in the bank have been slashed in value from a peak of €18 to just €0.12.
Executives also came under attack for continuing to pay bonuses despite government orders not to last December. One woman, who described herself as a staff member, said management had "no idea what it is like" at the counter dealing with people struggling to pay bills day after day.