Belgium-born French national sought in Paris terror attacks
Paris (CNN)Authorities are hunting for a Belgium-born French national who's one of three brothers suspected in the Paris terror attacks.
Belgian and French officials want to know where Salah Abdeslam is, and Belgium has issued an international warrant for him.
French police released his photo and warned people not to interact with him, saying that he is dangerous.
Salah Abdeslam is suspected of being involved in the attacks.
Investigators haven't said much about how they believe Abdeslam is tied to Friday's series of shootings and explosions in the French capital.
Jean-Pascal Thoreau, a spokesman for Belgium's Federal Prosecutor, said Abdeslam is one of three brothers suspected of involvement in the attacks. One of the brothers was killed in the attacks, and another was arrested by Belgian police, Thoreau said.
The senator told CNN that the man was carrying a fake or doctored Syrian passport, and also a registration document for refugee status issued by Greek authorities. The fingerprints taken by Greek authorities match those of the terrorist who blew himself up at the Stade de France, the senator said.
• Bilal Hadfi, a Belgian resident who is thought to have fought in Syria, was one of the attackers, according to several sources. Hadfi, who was killed in the attacks, was 19 or 20, the sources said.
the assault and hostage-taking at the Bataclan concert hall Paris prosecutor Francois Molins described him as a 29-year-old French citizen with a criminal record from the southern Paris suburbs. The attacker, who was involved in the assault and hostage-taking at the Bataclan concert hall , was identified by fingerprints and was believed to have been radicalized in 2010 but had never been accused of terrorism, Molins said.
Agnes Thibault-Lecuivre, the Paris prosecutor's spokeswoman, told CNN that six people -- all family relatives of Mostefai -- have been detained. It is common practice in criminal cases in France to place family members in custody. Mostefai's relatives have not been charged or arrested.
has been closed People were still out around the city Saturday, some posing for selfies along the Seine or stealing a kiss in front of the Eiffel Tower. But the tower itself -- like many other tourist attractions, shops and public buildings -- has been closed in the aftermath of the attacks.
BFMTV CNN affiliate BFMTV reported Sunday that authorities had found three Kalashnikov automatic rifles in an abandoned car in the eastern Paris suburb of Montreuil that was believed to have been used by perpetrators of the attacks.
At least seven people have been arrested in raids in Belgium connected to the Paris attacks, officials said. Those arrested were in contact with the Paris attackers, a senior Belgian counterterrorism source told CNN. No weapons or explosives were found on them.
On Saturday, CNN affiliate BFMTV reported that the father and a brother of one of the attackers had been taken into custody. And AFP reported that the two men were detained after police raided their homes 130 kilometers (80 miles) east of Paris. CNN has not independently verified that the men were picked up by authorities.