Cairo attacks continue; reporter dies from earlier shooting
and Al-Jazeera reported that security agents detained the network's Cairo bureau chief along with another journalist.
New York, February 4, 2011--Journalists in Cairo faced assaults, detentions, and threats again today as supporters of President Hosni Mubarak continued their efforts to obstruct news coverage of protests demanding the Egyptian leader's ouster. While the extent of attacks lessened after a peak on Thursday, ongoing anti-press activities remain at an alarming level that must be halted, the Committee to Protect Journalists said today. In addition, a journalist shot a week ago while filming a demonstration died today, a state newspaper reported, 
"It is stupefying that the government continues to send out thugs and plainclothes police to attack journalists and to ransack media bureaus," said Mohamed Abdel Dayem, CPJ's Middle East and North Africa program coordinator. "This is doubly outrageous after the embattled president, vice president, and prime minister all expressed various degrees of regret for the unprecedented attacks on the media on Wednesday and Thursday. They vowed to the Egyptian people in public statements and to the press in interviews that such assaults would not be allowed to take place again."
Ahmad Mohamed Mahmoud, a journalist working for the newspaper Al-Ta'awun, published by the state-owned Al-Ahram Foundation, died today from gunshot wounds sustained on January 29, Al-Jazeera and the semi-official Al-Ahram reported today. Mahmoud was shot by what the newspaper described as sniper fire while filming confrontations between security forces and demonstrators in central Cairo's Qasr al-Aini area, which is adjacent to Tahrir Square. The death is the first reported media fatality during the uprising.
"As the unprecedented campaign against media continues, the Egyptian government has made its intentions abundantly clear: Silence as many journalists as possible no matter the political cost," said Abdel Dayem. "We call on the Egyptian government to immediately release Al-Jazeera's Adbel Fatah Fayed, Ahmed Youssif, and all other detained journalists. We call on governments around the world to forcefully condemn this latest abuse."
In the last 24 hours, CPJ documented another 10 anti-press assaults, 10 detentions, two attacks on newsrooms, and the hacking of a major news website. In all, CPJ has documented at least 101 direct attacks on journalists and news facilities this week, and it's investigating numerous other reports.
Here is a round-up of new attacks on the press:
Eric Feijten, a reporter for Dutch news broadcaster Nederlande Omroep Stichting (NOS), was arrested and released at least twice in the past two days. NOS released a statement after his first arrest saying that Feijten had been beaten and threatened. "Finally after 17 hours without drinking or eating, he was released in a small hotel near the airport," NOS wrote. He left Egypt today and: "At the airport and there was even a ticket. Kicked out, so i am not happy because i failed to do my job."