Suspected bomb explodes in Kyrgyzstan before Clinton visit
Explosion outside building in capital Bishkek where 28 former officials from the deposed government are on trial
A suspected bomb explosion has injured two police officers in the Kyrgyzstan capital Bishkek, two days before a visit by Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, who is due to arrive on Thursday.
The officers, who were only slightly hurt, were wounded in an explosion outside a sports hall being used as a court for a trial of officials of the country's former government that was deposed in the spring. The incident followed fighting yesterday between security forces and Islamist militants in the country's southern city of Osh.
Clinton's visit is intended to offer support for the new government in the former Soviet republic which provides an air transit stopover for troops and supplies travelling to Afghanistan.
It was during a visit to Kyrgyzstan two years ago that Prince Andrew was reported by the country's US ambassador as making "rude ... and cocky" remarks to British businessmen attempting to win contracts there. In a dispatch to Washington, released by WikiLeaks yesterday and published in today's Guardian,the ambassador, Tatiana Gfoeller, reported that the businessmen alleged that nothing got done unless the son of the former president Kurmanbek Bakiyev - who is on trial in his absence - got a cut.
Officials believe the latest attack is part of a campaign of terror by Islamist insurgents. The government claimed three militants were killed and a fourth blew himself up in the fighting in Osh and that three more suspects who were detained were said to be members of the Islamic Movement of Turkestan.
Kolbay Musayev, deputy chairman of the national security service, claimed today that the militants had selected 33 targets for terrorist attacks, including eight in the capital. "Thanks to active efforts of law enforcement and intelligence agencies, their plans were defeated," he said, adding that the terrorist groups included citizens of several countries, including Russia and Uzbekistan.
The court is hearing the case against 28 former officials, including the self-exiled former president Bakiyev, on charges that they were complicit in ordering troops to open fire, killing many demonstrators during protests in April that brought down his government. Lawyers have complained that they and their clients have been subjected to threats and intimidation. Following the explosion, the hearing has been suspended for the day.
On the first day of the trial two weeks ago, relatives of the deceased broke through police lines and threatened the accused, demanding their execution. Three of the defendants subsequently fled their homes to avoid standing trial.
After elections last month, Kyrgyzstan is attempting to form the first parliamentary democracy in central Asia, a region otherwise governed by authoritarian presidents. Critics of the new parliament say it lacks authority.