Amarnath Yatra terror attack: Five women among seven killed; Ramnath Kovind condemns the attack
At least seven Amarnath Yatra pilgrims were killed and many others injured in a terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Anantnag district on Monday, PTI reported. The terrorists also attacked a police party in Bantigoo area beside targeting a bus carrying the pilgrims.
The attack took place hours after the Jammu and Kashmir Police claimed to have busted a Lashkar-e-Taiba module with the arrests of two persons, including Sandeep Kumar Sharma alias Adil, a resident of Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh.
Reacting to the incident, National Conference leader Omar Abdullah said: “the attack cannot be condemned strongly enough.” Omar wrote on Twitter, “Very sad news. The attack cannot be condemned strongly enough. My sympathies to the families & prayers for the injured.
He added the attack was feared in spite of recent success by security forces. “The one thing we had all feared this year during the yatra. In spite of recent successes against militants & unprecedented force presence,” he tweeted.
Earlier, the Amarnath yatra was suspended from Jammu due to law and order situation in the Kashmir Valley under curfew for the death anniversary of militant commander Burhan Wani. Authorities clamped curfew in three towns, including Tral in Kashmir, and imposed restrictions on the movement of people in the rest of the valley.
Special prayers were held on Sunday near the Pahalgam base camp of the annual Amarnath yatra, marking the commencement of the pilgrimage.
12:31 am: List of passengers who were travelling in the bus which was attacked. Express photo
12:30 am: NDA Presidential nominee Ramnath Kovind has also condemned the attack. He called it a ‘cowardly act’, as reported by ANI.
12:25 am: Mehbooba Mufti met the injured in Anantnag hospital. While addressing the media, she said: “the bus carrying yatris broke down & they got away from the cordon. Five women among those killed.”
12:15 am: Gujarat PM Vijay Rupani has condemned the attack and said, ” Condemn cowardly attack, India will never get bogged down by such acts. Six people from Gujarat’s Valsad have lost their lives in Anantnag terror attack. Our government is in contact with J&K government and military to ensure proper treatment and medical attention for the injured.”
11:48 pm: Statement by police: Today evening terrorists initially attacked a police BP bunker at Botengoo. The fire was retaliated. There was no report of injuries. Thereafter, the terrorists fired on a police naka near Khanabal. The fire was retaliated. A tourist bus was hit bu bullets in which about 18 tourists were injured. Among them, six persons died while rest are being treated. The bus was on way to Jammu from Baltal and was not part of the convoy.
11:45 pm: J&K CM Mehbooba Mufti has reached Anantnag hospital where the injured have been admitted.
11:24 pm: Congress VP Rahul Gandhi has said, “India will never be intimidated by these terrorist cowards. This is a grave and unacceptable security lapse. The PM needs to accept responsibility and never allow it to happen again.”
11:20 pm: BJP President Amit Shah has also reacted to the attack. “I have no words to express my deep pain on the killing of innocent pilgrims traveling to the holy shrine of Amarnath. It is a henious act. I pray for the families of those who have lost their lives and wish speedy recovery to the injured. Cowards responsible for this barbaric act will not be spared. I have spoken to the BJP District President and MLC from Anantnag and asked our karyakartas in Kashmir to help the pilgrims in need,” he said.
11:07 pm: Defence Minister Arun Jaitley said that this incident should add to our determination to eliminate terrorism.
11:05 pm: Sonia Gandhi expresses sorrow, asks for investigation into lapses in security.
10: 55 pm: Jammu & Kashmir National Panthers Party gives a ‘bandh’ call in Jammu for tomorrow
10: 36 pm Prime Minister Narendra Modi has strongly condemned the attack on yatris. Here are his tweets
10:34 pm Home Minister seeks details of the attack from CM and Governor; also directs officials to ensure foolproof security in future. According to PTI, Rajnath Singh has spoken to J&K Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti and Governor N N Vohra over terror attack on Amarnath pilgrims
10:25 PM Union minister Jeetendra Singh has described the attack on Amarnath yatris as an attack on the resilience of India.
10:18 PM This is the latest picture from the site
10:06 PM  Internet services in Kashmir have been blocked, in view of tense situation in the valley.
10:05 PM Police claim the bus driver had violated rules for the pilgrimage, which state that no yatra vehicle should be on a highway after 7 pm.
9:56 PM According to a CRPF statement, the bus was not part of the official yatra and not registered with the Amarnath Shrine Board. The bus was carrying pilgrims back from Baltal after performing the yatra.
9:54 PM Security has been enhanced at Jammu-Srinagar National highway in Udhampur following terror attack on Amarnath Yatra Pilgrims in Anantnag, ANI reported.
9:52 PM The attack on Amarnath yatris is a dark patch on the history of Kashmir, says state minister Naeem Akhtar.
9:49 PM Death toll rises to seven, says police
9:45 PM Here are the visuals from the site of attack
For all the latest India News, download Indian Express App