Syrian Military’s Bombing Attack Kills Dozens
Regaining and maintaining control requires resources the government, stretched on many fronts by the 19-month conflict, cannot afford, said Hokayem, a -based analyst at the International Institute for Strategic Studies. he added, “they actually have no problem completely destroying it.”
Gutting and abandoning towns rather than trying to govern them shifts responsibility for reconstruction and relief onto the shoulders of the underequipped rebels, breeding frustration, Mr. Hokayem said, a tactic that suggests the government has given up on winning the trust of its people.
“They’re not after regaining the hearts of the population,” he said. “The calculation is that what’s needed is for the population to start resenting the rebels, not to start liking the Assad regime again.”
That dynamic — rebel gains, army crackdowns and ensuing resentment against rebels as well as the government — has played out again and again in recent months, most recently in Aleppo, Syria’s largest city. Rebels last month began what they said would be an all-out offensive there. But the result was to spread fighting into previously peaceful neighborhoods and damage the city’s beloved historic center, leaving many residents as angry at the rebels for bringing the fight there as at the government for its harsh response.
In Maarat al-Noaman over the past week, rebels attempted to provide some services. They tried to distribute bread after the government shelled bakeries, activists said, a tactic used in several cities, according to a recent report. But some of those efforts appeared ad hoc and rudimentary: an antigovernment video showed boys, girls and adults lining up as men handed out bread from the trunk of a small white sedan.
Abu Ahmed, the commander of a group of fighters from the nearby village of Sinbol, said in a interview on Thursday that supplies had sunk so low in the town that rebels had to form a committee to keep people from cutting down olive trees for fuel.
An even thornier problem arose that one rebel commander said had left his brigade “seriously confused”: how to manage the scores of government soldiers captured in the rebel offensive.
“We don’t know what we’re going do with them,” the commander, who asked that his name not be used and claimed to be holding 600 prisoners, said in a Skype interview on Tuesday. Even feeding them “one loaf, tomato or potato” a day would be too expensive, he said. “We don’t have food even to feed our families.”
But if the prisoners were released, he said, they might rejoin the army or pro-government militias. He said he was beginning to wish they had died in the fighting.
Yet the battle exposed weaknesses and strengths on both sides.
While the destruction on Thursday renewed questions about the rebels’ tactic of seizing territory, their earlier victory showed their growing capability and the strain on government forces. Rebels claimed they had been able to seize for a time all the checkpoints between Maarat al-Noaman and Khan Sheikhoun, 10 miles to the south along the north-south highway that is the main artery between Damascus and Aleppo.
Lt. Ahmad Haleeb, a rebel officer, said in an interview that he had fought with more than 150 troops and that they had killed 65 soldiers and captured seven in a fight for a checkpoint. In one government-held building, a cultural center, rebels shot video of a dozen dead, shirtless men they said had been security detainees apparently executed as troops fled.
Several units worked together, one attacking government reinforcements en route to the battle, activists and fighters said last week. Videos described as having been made during the battle showed rebels shooting down a helicopter, using small-arms fire in coordinated squads, firing rocket-propelled grenades and heavy-caliber weapons mounted on flatbed trucks, and even appearing to commandeer an armored vehicle.
They surrounded an army base at Wadi al-Deif, near Maarat al-Noaman, where on Thursday, activists and fighters said, government soldiers were still trapped without access to supplies amid new shelling by rebels.
“At a purely tactical level that was a defeat for the regime,” Mr. Hokayem said of Maarat al-Noaman.
On Thursday, the government said it was pushing rebels out of the town. SANA, the Syrian state news agency, reported that the army was “cleaning” the area and had “killed a large number of terrorists.” It said the army had uncovered caves and tunnels storing weapons, and had destroyed heavy weapons as well as 60 bombs weighing hundreds of pounds each.
But Abu Ahmed, the commander, said that rebels still controlled one side of town and aimed to control routes to Aleppo and north to Saraqib, Idlib and .
Maarat al-Noaman drew attention because of its strategic location, the rebels’ unusually well-documented gains and the vivid photographs and reporting by Agence France-Presse journalists who were also present during the airstrike on Thursday.
The town, with a prewar population of about 120,000, was an obscure provincial enclave known mainly for the Alma Arra museum, a 16th-century former traders’ inn housing a collection of Byzantine mosaics and pre-Islamic pottery — and, on the entryway floor, a mosaic portrait of Mr. Assad and his father and predecessor, .
But Maarat al-Noaman has broader significance as an archetype of Syria’s neglected midsize towns. The country’s hinterland is dotted with more than 120 towns with populations of more than 20,000, and battles have ravaged many that poverty and resentment made hotbeds of rebellion.
In his effort to win over Syria’s elite with new economic freedoms early in his rule, before the uprising, Mr. Assad courted Damascus at the expense of the periphery that had long been the base of his .
“He won Damascus,” said Mr. Hokayem, the strategic studies institute analyst, “but he lost Syria.”