Sunday Mirror journalist Rupert Hamer killed in Afghanistan explosion
Rupert Hamer, 39, died of his wounds after his vehicle struck an improvised explosive device near Now Zad on Saturday.
The father of three was the first British journalist to die during the war in Afghanistan and the first to be killed in a war zone since Terry Lloyd, the ITN reporter, and Richard Wild were killed in Iraq in 2003.
The newspaper’s photographer, Philip Coburn, 43, a former contributor to The Daily Telegraph, was seriously injured. The Ministry of Defence said he was is in a serious but stable condition.
Gordon Brown, the Prime Minister, said: “I was deeply saddened by this tragic news, and my heartfelt thoughts and sympathies are with the families, friends and colleagues of Rupert and Philip.
“Their courage, skill and dedication to reporting from the front line was incredibly important and ensured that the world could see and read about our heroic troops.
“Their professionalism and commitment to our forces will not be forgotten.”
Hamer was married with three children, aged six, five and 19 months.
The popular reporter, who had reported from Afghanistan four times before his final visit, had earned the affectionate nickname “Corporal Hamer” and had worked for the newspaper for 12 years. Colleagues paid tribute to a “fine, fearless and skilled writer”.
Sean Rayment, defence correspondent of The Sunday Telegraph and a friend of Hamer, said: “He was a great journalist and a fearless reporter. He had been to Afghanistan many times and knew the risks and accepted them. He was a very decent bloke.
“We spoke in Kabul recently and were laughing about the disorganisation there. We were going to meet up soon. It is absolutely tragic and I feel desperately sorry for his family.”
Coburn has been at the Sunday Mirror for eight years, covering stories including Hurricane Katrina.
Coburn and Hamer flew to the region on New Year’s Eve on a trip that was to have lasted a month. They had been reporting on the US marines campaign against the Taliban around Now Zad, a strategic town captured in Operation Cobra’s Anger in December.
Coburn was evacuated to Camp Bastion for medical treatment and is believed to have returned to the UK after his condition stabilised. British officials are making arrangements for the repatriation of Mr Hamer’s body.
Hamer is the second journalist to die in Afghanistan in the past fortnight. Michelle Lang of the Calgary Herald was killed by a roadside bomb on Dec 30. More than 20 journalists, most of them Afghans, have been killed in the country since the 2001 US-led invasion.
Tina Weaver, editor of the Sunday Mirror, said: “Rupert believed that the only place to report a war was from the front line, and as our defence correspondent he wanted to be embedded with the US marines at the start of their vital surge into southern Afghanistan.
“He was a seasoned, highly-regarded and brave journalist who had reported from both Iraq and Afghanistan on many occasions.
He had organised a special Christmas newspaper produced for the troops packed with messages from loved ones, which was flown out by the RAF three weeks ago, she said.
“He was a fine, fearless, and skilled writer ... he was a gregarious figure, a wonderful friend who was hugely popular with his colleagues.
“Above all he was devoted to his wife Helen and their three young children.
“Our thoughts and condolences are with Helen, his father Nick, who he was so close to, and the children he was so proud of.”
She described Coburn as a “consummate all round journalist and brilliant photographer”.
“We wish Phil a speedy recovery and send our warmest wishes to his partner and family,” she said.
A former British forces commander, Colonel Richard Kemp, told Sky News Hamer was very well liked by the troops he worked alongside.
He said: "He was a very, very professional journalist, an extremely experienced war correspondent with a lot of active service in Afghanistan and Iraq serving alongside and working reporting with British services and other Nato allies.
"He had a lot of integrity and would take no prisoners in pursuit of a story but what I would say is that he was extremely well-liked and respected by the soldiers he worked with.
"Soldiers and journalists don't always necessarily get on well together, they have very different jobs to do, but that wasn't the case for Rupert. He was very well respected by everybody he worked with, I never heard a bad word said about him."
But he said it was "only a matter of time" before a UK journalist was killed in the country.
"Tragically it was a matter of time. Our journalists, the same as other journalists, our British journalists deploying on operations with forces in Afghanistan or Iraq face exactly the same risks as our soldiers face out there. We all know where or how dangerous it is for a soldier, particularly the IED threat which was the weapon that killed Rupert.
"Journalists face exactly the same situation. They get a certain amount of training before they are deployed on these operations and of course Rupert was extremely experienced and knew how to look after himself, knew the dangers and the risks.
"One must consider that journalists such as Rupert Hamer are extremely brave men, of course it's their job, but they're also providing a very, very good service to this country in presenting the work of our armed forces for real to the people back here."
He said it was important for journalists to visit war zones, because they "wouldn't hesitate to expose difficulties" and this could make conditions better for troops.
Col Kemp went on: "It's a hazard of war and war correspondents sign up for this kind of risk, knowing what this kind of risk is. I hope it does not discourage too many others from going out there. Certainly it will put this risk into very stark reality but it's essential we have independent reporters going out on to the frontline, seeing what our troops are doing, reporting what's going on, reporting the reality of the situation in a way that can be understood by the British public."