Turkish cargo ship attacked off Libyan coast, killing one crew member, foreign ministry says
A Turkish dry cargo ship has been attacked off Libya's coast, killing one crew member, Turkey's foreign ministry has said.
The ministry said the ship was shelled as it approached Tobruk port in Libya's north-east and was then attacked from the air as it tried to leave the area.
The third officer on the Cook Islands-chartered Tuna-1 vessel died and other crew members were wounded in the attacks, the ministry said in a statement.
The ministry said the ship was 21 kilometres from the port and in international waters at the time of the incident which it said occurred on Sunday.
"We condemn strongly this contemptible attack which targeted a civilian ship in international waters, and curse those who carried it out," it said.
The cargo ship, owned by a Turkish company, was carrying plasterboard from Spain to Tobruk when it was hit, the ministry said.
Libya's military said the Turkish vessel was bombed after it was warned not to break a ban on approaching the eastern city of Derna.
"A ship was shelled about 10 miles from Derna coast," Mohamed Hejazi, a spokesman for forces with Libya's internationally recognised government, said.
"We have warned before about approaching Derna port.
"A member of the crew was killed, and there is one wounded."
A local politician said the Turkish-owned ship had entered territorial waters "without permission".
"The air force called on it several times to turn back but it failed to comply," the member of the parliament, based in Tobruk, said.
A military source said the vessel was on fire and now was now being towed in Tobruk terminal.
Libya's internationally recognised prime minister Abdullah al-Thinni said in February his government would stop dealing with Turkey because it was sending weapons to a rival group in Tripoli so that "the Libyan people kill each other".
Forces loyal to the internationally recognised government bombed from the air a Greek-operated oil tanker anchored off Libya's Mediterranean coast in January.
Two crewmen were killed in that incident amid hostilities between factions vying to rule the oil-producing North African country.