Syria responds to Annan's proposal; rebel stronghold of Idlib seized
"But given the grave and tragic situation on the ground, everyone must realize that time is of the essence. As he said in the region, this crisis cannot be allowed to drag on."
The opposition said 56 people died Wednesday across Syria, including 29 in the rebel stronghold of Idlib, where activists reported Syrian military forces had seized control following a four-day onslaught. Only pockets of the city were held by soldiers who have defected, the activists said.
Three U.S. administration officials said earlier that al-Assad doesn't recognize the former U.N. secretary-general as the Arab League's representative and had rejected Annan's efforts. Al-Assad also said he will not do anything until the opposition lays down its arms, the sources said.
In Idlib, the Free Syrian Army, a group of fighters composed primarily of defectors from government forces, had fled the city for "tactical reasons," said Hamza abu al-Hassan, an activist with the opposition Binnish Coordination Committee. Binnish is a town located a few kilometers northeast of Idlib. Clashes had slowed compared with previous days, but shelling continued, he said.
Shelling was ongoing on the southwest outskirts of Binnish, al-Hassan said. The shells appeared to have been launched from military barracks south of the town, he said. No casualties resulted, as the shells struck open areas in an apparent attempt to scare residents.
Human Rights Watch, citing accounts from witnesses and activists, said Syria's bombardment of the city of Idlib had killed 114 civilians since March 10. "Five witnesses, including three foreign correspondents, gave separate accounts to Human Rights Watch that government forces used large-caliber machine guns, tanks, and mortars to fire indiscriminately at buildings and people in the street," the group said. "After they entered Idlib, government forces detained people in house-to-house searches, looted buildings, and burned down houses, the witnesses said."
More than 8,000 people have been killed in the conflict, including many women and children, the president of the U.N. General Assembly said this week. Opposition activists have put the toll at more than 9,000.
Adem Ozkose, a columnist and war reporter for Milat and the Middle East correspondent for Gercek Hayat magazine, and Hamit Coskun, a freelance cameraman, were covering events in Syria and shooting a documentary, according to Milat. They were last heard from Saturday, said Turgut Alp Boyraz, a member of the newspaper's foreign editorial board.
The three -- Haitham al-Maleh, Kamal al-Labwani and Catherine al-Telli -- "wanted radical change within the organization," Monajed said. However, the council -- an umbrella organization that represents the Syrian opposition abroad -- is not ready for radical change, he said. The three decided they would be more "effective working from the outside," he said.
"We reiterate the firmest condemnation of the unacceptable violence perpetrated by the Syrian regime against its citizens," Italy's foreign office said in a statement. "Italy will continue to support the Syrian people and to work toward a peaceful solution to the crisis that ensures their fundamental rights and legitimate democratic aspirations."
However, Venezuela's parliament on Tuesday passed "an agreement in solidarity with Syria in light of the imperial threat presented by the United States and its Arab allies," Venezuela's Interior Ministry said Wednesday in a statement. "The document exhorts the international community and peace lovers to undertake a massive campaign to reject intervention in that nation," the statement continued.
Shelling continued Wednesday for a fifth consecutive day on Homs neighborhoods, killing five people and wounding almost 60, activists said. More than 70 rockets and tank shells hit central and eastern neighborhoods in the city; power blackouts were reported in some areas, the activists said.