ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Egypt's army chief has called for talks on national unity to end the country's mounting political crisis after a vital loan from the IMF was delayed and thousands of pro- and anti-government demonstrators took to the streets.
The meeting has been called in response to an increasingly destabilising series of protests that has unfolded since president Mohamed Morsi awarded himself sweeping powers on November 22 to push through a new constitution shaped by his Islamist allies.
Thousands of activists have gathered outside the presidential palace to oppose Mr Morsi, and the constitution his supporters want passed at a referendum on Saturday.
But another large rally of Islamists has been told the constitution is the key to stability.
Police cars surrounded Tahrir Square in central Cairo, the first time they had appeared in the area since shortly after Mr Morsi awarded himself the powers.
The latest bout of unrest has so far claimed seven lives in clashes between the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood and opponents who gathered outside Mr Morsi's presidential palace.
The Republican Guard, which protects the palace, has yet to use force to keep protesters away from the building, now ringed with tanks, barbed wire and concrete barricades.
The army has told all sides to resolve their differences through dialogue, saying it would not allow Egypt to enter a "dark tunnel".
For the period of the referendum, the army has been granted powers by Mr Morsi allowing it to arrest civilians.
But in statement issued after rights groups criticised the army's new police powers, the presidency said anyone arrested by the military during the referendum would face civil rather than military courts. It said the army's new role would only last until results are declared after Saturday's referendum.
The army has portrayed itself as the guarantor of the nation's security, but so far it has shown no appetite for a return to the bruising front-line political role it played after the fall of Mr Mubarak, which severely damaged its standing.
Armed forces chief and defence minister Abdel Fattah al-Sisi called for a meeting of "national unity for the love of Egypt to bring together partners of the country in the presence of the president of the republic", the army spokesman said.
An aide said Mr Morsi had supported the call for talks. The Muslim Brotherhood said it would be there, while the main opposition coalition said it would decide on Wednesday morning whether to attend.
In the midst of the crisis, Egypt has been forced to delay an economic reform program that would unlock a $4.8 billion loan from the IMF.
Finance minister Mumatz al-Said disclosed that the loan, a cornerstone of Egypt's economic recovery hopes, would be delayed until next month.
The government wants more time to explain controversial tax hikes on things like cooking oil and mobile phone calls.
The announcement came after Mr Morsi on Monday backed down on planned tax rises, seen as essential for the loan to go ahead, but which the opposition had fiercely criticised.
"Of course the delay will have some economic impact, but we are discussing necessary measures (to address that) during the coming period," Mr Said said.
Bread, sugar and rice would not be touched, but cigarettes and cooking oil would go up and fines would be imposed for public littering.
In a bid to rebuild consensus, prime minister Hisham Kandil said there would be a public consultation about the program next week.
In Washington, the IMF said Egypt had asked for the loan to be postponed "in light of the unfolding developments on the ground".
The IMF stood ready to consult with Egypt on resuming discussions on the stand-by loan, a spokeswoman said.
The turmoil has also placed a big strain on the economy, sending foreign currency reserves down to about $15 billion, less than half what they were before the revolt two years ago as the government has sought to defend the pound.
"Given the current policy environment, it's hardly a surprise that there's been a delay, but it is imperative that the delay is brief," Simon Williams, a HSBC economist in Dubai, said.
"Egypt urgently needs that IMF accord, both for the funding it brings and the policy anchor it affords."
The IMF deal had been seen as giving a seal of approval to investors and donors about the government's economic plans, vital for drawing more cash into the economy to ease a crushing budget deficit and stave off a balance-of-payments crisis.