Libyan authorities offer bounty for key rebel leader -  Haaretz - Israel News
The Libyan authorities on Wednesday offered a bounty of 500,000 Libyan dinars (400,000 dollars) to anyone who captured rebel leader Mustafa Abdel Jalil and turned him in to government authorities.
In an urgent headline bar, Libyan state television also announced a reward of 200,000 dinars for information leading to the capture of Abdel Jalil, who it described as an "agent spy".
Meanwhile, Libya's rebel leadership has announced that it is taking steps to organize its often chaotic and inexperienced force fighting Muammar Gadhafi's army. The leadership wishes to instill more discipline in its fighters with clearer orders from seasoned officers.
What fighters have lacked in training they made up with in enthusiasm, with many crediting three straight early victories to divine help and revolutionary zeal. But the revolutionary spirit proved no match for the Libyan government's aerial and ground forces, and their advance to Gadhafi's Sirte hometown was stopped in its tracks by planes and tanks.
"The situation has forced us to get organized," Hussein Hamza, a rocket-propelled grenade operator, told Reuters on the front line. "After we lost lives, cars and weapons, even the most enthusiastic youths finally started to listen to orders."
Jubilant youths, sensing victory, on occasion insisted on charging down the strategic coastal road towards Sirte in their 4x4s despite warnings by their defector officers that such a cavalier approach could spell disaster.
"We had enthusiastic youths that wanted to go forward in any way possible, but they just got shelled," said Boujdariya Hamza, one of the rebel fighters.
"The military council in Benghazi sent up some experienced military people to give orders and organise us," Haibah Helal, an oil-engineer-turned rebel, 29, standing at Ras Lanuf oil terminal checkpoint, told Reuters.
Checkpoints now record weapons, vehicles and numbers of fighters more thoroughly than in the early days of the uprising.
The rebels' new disciplinary approach may already be delivering tactical gains, with rebel fighters reaching Bin Jawad on Wednesday, where government forces had dug in tanks.
However, the rag-tag team of fighters still has much room for improvement, clearly seen in the to-and-fro of the battle front in the last few days.
"Today is military tactics. We've learned, didn't you see the youth holding the line? Now they listen, 'go forward, stop, come back,'" fighter Idris Shobaky said.
The screech of Libyan warplanes high overhead no longer triggered the frenzy of automatic rifle fire from the rebels which it had done as inexperienced youths became inured to the sounds of the battlefield.
"There's much more discipline," one witness said of the rebel fighters. "Much less show-off shooting, too."
In one group in Ras Lanuf, some rebels read out a message from unnamed Islamic scholars. The scholars said: "Protect the secrecy of our plans and movements from journalists ... We confirm the importance of orders in the field."
Their message was: "We forbid random movement and firing," adding: "You must obey orders in the field."
Rebels have forbidden journalists from moving along to the front line for "military political reasons", one organizer said.
When rebel spotters saw a plane they shouted instructions through a loudhailer to front-line fighters about readying weapons, and ordered them to "spread out, don't concentrate in one place".
With the euphoria of their rapid advance halted by the government forces' counter-attack and subsequent impasse, rebels were less inclined to pose for pictures and talk to reporters.
"We can't give you information because we'll be targeted by jets," rebel fighter Hatem Firjani said.
Fighter Moh'd Faituri also showed more caution: "If I tell you our forces are 3 km ahead, we'll get bombed 3 km ahead."