More journalists murdered in Mexico
MEXICO CITY - Mexican military police recovered the tortured and dismembered bodies of two local journalists in the port city of Veracruz on Thursday, their remains found stuffed in garbage bags and dumped in a drainage canal in a wealthy beachfront suburb.
Relatives and colleagues had reported photojournalists Gabriel Huge and Guillermo Luna missing on Wednesday afternoon. Their murders make three journalists killed in five days in Veracruz state where the Zetas criminal gang is battling rival gangsters and the Mexican military to retain control of vital narcotics smuggling routes.
Regina Martinez, a correspondent for Proceso, Mexico's leading news magazine, was found slain Saturday in her apartment in the state capital, Xalapa. Police have no suspects. In all, seven Veracruz journalists have been killed in the past two years.
Two other dismembered bodies were found Thursday along with those of Huge and Luna. One was that of Esteban Rodriguez, a welder who until last summer worked as a photographer for AZ, a newspaper with editions in the port and the Veracruz state capital. The other was identified as Irasema Becerra, a sales executive at another newspaper who was romantically involved with Luna.
More than 30 journalists have been killed across Mexico since 2000, and at least 14 have been murdered because of their work since heightened criminal violence exploded in late 2006, according to the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists. Ten other journalists have disappeared since 2005, the committee reports.
Nowhere lately has been as dangerous for the press as the state of Veracruz.
"Veracruz has seen a wave of lethal anti-press violence that is sowing widespread fear and self-censorship," said Carlos Lauria, who directs the committee's activities in the Western Hemisphere. "Mexican authorities must act now to end the deadly cycle of impunity in crimes against the press."
With coverage of the gangland violence often lacking in their local media, many Mexicans have relied on Twitter, Facebook and texting to stay informed. Suspected Zetas last year killed as many as four bloggers in Nuevo Laredo, bordering South Texas, leaving notes accusing them of blogging about the gang's activities.
Largely because of the violence, the U.S.-based advocacy group Freedom House rates Mexico as one of four countries in the Americas where the press is "not free." The organization tallies 76 Mexican journalists killed in the past dozen years.
"As one of the region's largest democracies, Mexico must face this challenge head-on to adequately protect journalists and restore confidence in its rule of law," Freedom House declared Wednesday in announcing its latest assessment of press freedom worldwide.
Poorly paid and usually living in the communities they cover, local Mexican journalists find themselves particularly vulnerable to payoffs or threats by gangsters and others hoping to silence or dictate their coverage. Like local police, both upright and co-opted journalists get caught in a riptide of intimidation when gang warfare comes to town.
Huge, who only recently returned to Veracruz, had worked for Notiver, a newspaper and website that now has had four of its journalists murdered in the past year. He fled following last summer's murder of Miguel Angel Lopez, a columnist who was killed in his home along with his wife and son, who also worked as a journalist for the newspaper.
The attack on the Lopez family followed the gangster beheading last summer of Notiver reporter Yolanda Ordaz.
The port of Veracruz and much of the state have become a battleground since last summer as the Zetas fight rivals of the Gulf Cartel, the gangs former paymasters also based in cities bordering South Texas, and the Sinaloa organization headed by Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman.
The Mexican navy took over the metropolitan police force of Veracruz port following the murder last September of 35 alleged Zetas, whose bodies were dumped on a busy intersection in Boca del Rio, the same suburb where the journalists' bodies turned up Thursday.