At Least 20 Dead, Including American, in Terror Attack on Hotel in Bamako, Mali
"The United States condemns in the strongest terms today’s terrorist attack on the many Malian and international guests and employees of the Radisson Blu Hotel in Bamako," the White House said in a statement. "We can confirm that the attack has ended, and we continue to coordinate with U.S officials on the ground to verify the location of all American citizens in Mali."
The raid on the Radisson Blu, which is popular with foreigners and frequently used by airline crews, came a week after terrorists killed 130 people in Paris.
In response to Friday's terror, France announced the immediate dispatch of 50 elite counter-terrorism police to the country. "Once again, terrorists want to make their barbaric presence felt everywhere, where they can kill, where they can massacre. So we should once again show our solidarity with our ally, Mali,” said French President Francois Hollande.
In the chaos, many of the guests managed to escape, but scores more fell into their clutches, the AP reported.
"The hotel is locked down and there is no possibility to go out or come in," a spokesman for Carlson Rezidor, owners of the hotel, told NBC News at the time.
Monique Kouame Affoue Ekonde, an Ivorian, recounted how she and six other people — including a Turkish woman — were escorted out by security forces as the gunmen rushed "toward the fifth or sixth floor."
Four Belgian citizens were rescued from the hotel, two others were reported dead, officials said.
Air France reported a dozen crew members staying at the hotel had been escorted to safety. Four Germans were also freed and two Canadians who were at the hotel are also safe, according to the AP.
Meanwhile, a Chinese guest with the family name Chen told China's state-run Xinhua news agency that a number of his countrymen had been trapped inside the hotel. At least seven Chinese tourists were among the hostages, the agency said.
The Indian government has said 20 of their citizens were in the hotel when it was attacked. Turkish Airlines said seven of its workers were also staying in the hotel, but five had been freed by security forces. The fate of the remaining two was not known.