Philippine Bill Would Give Muslims Autonomy
Mr. Aquino has significant influence in both houses. He has shown that he can get contentious legislation through Congress, notably the passage of a reproductive-health bill that was ardently opposed by the Roman Catholic Church. But some Philippine legislators have called for changes in the new draft, and rebel leaders have said that they could reject the final measure if the main provisions benefiting the rebels are watered down.
“What is not clear is how any changes made by Congress will be handled by the two sides,” said Steven Rood, the country representative of the Asia Foundation in the Philippines. “The draft, as certified by the president, represents a mutually acceptable law. There will have to be constant and detailed communication about the acceptability, or lack of acceptability, of proposed congressional changes.”
The issues raised by legislators were taken into consideration during the negotiations and the drafting of the measure, Miriam Coronel-Ferrer, the chairwoman of the government’s negotiating team, said in an interview. Some lawmakers have noted that the new region would keep a much larger portion of local taxes than their own districts do, and have said that those funds might be better used for the national benefit rather than going into local coffers.
“The reason for a better wealth-sharing arrangement in the Bangsamoro has to do with the fact that this place has been left behind in terms of economic development,” Ms. Coronel-Ferrer said. “It is part of the correction, a kind of reparation.”
Opponents of the agreement have said that it infringes on Philippine sovereignty, essentially creating a separate Muslim state in the south. A number of organizations have said they will contest the law’s constitutionality in the Supreme Court, and the rebels have said they will reject the measure if the court strikes down the main provisions dealing with autonomy or revenue-sharing.
The most violent groups in the southern Philippines — including the Abu Sayyaf, which has carried out high-profile kidnappings, beheadings and bombings for more than a decade — are not party to the agreement. The Abu Sayyaf was blamed by the military in July for killing 23 people on the southern Philippine island of Sulu, including more than a dozen women and children.