Gaddafi dead: Dictator's son Mutassim pictured moments before execution
After his capture, Colonel Gaddafi’s son Mutassim was photographed swigging water and smoking a cigarette.
Sitting against a wall, Gaddafi’s fifth son wore heavily blood-stained clothes but did not appear to be seriously injured.
Yet pictures taken minutes later showed him sprawled dead on a stretcher, shot in the neck  and chest.
Scroll down for video of Mutassim while he was still alive
The series of mobile phone photographs raise disturbing questions about Mutassim’s death  on Thursday.
Officials initially said the 34-year-old was killed in a gun battle during the final push on Sirte. Conflicting accounts said he was captured alive after he attempted to escape the city with his father.
The grainy images prove he was indeed captured alive, but events leading to his death remained unclear.
Dead: Gaddafi's son Mutassim was also killed in a firefight in Sirte Mutassim was his father’s national security adviser, despite masterminding a failed coup against Gaddafi in his youth. He enjoyed a lavish lifestyle in Tripoli, and told his ex-girlfriend Talitha van Zon that he spent £1.3million a month on his hedonistic pleasures. The Dutch glamour model said he flew to the Caribbean island of St Barts every Christmas in his private Boeing with an entourage of friends and hangers-on. Before the fall of Libya to forces loyal the National Transitional Council, Mutassim lived a life of excess, once telling an girlfriend he spent £1.3million a month He paid for singers such as  Beyoncé and Mariah Carey to sing at his parties, where guests included Jon Bon Jovi, Lindsay Lohan and  rapper Jay-Z. Miss van Zon escaped from Libya on a humanitarian ship to Malta in August after she claimed rebel  soldiers had threatened to burn  her alive. She said she and Mutassim were no longer in a relationship, but claimed he had bragged about victory over toasts of Jack Daniel’s and Coke just days before Tripoli fell to the rebels. Meanwhile, much of Colonel Gaddafi’s multi-billion-pound fortune remains unaccounted for after his death. A significant amount is still in the hands of surviving members of the deposed tyrant’s family, and could be used to fund insurgents in the newly liberated Libya. The country’s vast revenues from oil and natural gas were siphoned off by Gaddafi for years, and hidden in bank accounts in Dubai, south-east Asia and the Persian Gulf. Other sums are likely to be in neighbouring countries such as Algeria which are being used as safe havens for Gaddafi’s wife and grown-up children, and grandchildren. It is thought that members of the Gaddafi family who fled to Algeria were carrying gold bars. As recently as February, Gaddafi deposited £3billion with a London-based private wealth manager through a Swiss intermediary. Since then, Treasury officials have stepped up their efforts to trace and freeze Gaddafi’s assets in the UK, which also included commercial and residential property. In March, a £10million house in Hampstead, north London, was invaded by Libyans after the tyrant’s son, Saif al-Islam, tried to rent it out for £10,000 a week. UK property investments also included Portman House, a retail complex in Oxford Street, London, which houses shops such as Boots and New Look, and a City office  at 14 Cornhill, opposite the Bank  of England. Talitha van Zion, right, fled to Malta in August after fearing that she would be burned alive by NTC fighter