Leaked report reveals Thai military responsible for protesters' deaths
Thai soldiers were responsible for the deaths of three people at a Bangkok Buddhist temple during demonstrations in May, leaked government documents revealed today.
The preliminary investigation, seen by Reuters, concluded that Thai special forces on an elevated railway track fired into the grounds of a temple where several thousand protesters had taken refuge on 19 May. A separate leaked report concluded that the bullet that killed a Reuters cameraman in protests the following month was also probably fired by a Thai soldier.
The findings of the investigation flatly contradict statements by the Thai military, which has denied soldiers were responsible for the temple deaths.
The report from Thailand's department of special investigation (DSI) said there was not enough evidence to determine who was responsible for three further deaths in the temple, but said all six victims were hit by high velocity bullets.
"There is a reasonable amount of facts, evidence and witness accounts to believe that [three] deaths resulted from security officials' actions on duty," Reuters quoted investigators as saying. The report recommended that police investigate the deaths further.
At the time of the protests, Amnesty International condemned the use of live ammunition against demonstrators. Benjamin Zawacki, Amnesty's Thailand researcher, spoke of eyewitness accounts and video recordings showing the military firing live rounds at unarmed people.
Wat Pathum Wanaram, a Buddhist temple, had been designated a safe zone for women, children, the elderly and the infirm. Thousands fled there when the military used force to disperse protesters occupying a nearby commercial district.
According to the DSI's investigation, witnesses reported scenes of chaos outside the temple as gunshots rang out and civilians fled a shopping area. One witness said he saw soldiers firing from the raised train track into a medical tent inside the compound, where two nurses treating wounded civilians were killed. In total, 91 people were killed and at least 1,800 were wounded during the unrest in April and May. More than 30 buildings were set on fire in the worst political violence in modern Thai history. The Thai prime minister, Abhisit Vejjajiva, blamed armed elements among the protesters for the temple deaths.
Another DSI report, into the death of Reuters cameraman Hiro Muramoto, quoted a witness as saying that Muramoto collapsed as gunfire flashed from the direction of soldiers. Muramoto, a 43-year-old Japanese citizen based in Tokyo, was killed by a high velocity bullet wound to the chest while covering protests in Bangkok's old quarter.
"There is a reasonable amount of facts and evidence to believe that the death of Hiro was due to an act of the security forces who said they were acting according to official duty," the DSI report said, recommending police investigate the case further. Thailand's government has not yet publicly released the report into his death despite intense diplomatic pressure from Japan.
The leaks came amid reports that the centre for the resolution of emergency situations (CRES), an ad hoc civilian-military body, will recommend a lifting of the state of emergency that came into force in April, as it believes that the political situation has returned to normal.
The US group Human Rights Watch said last month that the Thai authorities were using emergency powers to violate fundamental rights and obstruct efforts to bring abusers to justice after the clashes. It said under the state of emergency, the authorities had detained suspects without charge for extended periods, using unofficial detention facilities with inadequate safeguards against possible abuse, and had imposed widespread censorship. In addition, officials in effect have immunity from prosecution for most acts committed under the decree.
The protests began in March when the United Front for Democracy against Dictatorship, known as the redshirts, took to the streets calling for the dissolution of parliament and new elections. Many of them back the former Thai prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra, who was deposed in a 2006 coup and is currently in voluntary exile. Shinawatra has called for an international investigation into the violence, including the deaths at the temple.