ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The body of a man has been found in the flood-affected town of Sale in Victoria's south-east.
The man's body was retrieved from a four-wheel drive submerged in floodwater on Spencer Road, about 4:00pm AEST.
Police have been searching for a missing farmer in the same area, but the body has not been identified.
It is believed the 60-year-old missing farmer went to move cattle away from floodwaters on his property at Desailly Flats, on the Thomson River, on Friday afternoon.
The man did not return home and police have been combing the area.
Flooding remains a problem around Gippsland, but water levels are gradually falling.
The Thomson River peaked at Sale on Saturday, and no rain is forecast in the area until Wednesday.
The South Gippsland Highway will remain closed between Sale and Longford over the next few days.
Motorists planning to use the highway at Sale will need to detour via Rosedale and are urged to avoid driving through floodwaters.
Scott Hilditch from the State Emergency Service says while the floodwaters are moving, it will take time.
"We're slowly starting to see the water move through the river system and into the lakes, a lot of low-lying areas are still going to be affected for a number of days, and the concern that we now have is pretty much towards the lake system, where we're currently monitoring," he said.
State Emergency Service spokesman Lachlan Quick says homes affected by flooding last month have been hit again.
"Sale is going to remain our main area of focus throughout today," he said.
"There's quite a significant amount of rural inundation.
"There's lots of roads closed and a significant amount of properties isolated so we have got to keep a bit of a close eye on those."
Lakes Entrance residents in Victoria's south-east were warned to expect minor flooding on Saturday night due to high tides.
Floodwaters were expected to rise about 8.30pm AEST, and the Princess Highway diverted to Bruthen Road from 6:30pm.
SES volunteers have begun sandbagging essential services, and are reminding residents to be aware of the dangers of floodwaters.
Mr Hilditch says they are expecting the floods to reoccur over the next few days.
"Because of this high tide we are expecting it to be a little higher. We're still not expecting any inundation of homes but we are expecting the flood waters to be a little higher from tonight, tomorrow night and Monday night," he said.
Meanwhile, a 21-year-old man was rescued from floodwaters in Wy Yung by the police air wing on Friday afternoon after riding his bike to have a look at the flooding.
He had made his way onto a bridge, which was dry, when he realised that both sides of the bridge had become inundated with water.
He was spotted by police who called in a helicopter.
Bureau of Meteorology senior forecaster Dean Stewart said the Gippsland region would remain mostly dry over the weekend and through to Tuesday, with the possibility of a couple of showers, giving floodwaters a chance to recede.
"All the river systems basically have receded," said Mr Stewart.
"A lot of water has flown into the Gippsland Lakes so they're probably still getting above-average water levels until it has a chance to go out into the ocean."