Pune bakery fire: Six workers killed in Kondhwa's 'Bakes and Cakes'; fire contained
Six migrant workers died of suffocation in a fire that broke out in a Pune bakery early morning on Friday, reports said.
The incident took place in a Bakes and Cakes outlet near Talab company in Kondhwa Khurd locality of the city. Though the reason for the fire is not known, a police contorl official told IANS that the fire is believed to be caused by a short-circuit.
The victims, all hailing from Uttar Pradesh, were caught unawares as the blaze quickly engulfed the mezzanine floor on which they slept inside the bakery. Rescue officials said the owner had locked the bakery shutter from outside, trapping the workers inside and seriously hampering the relief operation.
"We received a call at around 4.45 am on Friday and immediately fire tenders were rushed to the spot. As we reached the spot, we saw smoke emanating from the shutter of the shop, which was locked from outside," a fire brigade official told PTI.
While efforts were on to break the shutter, the bakery shop owner came to the spot and opened it.
"As soon as the shutter was opened, we saw a huge fire inside and got information that there are bakery workers who were trapped at a loft inside the shop," the fire officer said.
The fire brigade personnel wore breathing apparatus sets and climbed a staircase inside to reach the victims. "There were six workers, who were found in an unconscious state. They were rushed to the Sassoon General hospital, where they were declared dead," said the officer.
The deceased have been identified as: Ishad Ansari (26), Juned Ansari (25), Shanu Ansari (20), Zakir Ansari (24), Faeem Ansari (21) and Zishan Ansari (21).
"Since the main shutter was locked from outside, all the six got trapped inside and died of suffocation," the fire official informed.
The bakery is owned by three partners. "We have registered a case and investigation is on," an officer at Kondhwa police station said.
A video shared by YouTube shows the fire spreading to nearby shops. Firstpost, however, couldn't independently verify the authenticity of the video.