Italy earthquake: 50 aftershocks hit stricken region
The aftershocks rattled the nerves of the 14,000 people who have been left homeless by the earthquake which hit Emilia-Romagna on Tuesday and a previous one which hit the region on May 20.
Rescuers were searching for one missing person – the employee of an electronics warehouse in the town of Medolla, one of the towns at the epicentre of the quake.
Experts said the aftershocks could continue for days or even weeks, compounding the fear and uncertainty of the tens of thousands of people affected by the natural disaster in a triangle between the cities of Bologna, Ferrara and Modena.
"The aftershocks could go on for several weeks, or even months," Andrea Morelli, the director of the National Institute of Geophysics and Vulcanology, told Corriere della Sera newspaper.
The president of the institute, Stefano Gresta, said: "One cannot exclude the possibility that there could be more powerful earthquakes." Tuesday's earthquake hit towns and villages which were already battered from the quake of May 20.
It caused further damage to some of the region's exquisite Renaissance churches, cathedrals and bell towers.
In Mirandola, the roof of the cathedral collapsed, covering the floor in broken tiles and dust.
Churches in the towns of Finale Emilia, San Giovanni del Dosso and San Felice sul Panaro were also badly damaged, their facades shattered.
In Mantua, the Ducal Palace, which is famous for a stunning collection of frescoes, was also damaged.
In the town of Cavezzo, rescuers managed to pull a 65-year-old woman out of the rubble of her home on Tuesday evening, after she had been trapped for 12 hours.
The woman survived the collapse of the five-storey building by sheltering under a fallen cupboard.
Surveying collapsed buildings and a piazza littered with bricks and other debris, a local man said simply "Povera Italia" – Poor Italy.
Ten of the victims of Tuesday's quake were factory workers and union leaders said they should not have been allowed to return to workplaces that were not quake-proof.
Many residents said that while they could understand why centuries-old buildings collapsed, modern buildings should have been able to withstand the quake, amid suspicions that some were shoddily built with cheap materials.
The government called for an investigation into why the damage to modern structures was so extensive.
"It is natural to have earthquakes, (but) it is not natural for buildings to fall down like this. It doesn't happen in other countries," said Elsa Fornero, the welfare minister.