Five high-schoolers dead after I-89 crash
WILLISTON - Four of the five teenagers who were killed in a crash on Interstate 89 late Sunday night have been identified as juniors at Harwood Union Middle/High School, according to a news release from the school's co-principal, Amy Rex.
The five died when the 2004 Volkswagen Jetta they were riding in was struck by a 2012 Toyota Tundra headed the wrong way in the southbound lanes of I-89.
In addition, a man stole the Williston police cruiser that was responding to the scene as the police officer attempted to deal with the first fiery crash. The man in the cruiser crashed into seven more cars before he was ejected from the car and the cruiser burst into flames, Vermont State Police Capt. Mike Henry said.
Henry said police are expecting to bring charges against Steven D. Bourgoin, 36, of Williston, who police say took the police cruiser. Police are working to determine charges, and have not yet scheduled a court appearance. An attempt to reach Chittenden County State's Attorney T.J. Donovan was not immediately successful Sunday.
The five teenagers were first identified by Rex and later by state police as Eli Brookens, 16, of Waterbury; Janie Cozzi, 15, of Fayston; Liam Hale, 16, of Fayston; Mary Harris, 16, of Moretown; and Cyrus Zschau, 16, of Moretown. Rex said that all the teenagers were juniors in high school, and that four of the five attended Harwood Union High School.
"This is an unprecedented tragedy; we have suffered a tremendous loss," Rex said in a statement. "These students were vibrant members of our school community, actively involved and all with a promise for a bright future."
Sarah Moore, spokeswoman for Kimball Union Academy in Meriden, New Hampshire, confirmed Sunday evening that Cozzi was a student at the school. Moore said the school will have support services in place to help the school community.
"We are heartbroken," Moore wrote in an email. "The accident that took place is unimaginable for Janie's family, home community, friends and Kimball Union family.  ... Our hearts are with everyone affected by this tragedy."
A vigil will be held for the students at Harwood Union High School on Monday night. Gov. Peter Shumlin said in a statement he planned to attend the vigil.
"I have reached out to the families of the young Vermonters who we lost to offer love and support from me and all Vermonters during this unspeakably sad time," Shumlin wrote. "The loss of five teens in such a senseless tragedy is unimaginable and heartbreaking. Vermont is a community, and today we join the Harwood Union family, and share the sadness and loss of the family and friends of those teens."
Bourgoin was in critical condition as of 10:30 a.m. Sunday, a hospital spokesperson said. Henry said police have not yet been able to draw a nexus between the original wrong-way driver and the man in the cruiser. Police have not said whether they are looking for another suspect, but have deemed the identity of the initial wrong-way driver "under investigation."
A number of Chittenden County emergency agencies responded to the scene around midnight on Sunday, and the interstate between exits 13 and 11 was shut down for hours. The road was open by about 9:30 a.m. Sunday.
At about 11:43 p.m. Saturday, police dispatch began receiving 911 calls about a pick-up truck headed north in the southbound lane of I-89, according to a state police news release. About 10 minute later, police received reports of a crash at mile marker 80.8 near French Hill in Williston.
The Toyota Tacoma pick-up headed north in the southbound lane between exits 11 and 12 collided with the Volkswagen, police said.
A Williston police officer, first on the crash scene, found the Jetta in flames in the median and ran toward the fire with a fire extinguisher. Officer Eric Shepard pulled a female victim from the burning car, police said. Meanwhile, a man police later identified as Bourgoin took the Williston police cruiser and headed south at a high rate of speed.
Richmond police attempted to intercept him, but the man made a U-turn and once again headed north in the southbound lanes towards the original crash scene at a high rate of speed. He hit seven other vehicles as he headed north, Henry said. The man was ejected from the cruiser, and the cruiser went up in flames, he said.
Shane Moody said he and his girlfriend Amanda Dinsmore, both of Barre, were driving south on I-89 near the rest stop in Williston when he noticed blue lights from police vehicles behind him and a number of cars pulled over on the side of the highway in front of him.
Moody pulled his car to the side just as he heard a loud bang, he said. After exiting his car, Moody and Dinsmore said they noticed two cars on fire - one in the center of the road and one down an embankment. Debris covered the roadway.
Police said Bourgoin was taken to the University of Vermont Medical Center with “non-incapacitating injuries”  and is in custody.
Five other people sustained non-life threatening injuries in the other crashes and were taken to the UVM Medical Center, Williston Fire Department said in a news release Sunday.
Williston Fire Department said that many witnesses to the crash helped render aid to crash victims prior to the arrival of emergency services. Bystanders initially reported numerous people injured or trapped in their cars, the department stated in a news release.
"There are no words that can truly describe the horrific events as they occurred last night," the fire department wrote. "The Williston Fire Department would like to extend our deepest condolences to the family and friends of those lost in this tragic event. Please keep all those involved in your thoughts and prayers."
Police said the five teenagers were declared dead at the scene.
The identities of the vehicles and occupants from the second crash will also be released at a later date, police said. No emergency responders were injured as a result of the incident, Henry said.
The Harwood Crisis Team convened and opened the school Sunday for all students, faculty and staff, families or community members. The school will be open again from 10 a.m. until 3 p.m. Monday, a school holiday, Rex said. The school's faculty, staff and coaches plan to meet Monday afternoon to plan the opening of the school and how to best support our students in the upcoming days.
The school would have been closed Monday for Indigenous People's Day, previously known as Columbus Day, a state holiday.
"Administration, school counselors and support staff will be on-site to provide space and support for our community," Rex said in an email. "We are in contact with Washington County Mental Health and the Northeastern Family Institute, and they too will be available to provide us with additional support."
All Harwood Union sports games planned for Monday have also been canceled in light of the tragedy. This includes boys' junior varsity and varsity soccer, girls' soccer, and varsity and junior varsity field hockey.
"We have a lot of work ahead of us," he said late Sunday morning.
Police said the crashes are still under investigation and asks anyone with any information to call the Williston State Police at 878-7111.
This story was first published Sunday, Oct. 9, 2016, and has been updated. Contact Elizabeth Murray at 651-4835 or emurray@freepressmedia.com. Follow her on Twitter at @LizMurraySMC.
Do you have a breaking news tip? Call us at 802-660-6500 or send us a post on Facebook or Twitter using #BFPTips.