Hurricane Joaquin: cargo ship with 33 crew on board missing near the eye of the storm
The US Coast Guard said it was searching for a cargo ship with 33 people on board on Friday night after it went missing during Hurricane Joaquin.
The Coast Guard said the 735-foot ship named El Faro had taken on water and was listing at 15 degrees near Crooked Island, in the Bahamas.
The US Coast Guard said in a statement: "The crew reported the ship had previously taken on water, but that all flooding had been contained."
The ship had been travelling from Florida to Puerto Rico when it got caught in the hurricane.
"This vessel is disabled basically right near the eye of Hurricane Joaquin," said Capt Mark Fedor. "We're going to go and try and save lives. We're going to push it to the operational limits as far as we can."
Tim Nolan, president of the company that owns the El Faro, said the ship's "officers and crew were monitoring what was then Tropical Storm Joaquin" when they sailed from Florida.
"There are a number of possible reasons for the loss of communications among them the increasing severity of Hurricane Joaquin," Nolan said, adding that his company's "primary concern is for the safety and well-being" of those aboard the ship.
Capt Fedor said there were 20- to 30-foot waves in the area, and that heavy winds could have destroyed the ship's communications equipment. The ship went missing when Joaquin was a Category 4 storm. The hurricane has since lost strength and become a Category 3 storm.
Joaquin, the third hurricane of the 2015 Atlantic season, was expected to move away from the Bahamas on Friday night. In the early evening local time it was around 825 miles southwest of Bermuda with top sustained winds of 125 miles per hour, the National Hurricane Center said.
There are fears that Britain could receive the tail-end of the hurricane, bringing wet and windy weather next week.
Parts of the Bahamas were still being battered on Friday night, cutting communication to several islands, most of them lightly populated. There had been no reports of fatalities or injuries, said Capt Stephen Russell, the director of the Bahamas National Emergency Management Agency.
Officials were investigating reports of shelters being damaged and flooded, as well as two boats with a total of five people that remained missing.
About 85 per cent of homes in one settlement of a couple dozen houses on Crooked Island were destroyed, said Marvin Hanna, an Acklins representative. He said he has had no communication with Acklins since late Thursday morning.
"At that time, vehicles were floating around and the water level was up to the windows of some homes," he said.
Residents reached by relatives said they were "trapped in their homes, and reported feeling as if their structures were caving in," Russell said. "It's too dangerous to go outside because the flood waters are so high, so we ask that persons stay inside and try to go into the most secure place of their home."
Power also was knocked out to several islands, and Leslie Miller, executive chairman of the Bahamas Electricity Corporation, said the company "is in no position to do much" to restore electricity. "All the airports are flooded," he said.
Schools, businesses and government offices were closed as the slow-moving storm roared through the island chain.
Streets were largely deserted as people remained hunkered down on the island of Eleuthera, which was bracing for heavy winds later on Friday. Some people were still making last-minute preparations, including Alexander Johnson, 61, who was moving his fishing boat with his brother, Solomon.
"It looks like it's going to make a turn to the north, so we won't get it in full," Johnson said. "That's good for us, because we've seen some rough ones come through here."