Fox Glacier crash: Police postpone recovery of four remaining bodies
Bad weather has halted a recovery operation for the bodies of four tourists remaining on Fox Glacier after a helicopter crash.
All seven people on board were killed when the helicopter crashed on the West Coast glacier just before 11am on Saturday. 
A spokesman for the company involved gave a heartfelt message to the victims as police anticipated bad weather would prevent recovery crews from revisiting the treacherous crash site until at least Wednesday.
Alpine Adventures organisational systems manager Barry Whiteland said "I do feel for the families involved. For the community. For everybody, because it's not an easy time for any of us at this stage".
Whiteland read a statement from the company outside the rescue co-ordination centre in Fox Glacier on Sunday afternoon saying "Fox Heli Services' thoughts are now with the family and passengers and of the pilot, of course".
Four of the victims were tourists from the United Kingdom, two were visiting from Australia, and the pilot, Mitchell Gameren, was from Queenstown. 
Three bodies have been recovered after a brief break in the weather, but four remain at the scene.
"The pilot was a very valued team member of course with our company," Whiteland said.
"As far as the company is concerned, we are very, very moved by it all.
"We had a meeting with the pilots this morning. A very sombre meeting."
The company planned to return to operations but at this stage it was not clear when that would happen.
Police had postponed the recovery of the bodies for the remaining four victims as weather forecasters expect rain in the area for the rest of the week.
West Coast Inspector John Canning said weather conditions were forecast to deteriorate during Monday and Tuesday, meaning recovery crews would likely be prevented from revisiting the site until at least Wednesday.
"The environment up there is very challenging. It is very dangerous.
"The site is near the top of the glacier, it's all ice, it's not level and there are blocks of ice as big as buildings with crevasses between them."
MetService meteorologist Claire Flynn said a severe weather warning was in place for Fox Glacier and surrounding areas. Heavy falls were expected through Monday and into Tuesday morning.
"Wednesday is still looking fairly miserable, it won't be heavy rain like today and tomorrow. Thursday it's still raining and on Friday it's raining - it's not looking good," she said.
Canning said alpine cliff rescue teams from Mt Cook and Franz Josef were at Fox Glacier, along with disaster victim identification teams.
"It's going to be done. It's going to be done slowly, methodically and safely and that may take a wee bit of time," Canning said.
Transport Accident Investigation Commission (TAIC) general manager Peter Northcote said the advantage of the bad weather was investigators would have time to plan the recovery properly.
The bodies of three people recovered on Sunday were expected to be taken to the Fox Glacier settlement before being transferred to Christchurch or Auckland. 
The seven people killed in Saturday's crash were: Mitchell Paul Gameren of Queenstown, 28, Andrew Virco of Cambridge in England, 50, Katharine Walker of Cambridge in England, 51, Nigel Edwin Charlton of Hampshire, 66, Cynthia Charlton of Hampshire, 70, Sovannmony Leang of New South Wales, 27, and Josephine Gibson of New South Wales, 29.
Katharine Walker was the head of Radiotherapy at Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge.
According to the hospital's website, Walker had worked there for 23 years.
Recovery teams were winched the site of Fox Glacier helicopter crash earlier on Sunday.
READ MORE: * Tributes flow for helicopter pilot Mitch Gameren * Air accidents near NZ glaciers* Community left 'hurting' * Tourist group in dark over fatal crash* Australian crash victim 'a big-brother figure' * Family, friends and colleagues pay tribute to British tourists 
Northcote said a TAIC crash investigator had flown over the crash site, but was unable to land.
They were trying to find the best process to approach and recover the wreckage, he said.
"We know the scene is a particularly difficult one. It is heavily crevassed. Some of the wreckage is in crevasses.
"There is snow and there is ice and so people on scene need to be appropriately guided and in fact tied, in some places, to alpine cliff rescue team members."
A commercial drone operator had been commissioned by police and the TAIC to gain close and detailed photos which were not possible from a helicopter because of the difficult nature of the environment.
"That work will be weather dependent . . . if the weather is kind to us that could start [Monday].
"It's very much a case of working with the weather and the resources available to approach the task carefully and methodically," Northcote said.
Investigators expected to begin interviews with the operator to find out more details of their operations, the training and experience of the pilot and crew, and the design, manufacturing, maintenance and any issues with the helicopter.
"The commission's job is to try and work out the circumstances and the causes of this accident and to see if anything can be learnt from it that might help prevent a similar accident in the future," Northcote said.
TAIC would work with French and United State agencies, and the manufacturers of the helicopter and its engine.
"If anything comes up in the investigation that suggest that there needs to be some urgent action on the part of the regulator CAA [Civil Aviation Authority], or any other party, then the commission has the ability to make those recommendations," Northcote said.
Glacier Country Tourism chairman Rob Jewell confirmed the no fly zone around the crash site had been extended and no helicopter companies ran tours on Sunday, giving the recovery helicopters priority.
Visitors who wanted to see the glacier had to take the walking track.
"We're hurting. It's a real tragedy today. We'll just do what we can to make this as easy as we can for everybody, and obviously our thoughts are with those who lost their lives today and their families and friends," Jewell said.
"Here on the West Coast, it's a small village, and everyone knows everybody, so it's a matter of looking after each other."
Alpine Adventures ground crew manager Mike Nolan described the crash as an "absolute tragedy".
"We just can't believe what's going on. We're just feeling for the families at the moment," he said.
"We don't know a lot about the recovery process just that the weather is hampering search and rescue teams. Mitch was one of our experienced pilots. We're devastated for him and his family. "
Gameren had worked at the company for about six years, mostly during summer as he worked overseas as well, Nolan said. 
"He was a very valued member of our team. We just absolutely can't believe what's happened.".
The company would conduct its own investigation as well as supporting police, CAA and TAIC.
Nolan said the company took its safety very seriously and Saturday's crash was the first time a life had been lost in the more than 20 years he had worked with the company. 
* Police have amended the name of one of the victims.  Sovannmony Leang was incorrectly listed as Leang Sovannmony. In addition, he and Josephine Gibson were residents of New South Wales, Australia, not South Australia. Police regret any distress or confusion the mistake caused.