MFB warns residents to close doors and windows as thick smoke from industrial fire blankets Broadmeadows
Despite drops of up to 10,000 litres of water a minute and retardant bombed onto the fire, it was still out of control on Monday evening, but contained within the yard. Water bombing helicopters that were being used to contain the flames had to be stood down once thunderstorms brought a change in wind direction just after 4pm. A Metropolitan Fire Brigade spokesman said while the rain had been welcome, swirling winds and stormy conditions had added to the challenge. With the huge, plume of toxic black fumes emanating from the fire visible from as far away as the Mornington Peninsula, the MFB warned residents near to the fire to turn off air conditioners and keep doors and windows closed.
A water-bombing helicopter drops its load on the massive Broadmeadows tyre fire. "We understand that people will be concerned about the smoke that they see ... we really just want people to stay indoors and close their windows," incident controller David Yousef said. "All smoke is toxic but at the moment, because of the wind conditions, fortunately it is not coming down to ground level so we don't have any significant concerns for the community. The MFB says the Broadmeadows fire is likely to burn for several hours. "We would ask people to continue to monitor the media and maintain a watch on what's going on."
Deputy incident controller Andrew Zammit told a community meeting in Broadmeadows on Monday afternoon that toxins in the air were within "tolerance" levels. He said given the experience of the Hazelwood mine fire of 2014, they were "mindful" of monitoring the air particles every 15 minutes with assistance from the Environment Protection Authority. Mr Zammit said they were also working with the agency to put measures in place to prevent fire run-off from infiltrating nearby waterways. The fire could continue burning for the next 24 to 36 hours. "There is a lot of rubber there and a lot of fuel there to burn so it is proving quite challenging for firefighters," incident controller David Youssef said.
"Tyres fire are very difficult to extinguish and they can often burn for more than a day. That is why we are pulling out all the stops to try and bring this fire under control." The firefighters had been supported by two water-bombing helicopters, creating a further spectacle for a number of bystanders. "It's not often you see something like that," Coburg's Ben Patterson said. The cause of the fire has not yet been determined. Tyre Crumb owners were not available for comment.
Southern Cross Recycling chief executive Enzo Bruscella said his staff noticed smoke coming from the stack of tyres shortly before 9am and notified authorities. "Our major concern is for the health and well-being of our staff, so our staff have been evacuated and accounted for," he said. He said business for the day has been shifted to another site to minimise loss and to cater for emergency services that have set-up in his company's yard. "We have great confidence in emergency services," he said.
His company has CCTV cameras that face the tyre pile and is likely to be reviewed by authorities when they begin investigations into the cause. Kerry Talbot works at a fruit supply shop across the road from the fire. She said she could see flames and smoke from where she was standing, but smoke was travelling straight up in the air, rather than blanketing the ground. "There's no smell ... It's so dead out there, there's no wind," she said. "We're pretty close and we haven't been told to move or anything."
The Environment Protection Authority also updated its tyre storage requirements in April last year so that sites that housed more than 5000 tyres had to get a special license or face fines of up to $350,000.