Southern storms kill 2, unleash damaging tornadoes
Powerful storms pounded cities and towns across the South on Christmas Day, leaving at least two people dead and others injured.
Rick Cauley said he never heard the train noise witnesses to tornadoes often talk about. It was hard for him to hear at all.
Cauley, an assistant football coach and history teacher at Murphy High School, took his wife, two young children and in-laws to the school to ride out the storm in the safety of the sturdy field house.
The family huddled in the hallway of the field house as destruction swooped down on the campus.
Cauley said there was also significant damage to the roof of the school auditorium and the band room.
"You could see it forming ... and then it came behind the church and then (there was) all green fluorescent lighting and it was like popping transformers left and right," another witness told WALA. "You heard crashing and then the power went out."
Several buildings, including a church and a high school, were damaged by the tornado, and there were several car wrecks, Steve Huffman said.
"One female was transported to the hospital with pregnancy issues, but she was not injured," he said.
"We are still getting damage reports," Yasamie August said. "We know that Mobile County has significant damage from trees down and power lines down. Most of that is concentrated around Government Street. Choctaw and Clarke counties are also reporting damage.
"The city of Prichard had one person injured due to the home they were in," she said.
Nearly 21,500 customers in Mobile were without power, Alabama Power said on its Twitter feed. Statewide, there were 26,600 homes and business in the dark. More than 84,000 customers in Arkansas and about 4,000 in Louisiana were without power late Tuesday, officials said.
A 25-year-old man in Texas was killed after a tree fell on his pickup as he was driving on the northwest side of Houston, Harris County Sheriff's Deputy Thomas Gilliland said. Officials suspected high winds knocked the tree down.
Amanda Goodman was ejected from the SUV she was riding in after the driver lost control and struck an oncoming big rig, the Oklahoma Highway Patrol said. Goodman died at the scene while the driver and a 4-year-old passenger were taken to a hospital. They were listed in stable condition. The truck driver was not injured.
The Storm Prediction Center in Norman, Oklahoma, said conditions remained favorable for a few powerful or long-lasting tornadoes in southern and eastern Alabama, the Florida Panhandle and southwest Georgia. It is also forecast thunderstorm wind damage for parts of the Southeast into the early morning hours Wednesday.