Spain earthquake: Geologists say there was no need for anyone to have died
Questions over the Spanish earthquake death toll mounted last night as experts claimed that it should have caused no loss of life.
Seismologists said the quake, registering 5.2 on the Richter scale, which struck the town of Lorca, in the Murcia region, was 1,000 times smaller than the record 9.0 earthquake which sparked the tsunami in Japan in March.
Luis Suarez, President of Spain’s Association of Geologists, blamed faults caused by previous earthquakes for weakening buildings.
Distraught: A local policewoman tries to console the daughter of a victim in Lorca after an earthquake measuring 5.3 hit the town Reduced to rubble: A man tries to salvage his belongings from a destroyed house in Lorca this morning Mr Suarez said: ‘An earthquake of 5.2 on the Richter scale does not have sufficient intensity to collapse buildings so the damage is the result of previous damage.’ A 4.4 earthquake struck the  area, which is popular with British holidaymakers, around 5pm  local time on Wednesday, followed two hours later by the second quake which has claimed nine lives so far. Lorca’s mayor Francisco Jodar has calculated 80 per cent of buildings in the town of 90,000 inhabitants have suffered structural damage. All roads lead OUT of Rome: Streets of Italian capital empty... Libyan government is forcibly expelling migrants in a bid to... Many homes in the worst-affected areas were built in the 1960s,  before laws were passed to ensure buildings in areas with seismic activity were more earthquake resistant. The death toll rose from eight to nine yesterday when a 41-year-old woman died from head injuries. The other victims include two pregnant women and a 14-year-old boy. More than 165 were injured, including a three-year-old who remains in a ‘serious condition’ in intensive care. About 20,000 slept outdoors in cars and parks in the aftermath of the earthquakes. Residents stay in the Huerto de la Rueda area of Lorca where many spent the night
Experts are checking buildings one by one - and putting green stickers on those people can go back to and red stickers on those they say must stay empty for the time being.
Expat former PA Linda Cook, 63, who lives in a two story-villa five miles from Lorca said: “It was terrifying, absolutely awful.
'The whole house shook when the second earthquake struck, the ground shook. I was holding onto the table but that was shaking just as much as I was.
'My first reaction was ‘Oh my God! Earthquake!’ There was no mistaking it.'
David Bartram, 59, a retired accountant from Oxford, who lives six miles from the centre of Lorca added: 'When the first one struck I thought ‘Oh crikey!’
'Then the second one really put the frighteners in me.
'Plates fell down, tiles in the kitchen came off the wall. The whole house shook violently.
'It was really very frightening. I took my dogs and got out of the house.
'We had a minor quake about seven years ago and we often get little tremors, but I’ve never known anything like this.'
The town in Murcia is clouded in dust from the two quakes as residents survey the damage Lorca has a mix of buildings that are vulnerable to earthquakes and quake-resistent, according to the USGS. The quakes occurred in a seismically active area near a large fault beneath the Mediterranean where the European and African continents brush past each other, USGS seismologist Julie Dutton said. The USGS said it has recorded hundreds of small quakes in the area since 1990. Lorca dates back to the Bronze Age and probably gained its name from the Romans. The old part of the town is made up of a network of narrow alleyways. The quakes were reportedly felt across Murcia, with tremors registered in Cartagena, Aguilas and as far away as Albacete. In 2005, more than 900 homes in Lorca were wrecked by an earthquake measuring 4.7 on the Richter scale.
The ancient town of Lorca is sited in a seismically active area where hundreds of small quakes have been recorded since 1990 Yesterday's earthquakes came as thousands fled Rome in fear that a 96-year-old prediction of a large earthquake would prove true. The panic started after seismologist Raffaele Bendandi predicted in 1915 that a huge earthquake would strike Rome on May 11, 2011. Thanks to the internet, word quickly spread. Officials at the National Vulcanolgy and Seismology Institute, which is based in Rome, held an open day to try and convince people that earthquakes could not be predicted and the council was flooded with worried calls. Mayor Gianni Alemanno and Enzo Boschi, president of the institute, spent the day trying to reassure locals there really was nothing to panic about. Mr Boschi said: ‘Rome is not at risk of any earthquake.'