Above All Else, Eastern Quake Rattles Nerves
This quake was notable for its incongruity: it was one of the most powerful to hit the East Coast in decades, and yet it caused little damage. Reports of tremors came from as far north as Sudbury, , where government offices were closed, and as far south as .
Thousands of people in Midtown were evacuated from their offices and found themselves suddenly sprung on a sunny summer afternoon. Farther downtown, police officers ordered the evacuation of , sending Mayor and his staff scurrying out of the building.
But for all the disruptions and the fleeing of buildings, the quake was, for most people, a curious interruption before life quickly returned to normal. For some it provoked little more than amusement. “Felt a litle wobble here is Astoria, but none of my Scotch fell off the shelf,” a man who identified himself as William Schroeder posted on .
Others were more shaken. “I ran outdoors and found my neighbor calling a friend in who also felt the profound quake,” Bill Parks of Hummelstown, Pa., said in an e-mail. “This quake was like none I ever experienced in the East in my life and I am 76 years old.”
In Washington, the quake led to quick evacuations of the White House, the Capitol and monuments across the Mall. Some airplanes were left in a temporary hold pattern, and some were diverted to other airports. stopped its trains. The asked the public to refrain from talking on cellphones and to use e-mail and text messages instead to relieve the . The epicenter in Mineral is about 84 miles southwest of Washington, and a few miles from a nuclear power plant. Dominion Virginia Power, which owns the plant, said that its units tripped off line automatically as planned and that no damage to the plant had been reported.
Perhaps the most trauma occurred in Mineral itself. The quake stopped everything for hours. Schools closed. Coffee shops shut down. At the Food Lion, on the outskirts, managers shooed reporters away but not before one employee said: “The whole floor was going up and down. It was crazy in there.”
Ben Pirolli, 68, a co-owner of Main Street Plumbing and Electrical, said he was working in the bathroom when the quake hit.
“I was mopping the floor and the next thing you know, everything is falling in on me,” Mr. Pirolli said. “I thought the world was coming to an end.”
Geologists said that the region experiences frequent earthquakes but that they were usually so small that they were hardly noticed. This one was 3.7 miles deep, bigger than is typical, and produced a rumbling that grabbed the attention of millions of people hundreds of miles from the epicenter.
W. Craig Fugate, the FEMA administrator, said in an interview that the agency had spoken with emergency coordinators in states across the Atlantic Seaboard, and that so far there were no reports of injuries or major damage and no requests for federal help.
The lack of major damage was attributable to the geology of the East Coast, Mr. Fugate said. The hard rock transmits the energy of the earthquake longer distances, he said, even if the quake does not cause devastation.
“What we are getting is case by case — a building here, a building there,” he said. “Most of the major things like roads and bridges seem to be intact and O.K.”
One place that reported damage was the landmark National Cathedral in Washington. Several pinnacles in one of the towers cracked or broke off, a security official at the cathedral said. The cathedral’s central tower also appeared to be damaged, and the building has been closed to the public until further notice.
The also indefinitely closed the Washington Monument after engineers found cracks near the top of it, The Associated Press reported.
At the castle, plaster in offices cracked and fell.
But over all, the biggest problem in Washington may have been the giant traffic jams that formed as tens of thousands of workers left the city after the . Tourists, with nowhere else to go, packed the streets. Debris had fallen from a few buildings, city officials said.
Rumbles were reported to from places as far-flung as , and , where was on vacation and unaffected. Vice President was in , coincidentally checking out damage from that nation’s 9.0-magnitude earthquake in March.
Tuesday’s quake was also felt through a large part of eastern , including , and . The reported that it extended as far north as the mining city of Sudbury.
Arthur Lerner-Lam, head of the Lamont-Doherty Division of Seismology at , said the earthquake occurred in a part of central Virginia that is known as an area of geologically old faults, created several hundred million years ago during the formation of the Appalachian .
That area has frequent small earthquakes; the largest previously recorded there was a magnitude 4.8 in 1875. The last big quake in the East, with a magnitude of 5.8, was in 1944 in Massena, N.Y.
“We do expect earthquakes to occur here,” Dr. Lerner-Lam said. “Not as frequently as in California, but this is not a surprise.”
He described the central Virginia earthquakes as “kind of a randomized reactivation of these geologically old structures,” as opposed to the tremors that occur along an active fault like the San Andreas in California.
In , Va., Lance Fisk, 46, a tattoo artist, was an hour into applying a tattoo when the building started to shake.
“At first I thought it was a truck bouncing the building, but then it went on and on,” Mr. Fisk said, adding that chairs were rolling around the floor. “The guy in the chair was getting nervous. I told him, ‘Sorry about that crooked line.’ I was just messing with him.”