5 dead in Texas floods
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
As many as five people have died in extensive flooding in Texas, including two possible victims whose bodies were found Saturday in Houston.
“We’ve executed over 130 water rescues,” said Michael Walter, public information officer for Houston’s office of emergency management.
One of the bodies was found in a flooded ditch, the other in a wooded area east of downtown. Whether the deaths were due to the floods isn't yet know. “We’re waiting for confirmation from our medical examiner," he said.
Houston has experienced significant street flooding as have areas of Harris county, which surrounds the city, Walter said. At least 57 structures in Houston have been flooded.
Between six and 10 inches of rain fell in eastern Harris county between Friday and Saturday, and up to 14 inches in Liberty County to the east, according to the National Weather Service.
An entire neighborhood near Hunting Bayou on Houston's east side was “significantly flooded,” Walter said.
“We’ve got multiple homes under water and we had to put in high water rescue vehicles to get people out,” he said.
“They’ve also had tornadoes in Pasadena and Friendswood to the southeast,” Walter said.
Power was out across portions of the area. CenterPoint Energy reported that 12,300 customers were without power at 4:00 pm.
By Saturday afternoon the rains had stopped for the next few days, but the danger hasn’t passed. A National Weather Service flash flood warning for portions of southeastern Texas was in place until early Sunday morning.
“Everything that was upstream is now coming downstream,” Walter said.
Several bayous in Houston are over their banks, or still threatening to spill over. A bayou is a slow moving, often marshy or boggy stream on flat ground.
Two bodies were recovered after flooding in the Austin and San Antonio areas on Friday and a third on Saturday in Travis County.
The flooding was the results of storms that moved east across Texas on Saturday, including at least three radar-confirmed tornadoes .
The storms and suspected tornadoes, which forecasters say were caused by an upper-level disturbance from Mexico, socked an already-sodden swath of Texas that was still drying out from the remnants of Hurricane Patricia.
Copyright 2015 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.