Violent tornado rips through northern Auckland, killing one person and leaving 10 in hospital
A TORNADO has ripped through Auckland's north, killing one person in a freak storm that has shaken disaster-weary New Zealanders.
The twister ripped the roof off a shopping mall, overturned cars, uprooted trees and sent shoppers running when it hit the suburb of Albany at about 3pm (1pm AEST) today.
One person is confirmed dead and 10 were being treated at two Auckland hospitals.
Most suffered from multiple lacerations and injuries caused by flying debris, the ambulance service said.
The twister travelled south at 200km/h across a 5km strip, leaving a path of destruction that had bystanders recounting images from the Hollywood disaster movie Twister.
Amateur footage from the scene captured roofing iron and other debris flying across streets and carparks.
Witnesses reported insulation Pink Batts raining from the sky, and said the sound reminded them of the rumbling of the killer earthquake that hit New Zealand's southern city of Christchurch on February 22, killing 181 people.
One witness, Julie Carter, told journalists she saw three children in a car that was thrown up into the air in a carpark and landed upside down. Another vehicle was tossed about 60m, she said.
Samantha Davey, an employee at Albany Optometrists, told Radio New Zealand she could see sheets of metal flying through the air near the mall.
"All we could see was a big, black cloud spinning above it and debris flying everywhere," she said.
"We're above the mall so we're OK, but the mall has been hit, we can see there's part of the roof missing and there are cars tossed about."
Martin Sibrits, of Rebel Sports, told Fairfax New Zealand the tornado was "simply unbelievable".
"It was huge. I could see pieces of iron flying through the air, 100m up," he said.
He said a neighbouring hardware store had taken the biggest hit.
"That place is looking like a bomb site."
From his window he could see many cars in the parking lot had been damaged and several injured people were seeking help.
Ross Sims, of Mainline Music, told journalists he mistook the tornado for an aeroplane.
"I thought, 'geez that plane is low' but when I looked outside it was this giant big black cloud," he said.
MetService weather specialists have confirmed the tornado was categorised an EF2 on a scale between EF0 and EF5.
While far smaller than tornadoes to hit the US, it was still the largest twister New Zealand had seen in several years, the centre reported.
Its weather ambassador Bob McDavitt said the tornado was a rare event caused by an unusual storm system over Auckland.
"Your heart has to go out to the ones who are affected in Albany. It's certainly horrific. There is horrific damage."
Prime Minister John Key said he was closely monitoring the situation and would offer authorities in Auckland any assistance required.
"Obviously it's been a very powerful and quite devastating tornado that's caused a significant amount of damage in a very localised area," he told reporters.
It's the latest in a string of disasters to hit New Zealand, including two earthquakes in Christchurch, the second of which claimed 181 lives, and a colliery explosion last November in which 29 miners died. New Zealand Metservice meteorologist Peter Kreft said the tornado hit without warning and the damage stretched for 5km, with the eye of the storm measuring more than 10m across. "Tornadoes in New Zealand are typically of that size, they're nothing like the size that are observed in the Midwest of the US," he told Radio New Zealand. "So while it's a tragic and devastating event for the area it's passed over, in the broader scheme of things it's a relatively small tornado." Another tornado struck Albany 20 years ago in May 1991, killing one man who was hit by debris while he was driving a bulldozer.
New Zealand is hit by 20 tornado events each year, but they are typically narrow and short-lived. New Zealand's worst tornado hit the North Island city of Hamilton in 1948, killing three people, injuring 80 others and destroying more the 200 homes and businesses.