Oakland Warehouse Fire Survivors Describe Escape From Blaze as Confirmed Death Toll Rises to 33
"This is very hard work and its very slow and it definitely has taken a toll on the first responders," Kelly said Sunday morning. "We have people around the clock and we will be here for days and days to come."
At an impromptu press conference Sunday afternoon, Kelly told reporters that officials had located 30 victims.
"That is an astronomical number," Kelly said. "We're really starting to get deeper into the building and as we do that we continue to find more victims."
At a later press conference the number rose again by three.
Kelly said officials plan to begin releasing the names of the victims later Sunday.
Authorities also asked family and friends of any of the missing to preserve sources of DNA for evidence.
Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf told NBC News Sunday afternoon that she had visited the site of the fire and “it is unbelievable the level of devastation and the complexity of the operation that’s going on.”
"The magnitude of loss for this community and for these families is unspeakable," she added. "Our job right now is to stay focused on that as our priority."
Oakland Battalion Fire Chief Melinda Drayton said at the press conference Sunday morning that firefighters had worked overnight to systematically remove debris from the warehouse.
"Within 12 hours we made it through one fifth of the building," she said.
"This will be a long and arduous process but we want to make sure we are respecting the victims, their families and our firefighters' safety to work slowly and carefully through the building," she said.
Drayton said the fire "is the most deadly" that she was aware of during her 19 years as a firefighter.
The first floor of the warehouse was an artists' collective made up of divided work spaces that Fire Department Operations Chief Mark Hoffman described as a "labyrinth” on Saturday.
The structure was last permitted for legal use as a warehouse, officials said, and did not have the permits necessary for people to live in the building.
During the fire at the building known as the Oakland Ghost Ship, the roof collapsed onto the second floor where the party was held, and parts of the second floor collapsed onto the first floor, officials said.
The Oakland Planning and Building Department launched an investigation into the habitability of the warehouse less than a month ago, citing an “illegal interior building structure,” according to NBC Bay Area.
Records obtained by NBC Bay Area also show the warehouse and surrounding area have been the subject of nearly 10 blight complaints over the past decade.
Max Ohr, the creative director of the art collective that used the warehouse, told the TODAY Show Sunday that he was working the door on the night of the party and around 70 people were “in the venue enjoying music” when he heard someone say there was a fire.
Ohr said he "saw an orange glow coming from the back of the warehouse" and ran to get an extinguisher.