Snow and travel disruption across UK – live coverage
Snow and ice are continuing to cause disruption across the UK, with hundreds of drivers stranded in their cars in Scotland overnight. Follow the latest here
That's it for today, thanks for reading and commenting.
An inquest into the death of a driver who was hit by a vehicle after he stopped to help a stranded motorist in freezing conditions has been opened and adjourned, PA report. The man who died in the collision on the edge of the Yorkshire Dales last week was named by police today as Paul Clarkson, 57, from East Appleton, near Richmond, North Yorkshire.
A retired couple were left "starving and freezing" after being stranded in their car for 17 hours on a journey which usually takes 40 minutes, report PA
Hundreds of travellers were caught out yesterday as a fresh wave of snow and blizzards struck major routes in central Scotland. Pensioners Stewart and Kathleen Hendrie described their experience as "appalling". They left their daughter's house on Glasgow's south side at 10am on Monday and finally sought warmth in a hotel in Cumbernauld at 4am today. The couple were trying to make their way home to Falkirk when they were caught up in Kathleen, 66, said: "We had breakfast with my daughter at 8am before setting off home. It was 9pm before we ate again after we walked a mile along the road to a petrol station. "The hunger we could deal with, but the worst thing was the intense cold. I didn't know how long we'd be stuck and at one point I joked with my husband that I thought I was going to get hypothermia. "We put £10 of petrol in the car before setting off, which is more than enough to make the journey, but we were starting to run out of fuel after leaving the engine running to keep warm. "Luckily, there was a van near us who let us come inside for a while to get a blast of heat when it was minus 14 outside." The couple's son, Douglas, managed to book Kathleen and her 65-year-old husband into the Westerwood Hotel in Cumbernauld after they had been stuck at the Crowwood Roundabout for five hours. However, it was a further 15 hours before they were able to make the eight-mile journey, finally checking into the hotel just after 4am. Kathleen said: "It was so good to get into the warm and get a good breakfast. We only managed to sleep for a few hours and then we decided to leave just after 9am. "It hadn't snowed in a while and we wanted to chance getting back to Falkirk while we could. We just wanted to get home. "It was an appalling experience I would never want to repeat again. We were starving, freezing and, above all, worried. If there's even one flake of snow that falls again I won't be going out in it."
A police helicopter was called in to rescue a dog walker who fell 30ft down a steep snow-covered slope in sub-zero conditions today, the Press Association reported.
This video is perhaps a little long, and djvinster's presentational style may not quite be to everyone's taste, but it provides a real sense of just how chaotic the roads were in parts of Scotland yesterday.
Yesterday was "one of the busiest days in the AA's history", the company has announced. It attended around 24,000 breakdowns, compared to 10,500 on a normal Monday.
So far today, it has attended around 7,700 breakdowns across the UK, with calls peaking at around 2,500 every hour this morning, which it says is around two and a half times the normal rate.
The RAC said it saw "unprecedented call volumes" yesterday. It said it received 3,000 calls an hour, the busiest since the cold weather began.
"Batteries problems continue to be the number one fault," the company said. Luckily Alan Wilcock – RAC Patrol Ambassador of the Year, no less – is on hand with advice for motorists:
Severin Carrell reports that while travellers on the mainland have been grappling with the misery of gridlocked roads and treacherous driving conditions, residents on the tiny Hebridean island of Canna have been relishing a very rare cold snap – as depicted in this stunning picture.
Scotland correspondent Severin Carrell emails with more proof that at least some forecasters were warning of severe weather during Sunday and early Monday morning:
The Met Office's weather warnings Twitter feed was warning of heavy snow and icy conditions in the area of Scotland where hundreds of motorists were stranded yesterday.
These posts are from Sunday and Monday:
• @metofficeUK FLASH Warning of Heavy Snow for SW Scotland, Lothian & Borders valid from 0945 Mon 06 Dec to 1500 Mon 06 Dec http://bit.ly/g4YaeU
• @metofficeUK FLASH Warning of Heavy Snow for Central, Tayside & Fife valid from 0736 Mon 06 Dec to 1200 Mon 06 Dec http://bit.ly/dV8TbW
• @metofficeUK FLASH Warning of Widespread Icy Roads for SW Scotland, Lothian & Borders valid from 0001 Mon 06 Dec to 1200 Mon 06 Dec http://bit.ly/i5hRTN
Earlier Scotland's transport minister, Stewart Stevenson, admitted the weather forecast the government were given "appears to have been different" from that of some other forecasters.
More criticism about the Scottish authorities handling of the weather conditions, PA report:
Scottish Conservative transport spokesman Jackson Carlaw, was also critical, saying this morning that the last 24 hours had been "truly desperate" for many travellers.
The Met Office has extended its severe weather warnings – indicating that heavy snow is likely in Yorkshire and the north east of England.
The warnings, the second most severe in the Met Office's armoury, are in place from 12.30pm today. The agency's earlier notification (9.10am) of heavy snow in the north of Scotland remains in place.
Strathclyde Police, together with Central Scotland Police, Lothian and Borders Police and Scottish Government agency Transport Scotland, have urged people not to venture out today unless their journey is "absolutely essential".
My colleague Paddy Allen has created this map showing where some of the most severe transport disruption took place in Scotland yesterday.
On Twitter and in the comments section people pointing out that there was at least one forecast predicting heavy snow from 5am on Monday morning.
@shonac @AdamGabbatt snowforecast v clear tweet from central fm on Sun:FLASH Warning of Heavy Snow for Central, Tayside & Fife from 0500 Mon 06
@centralfm uh oh. it's gonna snow again! FLASH Warning of Heavy Snow for Central, Tayside & Fife valid from 0500 Mon 06 Dec... http://fb.me/Lpvgiy9S
The Scottish transport minister, Stewart Stevenson, has elaborated on his comments to the Today programme this morning by admitting that the weather forecast the government were given "appears to have been different" from that of some other forecasters.
Stevenson told BBC Radio Scotland that the authorities had been caught out by the severity of the weather yesterday, and would examine why the weather forecasts authorities were given was different to other predictions. Hundreds of people were left stranded in their cars overnight after heavy snowfall.
"We prepared for one set of weather yesterday morning - we had weather greater than we were ready for," Stevenson said.
He insisted staff had been making "quite heroic efforts", but added: "Today we're now facing temperatures so low that salt is no longer working on the network. "We've actually seen snow ploughs damaged by the solidity of the ice on the M8."
Stevenson said the authorities would "have to look at the advice we had", adding that the weather forecast they were given "appears to have been different" from that of some other forecasters.
"I want to know why that's the case because we can't have that happening again," he said. "That's a clear part of what we've got to look at to make sure that we improve." And while he said the authorities "normally get it right", he added: "That's no comfort to the many people who have been stuck in their cars overnight in quite atrocious conditions."
"I think there is an acceptance that the advice we were working on did not meet the requirements. We can't allow that to happen again."
He said the road operating companies and local councils had been "making terrific efforts" to deal with the conditions, but added: "It simply hasn't delivered for the people who are stuck there. "I think it's right that they know that we are sorry for the very, very considerable difficulties we have created for people, and by and large we're very grateful for the very substantial tolerance and patience people have shown."
Asked if he had considered his position, Stevenson said: "My focus this morning - and I'm sure this is what people will require of me, and of everyone else - is to resolve the problems. "We will review our performance very carefully, once we've got the immediate problems dealt with. That I am sure is what people wish us to do."
Severe weather warnings are in place across the majority of Scotland, all of Northern Ireland, and north west England, north west Wales and south east England.
The Met Office is warning of heavy snow in northern Scotland and north west England, whereas motorists are warned of icy roads across all of the UK.
Glasgow and Edinburgh airports are open today after closing yesterday due to the weather, but officials are warning travellers to check with their airlines.
Looking at their websites (Glasgow, Edinburgh), however, it seems most flights are running as normal.
Belfast International airport is warning "It is expected that the severe weather may cause delays and cancellations to Tuesdays flights", while London City airports is warning that "some flights are experiencing minor delays due to earlier disruptions".
On the railways, the East Coast line between London and Edinburgh is still running a reduced service, while some Northern Rail services in Yorkshire and North Lincolnshire are cancelled.
Stewart Stevenson, Scotland's transport minister, said last night: "Scotland has been in the grip of the worst snow and ice conditions in the early winter since the 1960s. Every effort has been made to keep disruption to a minimum."
This morning Stevenson has been interviewed on the Today programme on BBC Radio 4. He defended the government, local authorities and emergency services, insisting staff had been doing an "excellent job".
This might come as a surprise to the hundreds who were left shivering in their vehicles overnight.
Stevenson said: "I am sorry people have experienced difficulties...We have to review what happened. We have to ensure we don't have a repeat of this later in the winter."
He also promised to review communication with forecasters, saying saying that yesterday "we were working to slightly different parameters."
Were you stranded overnight? Are you stranded now? You can get in touch by tweeting me @adamgabbatt or email adam.gabbatt@guardian.co.uk
Hundreds of drivers stranded overnight in freezing temperatures were battling to get home today as police launched a huge operation to free up miles of gridlock.
Some motorists were stuck in their vehicles for more than 15 hours last night, as Scotland bore the brunt of a fresh wave of ice and snow which left several major routes impassable.
Police across the country's busy central belt have warned people not to travel unless it was "absolutely essential" – after temperatures plunged as low as minus 17C (1.4F) and hampered gritting efforts.
The deluge yesterday saw people sleep in their cars or abandon them on the highway as motorways and A roads clogged up. Around 100 children were also forced to sleep at their school after the bad weather prevented pupils, parents and staff from getting home.
North-east Scotland and north-west England face more snow today, with widespread icy roads expected up and down the country thanks to the freezing conditions.
At least nine people have so far died in the big freeze, with an elderly man found dead in snow at a Lincolnshire caravan park the latest victim.
There had looked to be some brief respite from the freezing conditions on the way later this week - with many places expected to have their first frost-free night for more than two weeks on Thursday.
Police struggled to get Scotland's busiest roads open overnight due to the number of abandoned and stranded cars. A statement issued on behalf of Strathclyde Police, Central Scotland Police, Lothian and Borders Police and Transport Scotland said: