Radiation shoots up after nuke plant blast
THE radiation level at Japan's troubled nuclear plant in Fukushima Prefecture shot up to 8217 micro sievert per hour temporarily this morning after an explosion was heard at its No.2 reactor, Tokyo Electric Power Co. said.
Kyodo news agency reported the level as of 8.31pm local time was more than eight times the 1000 micro sievert level to which people are usually exposed in one year.
Japan's nuclear crisis, already verging on the brink of unfettered disaster, entered new territory today with reports of damage to part of a reactor container in addition to the early morning explosion.
The Japanese government said the blast occurred at 6.10am local time at the No.2 reactor at Fukushima's No.1 power plant, Kyodo News reported.
Explosions had previously struck the No.1 and No.3 reactors.
The explosion today was described as "huge" by a spokesman for the Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) and workers were evacuated from the reactor area, according to the Jiji news agency.
At the same time, AFP reported part of one reactor's container appeared to be damaged, according to the Japanese government. It did not specify which reactor was involved.
Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano told reporters "damage appears on the suppression pool" - the bottom part of the container, which holds water used to cool down the reactor and control air pressure inside.
"But we have not recorded any sudden jump in radiation indicators," Mr Edano said without elaborating.
Kyodo News later reported that higher radiation levels were recorded in Ibaraki prefecture between the capital and Fukushima.
A spokesman for the country's nuclear safety agency said it had been informed by the plant operator that radiation levels in Ibaraki had risen.
"The level does not pose heath risks," the spokesman said, without giving immediate details.
In the aftermath of last Friday's monstrous 9.0-magnitude earthquake - upgraded yesterday from 8.9 by the US Geological Survey - and tsunami, the country's nuclear plants have lurched from one catastrophe to the next.
Hardest hit has been the Fukushima No.1 power plant about 240km north of Tokyo, where three of six reactors were in trouble.
Prior to this morning's blast at the No.2 reactor, TEPCO said it was possible one of the earlier blasts had knocked out the cooling system in the previously stable reactor, leaving its fuel rods fully exposed at one point and vulnerable to serious damage.
That emergency was compounded when a fire pump ran out of fuel as it was trying to pour seawater into the reactor to cool it down, Kyodo News reported. The water level was eventually restored to 11.8 inches (30cm) to cover the lower parts of the rods.
Mr Edano said a meltdown was "highly likely" at the three reactors - meaning a catastrophic failure of the reactor core that could lead to dangerous radiation leaks.
Some 200,000 residents within 20km of the two Fukushima plants have been evacuated although many people - mainly patients, elderly people and care workers at three hospitals and nursing homes - were still within the zone.
With new crises daily, it was difficult to gage where the Fukushima disaster would rate on a scale of nuclear crises, but Andre-Claude Lacoste, head of France's Nuclear Safety Authority, said today he thought it was "worse than Three Mile Island but not as great as Chernobyl".
Japan's nuclear safety agency had rated the damaged nuclear plant at four on an International Nuclear Event Scale of zero to seven.
By comparison, the 1979 Three Mile Island accident in the US was a five while the 1986 Chernobyl disaster in the Ukraine, which caused widespread contamination, was a seven.
"We have the feeling that we are at least more than level five and probably at level six," Mr Lacoste said. "I say this after speaking to my Japanese counterparts."
But Yukiya Amano, the head of the UN's atomic watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency, said in Vienna, "the possibility that the development of this accident into one like Chernobyl is very unlikely".
Meanwhile, CNN reported that tests detected low levels of radioactivity on 17 US Navy helicopter crew members from the USS Ronald Reaganafter they returned from disaster relief missions to Japan. After washing with soap and water, no further contamination was detected.
The navy has repositioned its ships and planes away from the power plant.