ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The death toll from the Christmas Island shipwreck could rise as high as 50, Prime Minister Julia Gillard confirmed today.
Ms Gillard told a Canberra press conference that the Australian Federal Police believe there were around 90 people on board the asylum seeker boat which broke up after hitting rocks on Wednesday.
The AFP says 30 bodies have been recovered so far and between 15 and 20 people remain unaccounted for, taking the possible death toll to 50.
Ms Gillard says the total number on board the boat may never be known.
"We may never know the precise number but the advice to me is that the best estimate at present is that there were around 90 people on the boat," she said.
"That does mean of course that we are still not able to account for around 18 people."
She says only one of the survivors is still in hospital.
A search by police divers for bodies near the accident location has now been suspended.
The AFP is preparing to charge three Indonesian crewmen who were on the boat, but will not speculate about whether the men will be accused of manslaughter.
The AFP is conducting a criminal investigation into the incident.
Ms Gillard says she is sticking to her strategy to disrupt people smugglers to prevent future tragedies.
"We do want to smash the people-smuggling business model," she said.
"We want to take out of hands of people smugglers the very evil product that they sell, and that is why we are working on a regional protection framework and regional processing centre."
But the Greens want an expert advisory panel set-up to look into the Government's policy on asylum seekers.
Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young says Ms Gillard's multi-party standing group on the Christmas Island tragedy will not deal with policy change.
At this stage only the Greens have accepted an offer to join the group.
Senator Hanson-Young says the current system needs an immediate overhaul because it is not working.
"We've had over a decade of failure on immigration policy and how we relate to asylum seekers. It doesn't work, it didn't work under the Howard government. It isn't working under this Government," she said.
"Let's get those who know best around the table to come up with the blueprint that we need for a humane and passionate policy for asylum seekers."