Quake death toll now 98, with 200 more missing
Prime Minister John Key told media: "We are very fearful tonight that the death toll could be much greater than any of us ever feared." Mr Key said it could be weeks before families had their loved ones' bodies returned. DNA and fingerprint samples are being used to identify the badly burnt bodies, he said. Earlier this afternoon 238 people were confirmed missing - although some may have already left Christchurch before the disaster, police said.
The missing includes 16 Chinese students, ranging in age from 17 to 22, believed to be trapped beneath the rubble of the CTV building. Police Minister Judith Collins described the horrific conditions rescue workers face, with bodies being pulled "in ones and twos" from the rubble. "We've got 76 at the morgue at the moment and more coming through. "I've never seen anything like it." We've got 76 at the morgue at the moment and more coming through. I've never seen anything like it
Superintendent Cliff said the number of bodies thought to be in the CTV building ranged from "the high 60s'' to 120. Several more bodies are known to be in the Pyne Gould Corporation building, where two victims were pulled from the rubble this morning. The rescue operation at the collapsed Cambridge Terrace building has entered a "recovery" phase. Heartfelt messages from families and friends of missing loved ones on social media sites paint a poignant picture of the quake's likely victims. Police have begun a major clampdown on non-emergency personnel entering Christchurch's CBD. Media have been threatened with arrest and two members of the Japanese press were taken into custody after trying to gain access to Christchurch Hospital in breach of a curfew overnight.
Meanwhile, petrol retailers in the city have called for calm amid panic buying of fuel that has reportedly led to queues a kilometre long outside some petrol stations. Hopes dashed for woman's rescue New Zealand authorities said they might have been mistaken over reports of a woman's voice coming from the rubble of a Christchurch chapel this morning. Hours after Mr Key warned that hopes of finding survivors were fading, search teams swung into action after it was claimed one worker had heard a "faint" female voice at Holy Cross Chapel about 9am local time. Hopes were dashed, with an emergency worker later telling Sky News that two teams searched the site and no one had been found. "What this does is draws us away from other things we are doing and ties up resources," Chris Haines of St John Ambulance told Sky News.
Meanwhile, local Police Commissioner Howard Broad said he was bracing for criticism over the identification of the quake victims by authorities. "We don't know who is under the rubble in these places where buildings have collapsed. We have been releasing the number of people we have certainly recovered," he said. Police were working to estimate how many dead might be trapped, he said. "Now just imagine if we get this wrong, if we're sloppy, if we tell a family that their loved one is dead and we made a mistake. "So we're not going to do that, we are going to work carefully, methodically, and we're going to get it right. Unfortunately that means that this will take some time and we're going to experience some criticism for the amount of time that this takes.''
New Zealand's Civil Defence Minister John Carter said rescue teams were heading into the city's suburbs for the first time since the magnitude 6.3 quake hit the South Island. Mr Key said search and rescue workers were now focused on the recovery of bodies rather than the rescue of survivors. Mr Key said emergency workers were "not getting positive signs" as they looked for sounds or signs of life under the rubble, as he warned New Zealanders to brace themselves for a rising death toll. About 300 people are believed to be missing, but authorities have said the number of people unaccounted for may include many who fled the city centre after the quake and have not contacted officials since.
A Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) spokeswoman said this afternoon that they had no concerns for the welfare of any Australian caught up in the Christchurch quake. But DFAT staff were still confirming the location of almost 1350 Australians registered with its consular emergency centre. Almost 3500 Australians were registered with the centre and more than 1955 have been located as safe, she added. Those that wanted to leave New Zealand have been confirmed on commercial flights out of the country today and tomorrow, she said. Mr Carter said about 2500 people had been injured, 164 seriously.
Police said no survivors had been pulled from the rubble since yesterday afternoon and it had been more than 24 hours since any text messages had been received from anyone trapped under the debris. "We are hopeful that we might find survivors but as time passes hopes fade," Superintendent Russell Gibson told TV3. But police said they were holding out hope that people were still alive in wrecked buildings. "Experts tell me that there are pockets within a number of these buildings, and providing people haven't been crushed there's no reason that we will not get people out of there," Superintendent Gibson said. Superintendent Gibson said 50 to 100 people were believed to be missing in one of the worst-hit buildings, the CTV site, but stressed the numbers were speculative. Among the missing are 90 students and staff from King's Education English language school, four nurses and 15 staff members from Canterbury TV.
"Just respect, if you know what that means." While people across the city were suffering, he said many were in the position that their valuables had been left in the open. A national state of emergency has been declared and the central city has been under curfew with soldiers patrolling in armoured personnel carriers. Six people were arrested for looting. Tallest hotel remains standing Hundreds of rescuers swarmed over twisted and smoking buildings yesterday in a frantic search for survivors, as fears for the collapse of Christchurch's Hotel Grand Chancellor were not realised overnight. The city's tallest hotel was expected to topple after suffering extensive damage in the quake and showing signs of buckling yesterday. Witnesses said the tower subsided three metres in a matter of minutes. Volunteer army rallies via Facebook A 10,000-strong student volunteer army was assembled through social networking site Facebook to help those suffering. "We are working closely with Civil Defence in this operation. At this very early stage, we are focusing on helping everyday people in their homes in low-risk areas with non-life threatening situations," student organiser Sam Johnson said. Emergency services cordoned off central Christchurch. Rescuers from the United States, Britain, Taiwan and Japan are expected to join the operation today. More than 1000 workers were expected to comb though shattered buildings.
The new rescue teams would allow the search of wrecked buildings to be widened. Thousands of people spent a second night in emergency shelters set up in local schools, sports grounds, and at a race course. Fresh water supplies were being distributed from schools and portable toilets set up around the city as services were disrupted. Mr Key today thanked other countries for their support, singling out Australia, which yesterday announced the deployment of 300 police and medical staff as well as aid and counselling services. "I would like to pay special acknowledgement to Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard for her announcement of a $A5 million donation to help with the recovery," he said. "Leaders from around the world have responded generously with offers of help and support and encouragement."