Two missing, four injured as category three Cyclone Cook moves away from New Caledonia
A powerful cyclone that hit New Caledonia late on Monday has moved offshore, allowing authorities to lift warnings on the French South Pacific territory.
Four people received minor injuries in the storm and a search is being conducted for missing people, New Caledonia's Civil Defence and Risk Management agency said in a statement. According to Radio NZ, a 73-year-old has been found dead.
Resident Gael Toukio said electricity and telephone services had been cut as Cyclone Cook came ashore.
"Every gust of wind made my house tremble," Toukio said by text message from the capital city of Noumea.
The main island was hit by winds of up to 180kmh and more than 400mm of rain on Monday, the meteorological service said in a statement.
READ MORE: * Getting ready for Cook ​*Tropical Cyclone Cook set to hit Pacific Islands, NZ could be next * Cyclone Cook set to hammer Pacific, could bring further floods to NZ
The bureau lifted a general warning on Tuesday, while the Civil Defence agency said around 70,000 people were without electricity.
Vale suspended nickel operations and evacuated staff on Monday. It is restarting on Tuesday, a spokesman said.
The New Caledonia weather bureau said the weather system - which peaked at a category-three event - has since weakened.
TVNZ reported that a New Zealander was stranded in New Caledonia after an Air New Zealand flight was cancelled.
An Air Calin flight from Noumea due to arrive in Auckland at 12.35pm on Tuesday and the return flight, due to depart at 2.30pm, werecancelled.
Cook hit the main island at almost the same time as high tide, with floods, and waves as tall as 10 metres forecast by weather authorities.
"The threat to New Caledonia is very serious," the meteorological service said in a cyclone alert.
The storm hit land late on Monday afternoon as a Category Three storm, said Virgil Cavarero, a forecaster at Meteo New Caledonia, below the destructive Category 4 predicted earlier, which would have been a level off the most dangerous wind speed.
Eyes now turn to New Zealand as the tracking system could bring heavy rain, high surf and gusty winds later in the week, along with renewed flooding concerns following the aftermath of Cyclone Debbie last week.
The North Island's flood-stricken regions were bracing for heavy rain thanks to a low from the Tasman Sea, and the tropical cyclone could make matters worse.
MetService meteorologist Lisa Murray said Tropical Cyclone Cook could affect New Zealand later in the week adding to the low that will move across the country from Tuesday.
Cook developed into a tropical cyclone while crossing the islands of southern Vanuatu on Saturday.
- Audio thanks to Radio New Zealand