miners coming to surface
Carlos Mamani, the one Bolivian in the group, was the fourth. The fifth miner to reach the surface was the youngest of the group, 18-year-old Jimmy Sanchez. The sixth was Osman Araya and the seventh Jose Ojeda, has been safely hoisted up. Sepulveda's wife applauded with the rest of the rescue team before embracing her jubilant husband.
A TV grab taken from the Chilean TV channel TV Chile, shows Chilean miner Florencio Avalos, centre, just after coming out of the rescue capsule. Sepulveda jumped and ran around embracing cheering onlookers before being asked to take his place on a stretcher and prepare for medical assessment. The miners were trapped for 69 days after the upper galleries of the gold and copper mine collapsed on August 5. Florencio Antonio Avalos Silva, the first miner to be pulled out. Both men wore protective dark glasses when they emerged.
Avalos embraced his wife, Monica, and son, Byron, and appeared calm and steady on his feet, before being taken away for medical assessment. Mario Sepulveda Espina, the second miner to be pulled out. A﻿ ﻿c﻿r﻿o﻿w﻿d﻿ ﻿a﻿r﻿o﻿u﻿n﻿d﻿ ﻿t﻿h﻿e﻿ ﻿m﻿i﻿n﻿e﻿r﻿s ﻿c﻿h﻿e﻿e﻿r﻿e﻿d﻿ ﻿a﻿n﻿d﻿ ﻿a﻿p﻿p﻿l﻿a﻿u﻿d﻿e﻿d﻿ ﻿a﻿s﻿ both ﻿e﻿m﻿b﻿r﻿a﻿c﻿e﻿d﻿ ﻿t﻿h﻿e﻿ ﻿t﻿﻿﻿e﻿c﻿h﻿n﻿i﻿c﻿i﻿a﻿n﻿s﻿ ﻿i﻿n﻿v﻿o﻿l﻿v﻿e﻿d﻿ ﻿i﻿n﻿ their ﻿r﻿e﻿s﻿c﻿u﻿e﻿. Chilean President Sebastian Pinera congratulated the rescue team but said there was still a long way to go. The miners, who have been trapped deep underground since August 5, are being hoisted up one by one through a narrow rescue shaft in a specially-built metal cage.
Mr Pinera wished Rodriguez good luck and urged him to bring the miners up in good shape. Then they closed him inside the capsule and Pinera grinned and made the sign of the cross as the capsule disappeared below. Other rescuers were due to join Rodriguez to help prepare the trapped miners for their journey to safety after 69 days trapped more than 600 metres underground. "We intend to finish today [Tuesday] with the first of the miners on the surface," Mining Minister Laurence Golborne told reporters. Mr Golborne said he hoped that the first of the miners would still emerge before midnight (2am AEDT today) - several hours later than officials had previously announced.
Earlier, officials had said the rescue would begin about 0100 GMT (noon AEDT). At 0030 GMT (11.30am AEDT) the metal capsule to be used in the rescue was dropped, empty, in the shaft for its first test run. Two other tests were scheduled for the capsule, one with the rescuer inside to check the integrity of the shaft and another to test the contraption's speed as it is winched up. At the same time, officials were testing an fibre-optic network that should allow rescuers to survey and communicate with the capsule. The rescue effort is expected to drag out over the next two days, until the last of the miners is pulled from a cavernous tunnel 622 metres underground that has been their home for an amazing 69 days.
Mr Avalos, who was second-in-charge of the trapped group, was chosen to be the first to be brought to the surface, President Sebastian Pinera said at the mine. Golborne said the first four were considered the most capable of the miners to confront any problems they might encounter. The mine-rescue expert lowered in the capsule will be raised again to test it, and then that rescuer and a navy special forces paramedic will be lowered to the men to prepare them for the trip. Only then can the first miner be pulled to safety. It is expected to take as many as 36 hours to rescue all of the miners. The last miner out is also decided: Shift foreman Luis Urzua, whose leadership was credited for helping the men endure 17 days with no contact from the outside world after the collapse.
The paramedics are empowered to change the order of rescue based on a brief medical check once they're down below with the miners. Families and reporters huddled around televisions and bonfires as a preliminary list of the order of rescue was announced. All the activity was unfolding under live coverage by 2000 international journalists camped out at the mine in a tent city that also sheltered 800 of the miners' relatives. They would all be alerted to the imminent arrival of each miner on the surface by a blaring siren and flashing light that would also tell medical teams to be ready to greet the cage. The operation has taken on symbolic overtones, as noted by the name given to the metal cage - the "Phoenix" - and officials' descriptions of the miners experiencing a "rebirth" as the emerge from the shaft.
When the last man surfaces, it promises to end a national crisis that began when more than 600,000 tonnes of rock collapsed on August 5, sealing the miners into the lower reaches of the gold and copper mine. For 17 days they were all but given up for dead before a probe drill found them. Since then, Chilean rescuers have worked furiously to save and sustain them, even asking for NASA's help. Food, water, oxygen, entertainment and communication lines were dropped to them through probe holes to get them through their prolonged captivity in hot, dank conditions that they have described as "hell".