MH370: Search suspended but future hunt for missing plane not ruled out
Hong Kong (CNN)Officials involved in the arduous search for Malayasia Airlines Flight 370 won't rule out another hunt for the plane if "credible" evidence emerges, Australia's transport minister said Wednesday.
"It's not a closed book by any stretch," Darren Chester said at a news briefing in Melbourne. "I don't rule out a future underwater search."
"It's a question of if you have credible new information, which leads to a specific location."
Australian, China and Malaysia announced the suspension of the the search for Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 nearly three years after the plane vanished without a trace over the Indian Ocean.
Officials from those nations had been leading the search for MH370, which disappeared en route from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing on March 8, 2014, with 239 people on board. The countries on Tuesday issued a joint statement announcing the suspension.
"The decision to suspend the underwater search has not been taken lightly nor without sadness," the statement said. "Despite every effort using the best science available, cutting edge technology, as well as modeling and advice from highly skilled professionals who are the best in their field, unfortunately, the search has not been able to locate the aircraft."
"There's no question this has been a very costly exercise -- in the order of 200 million Australian dollars has been spent on the underwater search effort of which 60 million dollars has been provided by the Australian government, and the Malaysian government has contributed more than anyone else in that regard," he said.
"I think it is their responsibility, not only for the 239 passengers on the plane, or for the next of kin like us, but also they have to give an answer to the whole world ... what really happened to MH370."
"Some were aware that we were approaching the completion of the priority search area (and) they were very thankful to the ATSB and the experts and the searchers for the work they've done. They were very appreciative of the Australian government's effort and understood the decision."
"The decision came not lightly," Chester said at the time. "But in the absence of new credible evidence it is not possible to continue searching. Every effort has been made. We have used the most high tech and the best people for this search."
But investigators still haven't been able to say for sure what caused the crash, and, unfortunately, according to O'Neill and Associates aviation expert Peter Goelz, the debris discovered has so far done little to enlighten authorities -- or the victims' families -- as to what exactly happened.
"All it tells us is what we suspected, in that the plane crashed somewhere in the South Indian Ocean," he told CNN in November. "At some time in the future there will be a quantum leap forward in the ability to look underneath the sea and someone will find it. But that's not for decades," Goelz said. "I think at some point, they'll find it -- it's too big a mystery. But the technology we have now, we can't do it easily or cheaply."
"The people who are living with you more than 20 years, and they leave suddenly," Wang said. "We just want them to give us more information. I think there (is) still something, we don't know."