At least 37 dead, dozens injured after Peru bus crashes into oncoming traffic
At least 37 people were killed after a bus swerved into oncoming traffic in Peru, leading to a multi-vehicle collision, authorities say.
Health Minister Anibal Velasquez, who was on his way to the crash site near the northern city of Huarmey, said the accident also left 70 people injured.
Authorities initially gave a death toll of 22, but Mr Velasquez told local radio the number had increased sharply as rescue workers managed to access the wreckage.
Six people who were badly wounded were taken by helicopter to hospital in the capital Lima, about 300 kilometres south.
The local hospital in Huarmey was overwhelmed by the number of injured, the fire department said in a statement.
Rescuers rushed to adapt other health centres in the area to accommodate the overflow, it said.
The head of the highway police, Orfiles Bravo, said a bus belonging to the Murga Serrano line had swerved into an oncoming lane on the Pan American Highway.
It was then hit by a truck and two other buses, Mr Bravo told RPP radio.
The Murga bus "was split in two," he said.
Television images showed bodies sprawled out on the pavement after the crash.
The government declared an emergency and ordered the deployment of more ambulances to the crash site, the head of the council of ministers, Ana Jara, said on Twitter.
Forty-two passengers on the Murga bus were members of a Christian evangelical church, the World Missionary Movement, who were returning from a convention in Lima.
"We are waiting for news," church leader Roberto Perez said.
Peruvian media reports said the injured and stranded passengers included Haitian and Senegalese travellers.
Deadly bus accidents are common in Peru, where transportation regulations are weak.
In the first half of last year, 1,406 people were killed in road accidents. The full-year death toll was 3,590 in 2013 and 4,138 in 2012
Monday's accident came as the Peruvian Congress held a forum on making the country's roads safer.