Damage, Injuries Reported After Tornadoes Hit San Antonio, Texas
Severe storms rolled through Texas Sunday night into Monday morning, where four confirmed tornadoes left widespread damage in northern San Antonio and four more were confirmed near Austin.
More than 100 structures were damaged when a severe storm hit just south of San Antonio International Airport, ABC News reported. Most of the damaged buildings were homes, but an elementary school was also damaged, the report added.
KTRK-TV said there were five minor injuries reported following the storms.
"The same weather system that struck Southern California last Friday caused severe storms to develop in Texas and southern Oklahoma late Sunday," said weather.com meteorologist Chris Dolce.
Near Olmos, Lucy Duncan took shelter under a mattress with her husband and three children as the storm closed in on their home. She told KENS-TV that the roof of their home was torn off, but the family escaped unharmed.
"I couldn’t even describe it because I’ve never experienced it before," Duncan told KENS. "I knew immediately something was wrong."
At the height of the outages, CPS Energy reported nearly 40,000 customers without power due to the storms.
The National Weather Service gave the San Antonio tornado damage near Ridgeview and Alamo Heights an EF2 rating with maximum winds of 120 mph. It was on the ground for about four and a half miles, according to the initial damage survey results. A separate EF0 tornado was confirmed east of Interstate 35 in the San Antonio area between Windcrest and Converse. A third tornado was confirmed on Putting Green Road and was rated EF1. A fourth tornado packing 85 mph winds in the Garden Ridge area was rated an EF0.
Storms also caused problems in southeastern Austin Monday morning, where thousands lost power and at least 20 homes were damaged, according to KEYE-TV.
"We were sitting on the couch and watching the tornado warning on the TV," Sammye Mason, who was in a friend's home when it got damaged, told KEYE. "The next thing we know, the lights go out and then, 'whoosh,' the door came flying open and we were knocked off the couch."
Two confirmed tornadoes hit Williamson County near Thrall. Both received preliminary ratings of EF2. In Hays County, an EF1 was confirmed, as well as an EF0 that tracked into Travis County.
An EF0 tornado overturned several RVs and damaged some sheds and outbuildings in southern Guadalupe County south of the town of Seguin.