Train accident: 32 charred to death on board Chennai-bound Tamil Nadu express; railway minister hints at sabotage
NELLORE (ANDHRA PRADESH): Thirty-two people were on Monday charred to death and 25 others injured when a fire broke out in a coach of New Delhi-Chennai Tamil Nadu Express near here with railway minister Mukul Roy indicating that there could have been a blast. Additional DG railways VSK Kaumudi said that 32 bodies have been recovered so far from the charred S-11 bogie of the train. South Central Railway officials in Hyderabad said 25 people have been injured in the disaster and have been admitted to different hospitals. The Nellore station manager noticed the fire in one of the bogies of the train at 4.15am and alerted officials. Two fire tenders were rushed to the spot immediately to put out the fire and they managed to restrict the blaze to the S-11 bogie, they said. In Kolkata, the railway minister said, "Some of the injured passengers admitted to hospitals and a gateman at one of the level crossings near Nellore station heard a loud sound when the fire occurred in the coach". Roy said that the divisional railway manager had also said that there was a report of a blast even as the minister maintained that nothing can be "excluded" as to what caused the fire. Asked if he suspected any act of sabotage, Roy said, "I will not say anything at this stage." He said that there was a talk about short circuit as also some inflammable substance being carried by a passenger. "Nothing can be excluded and nothing can be said without an investigation. It will be investigated if inflammable substances were in the compartment or it was caused by a short circuit," the minister said. Ishan Shah, who was travelling in the ill-fated coach and had woken up due to the disturbances, said that he had not heard any blast. Condoling the loss of lives in the fire accident, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh asked the railway ministry to render all assistance to the affected. Earlier, Nellore district collector B Sridhar said, "There was a short circuit near the toilet and the train was moving at a speed of 110 kms per hour. It was going to Chennai from Delhi. All the passengers were asleep when the fire broke out. People were not able to come out immediately". "The fire spread fast and the passengers could not come out through one of the doors because of the fire. So the other edge of the coach was to be used. Some people could come out while others succumbed to death," he said. The bodies have been charred so it is difficult to identify them, Sridhar said. Additional joint collector Laxmikant said the toll could rise up to 35 as some of the bodies are still to be recovered from the charred S-11 compartment. Nellore district police officials said 14 passengers in the bogie were safe. Some of the passengers travelling in the train told reporters that smoke engulfed the bogie soon after the fire broke out making it difficult for them to come out. The railway minister announced an exgratia payment of Rs five lakh each for the next of the kin of those killed in the mishap and said that one dependent from the family of those killed would be provided a job. He announced a payment of Rs one lakh each for those who were grievously injured and Rs 25,000 for those who suffered simple injuries. The railway ministry has also ordered an inquiry by DK Singh, commissioner of railway safety of South-Central Circle to look into the cause of the accident.