Africa News
Zimbabwe's president has backed out of his first campaign rally since a deadly attack on Saturday that has been called an assassination attempt.
South Sudan President Salva Kiir and arch-foe Riek Machar have agreed to a "permanent" ceasefire to take effect within 72 hours, raising hopes of a deal to end their country's devastating war.
A Stockholm court has sentenced a Swedish man of Rwandan origin to life in prison for participating in the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
The charismatic leader of a Moroccan protest movement has been sentenced to 20 years in prison along with three other activists after mass demonstrations touched off by the death of a fish seller.
At the Yazidi minority's holiest site in Iraq, Congolese gynaecologist Denis Mukwege pays homage to a spiritual leader who has decreed women raped by the Islamic State group should not be stigmatised.
Civil servants in Guinea-Bissau have gone on strike days after the country passed its first budget following a three-year political crisis.
PEACE PLEDGE:  MDC Alliance Chairperson Morgan Komichi appends his signature during the national peace pledge signing hosted by the National Peace and Reconciliation Commission (NPRC) in Harare for its #BuildingBlock4Peace campaign ahead of the July 30 elections in Zimbabwe. (File, AFP)
Multimedia  ·    User Galleries  ·  News in Pictures Send us your pictures   ·  Send us your stories
Libya's coast guard says it has intercepted 200 African migrants in the Mediterranean Sea.
More than 200 people were killed in violence against farming communities in Plateau state, central Nigeria, according to a speech by the governor.
The United Nations mission in Mali says soldiers who are part of a regional counterterrorism force "summarily and/or arbitrarily" executed 12 civilians in retaliation for the death of a fellow soldier.
Here are 14 facts about your liver you might not know.
Can you tie 'em in a knot, can you tie 'em in a bow?
All you need to know to get your SA passport sorted.
R330 to donate your poop, but will you make the cut?
Read this or pass on to your son.
These restaurant specials will keep you fed every night of the week!
Eliminating distractions is a skill that has to be practised all the time.