Chilean miners requests for alcohol and cigarettes turned down by Nasa
The miners had added wine and cigarettes to a wish list of items they wanted to help them cope, but were told they will have to forego the vices of drinking and smoking during what is expected to be several months underground.
According to one report some of the miners were dependant on alcohol before becoming trapped and already experiencing withdrawal symptoms after nearly four weeks cut off from the outside world.
But James Michael Duncan, Nasa’s deputy chief doctor, who has flown with a team of space agency medical experts to Chile, said: “From the alcohol standpoint, we need to first get their nutrition up before we make any considerations there.”
Instead of wine, the miners, who have lost about 22lb each in body weight, will have to make do with high protein, high-calorie foods delivered to them in narrow plastic tubes.
Cigarettes were deemed to be bad for their health in such an enclosed space, but they have been given both patches and nicotine gum to help them counter withdrawal symptoms.
Dr Duncan said: “It’s an environment that’s pretty enclosed and we don’t want to contribute to any of the problems within the atmosphere of the mine.”
According to one Chilean health official some of the miners were “large consumers” of alcohol before they became trapped, and it was not advisable to cut off drinking immediately. But Jaime Manalich, Chile’s Health Minister, who had earlier been quoted as saying some of the men were big drinkers, denied any of them were alcoholics or were addicted to any other substance.
Javier Diaz, head of a medical team treating the miners, added: “Miners do not drink more or less alcohol than the average Chilean.”
He said vitamins being sent to the miners were to counter constipation, not withdrawal symptoms.
The Chilean government released a new video of the miners showing them smiling, shaved, wearing red T-shirts and listening to music. It was a stark contrast to a previous video showing them haggard, mud-caked and bare chested.
The miners have been stuck 2,300ft (700 metres) down the San Jose mine in the Atacama Desert since Aug 5. Authorities have started vaccinating the trapped men against tetanus, diphtheria, flu and pneumonia to prevent outbreaks of disease. The men have moved to a drier spot almost 1,000ft deeper inside the mine because some were developing fungal infections and body sores.
They have located four sources of water, two of which have been deemed fit for human consumption.
The operation to rescue them is code-named “Operation San Lorenzo” after a martyred Christian saint. If drilling goes as planned they will then face the ordeal of squeezing into a tubular, metal cage for three hours as they are slowly pulled up one at a time.
Dr Duncan praised the miners’ courage and said it was important to get them on a regular sleep pattern and keep them optimistic.
That could mean increasing their contact with the outside world, including bringing in celebrities like Chilean footballers to talk to them, or astronauts who have survived long periods in isolation.
Dr Duncan said: “These miners showed us tremendous strength in surviving as long as they did without any contact with the surface.
“What we want to try to avoid is any kind of situation of hopelessness on the part of the miners.”