4 Dead, 5 Injured in Crash Involving CTA Bus on Chicago's West Side
After a horrific crash involving a car and a CTA bus that killed four people and injured five others, eyewitnesses are speaking out about the chaotic scene on Chicago’s West Side. (Published Sunday, May 7, 2017)
Four people were killed and five others injured in a crash involving a car and a CTA bus on Chicago's West Side early Sunday, according to police.
The pin-in crash occurred at about 5:55 a.m. in the 2600 block of W. Madison St. in the city's Garfield Park neighborhood, authorities said. 
A CTA bus was traveling eastbound on Madison St. when a white sedan traveling westbound at a high rate of speed collided with a parked car and lost control, hitting the bus head on, according to police. 
All four people in the car were killed, police said, with witnesses saying those in the backseat were completely pinned in as the car caught fire. 
Two of the victims, 25-year old Ashley Moore and 22-year old Tycika Fairley, were identified by Chicago Police on Sunday night. Both women were passengers in the car, and both were taken to Mount Sinai Hospital, where they were pronounced dead. 
"My next door neighbor came and tried to pull the - because the car was burning too - so one, tried to pull the guy out, but he wasn't successful," said Malinda Demery, who lives in the area. "By that time the fire department came up and did what they did."  4 Dead, 4 Injured in Crash Involving CTA Bus
The four people in the sedan were extracted and taken in critical condition to area hospitals where they were pronounced dead, authorities said. Details on their ages or identities were not immediately available.
The bus driver and four passengers also sustained non-life-threating injuries, according to police. Fire officials said one person was taken in fair condition to Rush University Medical Center, and three were taken to St. Mary's Hospital, two in stable and one in fair condition.
As a result of the crash, the #20 Madison bus was rerouted for several hours in both directions around the scene, the CTA said. The reroute ended just after 11 a.m.
NBC 5 Responds learned via FOIA request that there have been 1,058 reported collisions between CTA buses and other motor vehicles since 2012. The cause of Saturday's crash remains under investigation. 
Check back for updates on this developing story.