Storm Gertrude hits Britain as 132mph gust recorded at Cairngorm summit
A gust of 132mph has been recorded at the top of Cairngorm as Storm Gertrude sweeps the country, causing power cuts and travel disruption.
A rare red Met Office alert is in place for Orkney and Shetland with dangerous conditions expected throughout Friday.
More than 13,000 homes have been left without power.
Gusts of 91mph were recorded in South Uist, while on the mainland the Forth Road Bridge and Inverbervie in Aberdeenshire were hit by winds of 69mph.
The Forth, Tay and Kessock bridges are all closed while ferry and train services have been affected.
Speeds are expected to reach around 65mph in the Borders and the North East of England later in the day and pushing 80mph in North Yorkshire.
Around 8,500 properties in Scotland lost electricity due to Storm Gertrude.
Scottish Hydro said engineers were working to reconnect supplies in Aberdeenshire, Perthshire, the Western Isles, Skye and Oban but repairs would depend on the weather.
In Northern Ireland, around 5,000 properties were left without power after high winds battered the region throughout the night.
Severe gales, which gusted at up to 70mph, brought trees down on top of power lines and broke electricity poles.
Emergency services were called out to two lorries blown over on the A96 near Huntly and on the M9 near Dunblane in the early hours. The extent of any injuries is not known.
Drivers also had to avoid a trampoline blown on to the Newtonhill flyover near the A90 in Aberdeen at around 6am.
Police Scotland said a member of the public moved it from the road and officers were not needed. A force spokesman advised people to peg down trampolines and garden furniture in high winds.
The Scottish Environment Protection Agency (Sepa) has almost 40 flood warnings in place covering Ayrshire, Tayside, west central Scotland and the Highlands.
A landslip on the A82 at Letter Finlay between Spean Bridge and Invergarry caused a 150- mile (241km) diversion for journeys between Fort William and Inverness.
Fallen trees are affecting many routes and the Forth, Tay and Kessock bridges have been closed.
P&O Ferries said the Pride of Hull ferry, from Rotterdam, had been unable to berth this morning due to "extreme weather conditions".
The ferry, which was due to arrive at the port in Hull at 7am, will attempt to berth again at around 2.30pm.
In a tweet, the company said: "Due to extreme weather conditions in Hull, the Pride of Hull is unable to berth. A further attempt will be made when the weather improves."
A spokesman for P&O Ferries said the ferry had experienced winds of 60 knots this morning, which he described as "rare".
He added that passengers on the evening service to Rotterdam would not be affected by this disruption.
Met Office amber "be prepared" warnings are in place for Northern Ireland, Scotland and north west and north east England.
Yellow "be aware" warnings for rain, snow and ice are in place across much of the UK.
Forecasters said: "Winds are expected to widely gust 60-70mph, possibly up to 80mph along exposed coasts and over hills.
"Be prepared for the likelihood of difficult driving conditions and disruption to travel, such as cancellation to ferry services and bridge closures."
A succession of storms since December has seen widespread flooding and major disruption to travel, with the latest front expected to continue through the weekend.
All schools in the Northern and Western Isles have been closed and train and ferry services vastly reduced in Scotland.
ScotRail is operating a limited service, with routes in the Highlands and west coast particularly affected.
Operators said hundreds of engineers will be deployed across the network to inspect lines, repair damage and reopen routes as quickly as possible.
Phil Verster, ScotRail Alliance managing director, said: "We will be withdrawing some services until the worst of the storm has passed.
"The safety of our passengers and workforce is our top priority and we cannot run services on these lines until our engineers have thoroughly inspected the network for any damage."