ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Residents in parts of Goulburn are being ordered to leave their homes and businesses immediately because of flooding.
The SES has issued an evacuation order for a number of streets near the Wollondilly and Mulwaree Rivers.
Spokesman Michael Eburn (Ee-burn) says it's not yet known how many people will be affected.
"With continued forecast rain and rain in the catchment area we're expecting flooding in Goulburn and we have issued and evacuation order," he said.
"So we're asking people in the area to evacuate their properties now.
I'm afraid I can't give you a number of properties, but it's certainly a large number of streets. "
It's going to be a significant number of people."
Up to 1000 people could be asked to leave their houses.
The deputy incident controller James McTavish says looking after their properties should be residents' priority.
"Being a work day many people have left their homes and gone to work already, if they are subject to an evacuation order they should go home, so they should leave their work and make their properties secure," he said.
He says those living in low lying parts of Goulburn have already been evacuated.
"The rainfall exceeded the expectations overnight," he said.
"We're anticipating that that will lead to a deterioration in conditions around Goulburn in particular in the next few hours and we're looking at upgrading that evacuation warning in some areas to an evacuation order in the next couple of hours."
The level of rivers in the Goulburn district are expected to rise rapidly due to the heavy rain and flash flooding.
Mr McTavish says properties along the Wollondilly and Mulwaree Rivers are at risk with further rain forecast.
"We're expecting it to come up reasonably quickly through the day today," he said.
"The properties that were in immediate danger last night have been largely evacuated so we're quite comfortable with where we're sitting but we've taken the preemptive measure of warning those people that are possibly evacuated in the next 24 hours to give them as much time as they can."
He says a lot more rain is forecast.
"I'd certainly believe that there is going to be further evacuations in the Goulburn area," he said.
"With the rain that has fallen overnight and with the forecast for that rain to intensify through the day today we're likely to see continued rises in a number of river systems including the Wollondilly and the Mulwaree."
Meteorologist Julie Evans from the weather bureau says the threat of flooding remains for many communities.
"Mainly at this stage minor flooding for a number of rivers across the state but I think the thing to remember is that the rain is still falling and everything is very wet," he said.
"So even though we're not having very rapid rises that we sometimes see in more intense rainfall events the duration of this event is quite special."