Australian tourists staying put, not worried or rushing home
MORE than 120,000 people have fled the region around the Mount Agung volcano on the Indonesian tourist island of Bali, fearing it will soon erupt.
Nyoman Parwata, an official at the disaster mitigation agency’s command post in Bali, said the number of evacuees has swelled to about 122,500.
They are scattered in more than 500 locations across the island famed for its beaches, lush green interior and elegant Hindu culture, taking shelter in temporary camps, sports centres and other public buildings.
The volcano has been at its highest alert level since Friday, sparking the massive exodus of villagers. Thousands of cows are also being evacuated. An exclusion zone around the mountain extends as far as 12km from the crater in places but officials say people further from the volcano are leaving too. Agung, which dominates the landscape in the northeast of the island, last erupted in 1963, killing more than 1100 people. It remained active for about a year.
Volcanologists say the recent dramatic escalation in tremors indicates an eruption is more likely than not, but they can’t say with certainty when it will happen.
“I would definitely be following the advice to stay outside the exclusion zone,” said Heather Handley, an assistant earth sciences professor at Sydney’s Macquarie University. The increase in tremors suggests an eruption is “imminent,” she said.
The mountain, about 70km to the northeast of the tourist hot spot of Kuta, is among more than 120 active volcanoes in Indonesia.
In case of an eruption, Indonesia plans to divert flights headed for Bali to ten other airports, including on nearby Lombok and the capital Jakarta.
Indonesia, an archipelago of thousands of islands, is prone to seismic upheaval due to its location on the Pacific “Ring of Fire,” an arc of volcanoes and fault lines encircling the Pacific Basin.
The imminent eruption in Bali comes after the Vanuatu government decided they could not risk people’s lives and so ordered the compulsory evacuation of Ambae island, which is home to about 11,000 people.
Officials last weekend raised the activity measure of the Manaro volcano to level four and on Monday declared an emergency. At first, they relocated people close to the volcano to other parts of the island.
AS BALI’S Mt Agung volcano continues to rumble ominously, the locals are blaming tourists for angering the ancient mountain.
A local priest reportedly said Mount Agung is wrathful because “bule” (white people) had sex and menstruated on the mountain.
“The climbers did that,” he said.
Despite the warnings, Australian tourists on holiday in Bali say they are not worried and not trying to rush home to beat an eruption.
Late on Wednesday, Mt Agung recorded its biggest tremor so far, registering at 4.3. Ten airports around Indonesia are being prepared as alternatives if the expected eruption causes Bali’s airport to close. But experts still cannot predict when the mountain will erupt.
It is more than 70km from the tourist hot spots of Kuta and Seminyak.
While many Australian tourist remain unaffected by the impending eruption, some have spoken of being woken in the middle of the night to evacuate their hotels.
Rory Eastick from Newcastlesaid he was woken by his Indonesian brother-in-law at 11.30pm and told to leave his hotel in Tulamben, on the northeast coast of Bali, immediately.
“It was quite a worrying moment because it was at that time we realised everyone in our hotel had already left,” he said.
“Family staying in another hotel were kicked out and made to find their own way to safety.”
Monique Correia from Perth said she was also told to pack her things and evacuate.
“The lady from my hotel has just told us to all pack our stuff and evacuate and drive back to Kuta now,” she said.
However, other tourists are feeling more relaxed about the situation. David and Kellie Smith, from Redhead in Newcastle, are on their first Bali holiday with their two daughters and say they are not concerned by the possibility of Mt Agung erupting.
They have spoken a lot with locals who say the most concern rests with the villagers closest to the mountain.
Like many Australians spoken to yesterday by News Corp Australia at Seminyak and Legian, their travel insurance appears sound, should the volcano erupt.
“We are all covered. I have spoken to our travel agent and she said as soon as she gets notice (of any problems) she will email me,” Ms Smith said, adding that they monitor social media for developments. “If the locals are not panicked, we are not too worried at the moment.”
The family arrived in Bali on September 16 just as Mt Agung was rumbling into action and the next day took a day trip, with a guide and driver, to Amed where they had spectacular views of Mt Agung before it was on alert.
RELATED: Aussie inmates among those evacuated from a Bali prison
“Honestly, we haven’t been too worried. We have had people ringing us (to find out what’s going on) but from what I understand there is not too much drama,” Mr Smith said. They are due to return home on Saturday.
Melbourne man Brett McKenzie was at the Double Six beach yesterday while his three sons, twins Ryan and Jackson, 13, and Bailey, 11, had a surf lesson.
The family arrived in Bali on Sunday and Mr McKenzie said he and his wife had no reservations about coming, knowing that Mt Agung was stirring.
He said they had thoroughly checked the DFAT Smartraveller advice before coming and had travel insurance.
“It is one of those things, it is a force of nature, unavoidable. If we have to stay longer (if the airport closes) we have to stay longer,” Mr McKenzie said. It was about taking personal responsibility and being aware of risks, taking note of the expert warnings.
“Our concern is more with the local Balinese people. These people are subsistence farmers ... in the villages and nearby surroundings and their livelihoods are at risk. That’s where our concern comes from, more than ourselves,” he said.
Mr McKenzie said due care was needed to avoid any risks, adding it was important to take responsibility for yourself, should Mt Agung erupt.
“I think one thing we are aware of is the unpredictability of the volcano,” he said.
He said while his family would be interested to see the volcano itself, they were concerned not to be traipsing up the mountain just to take a look with massive relief efforts underway.
“You don’t want thousands of people running up there making it difficult for them,” he said.
Throughout the day on Wednesday hundreds of earthquakes were recorded within Mt Agung. Between 6am and 12 noon, there were 521 earthquakes.
The biggest tremor recorded so far came at 1.19pm yesterday registering at 4.3.
Thousands of people have been evacuated from the 12km exclusion zone around the mountain and who are sheltering in evacuation centres further down the mountain.
And shops around Bali reported yesterday having sold out of advanced face masks with filters as people rush to ensure they are stocked up. Many people were buying in bulk, saying they were donating to the relief effort or intended to volunteer when the eruption happened.
And children, who are in shelters with their parents, are now being organised to attend schools closest to the shelters where they are staying.
In the Karangasem district, volunteers were helping with classes for some of the thousands of children whose schools within the exclusion zone around the volcano are now closed.
“So far the children look happy and are enjoying themselves,” said volunteer Yenni Ariyanti.
“They do not look worried or sad. Hopefully we can continue to maintain their excitement and keep them in good spirits.”
Bali’s Governor Made Pastika has urged Australians that Bali is safe despite the looming eruption of Mt Agung volcano.
It comes as DFAT updated its travel warning late today, noting the potential for widespread ash fall outside the declared danger zone.
The new travel advice says: “Past eruptions of Agung volcano have shown this volcano’s potential to cause significant impacts to the island of Bali, including the potential for widespread ash fall outside the declared danger area surrounding the volcano. Depending on the weather conditions at the time of an eruption, an ash cloud could affect flights and ash fall may impact Denpasar and neighbouring airports in East Java and Lombok, causing widespread disruption to the travelling public. Contact your airline or tour operator directly to confirm travel plans.”
At the Klungkung evacuee shelter, large numbers of people, from the volcano slopes, are living inside a large indoor basketball court and sports arena while others are in tents outside. There have been problems with the tents during rain and Mr Pastika said this was the biggest problem now facing authorities.
The agency handling Mt Agung says it is still not possible to say when it would erupt but that the potency was now very large.
“To our brothers and sisters from abroad, of course Bali still safe,” Mr Pastika said, adding that the danger area is within a 12km perimeter of the mountain’s peak. He said there were many tourist areas away from the mountain which were more than safe.
Mr Pastika spoke to News Corporation today as he visited an emergency shelter for evacuees in Klungkung, which is currently housing more than 3800 people.
“The biggest problem is if the rain comes so that's why we are trying to move them to traditional village halls. People living the tents can’t stay there more than one month,” he said, for health and sanitation reasons.
At the Klungkung centre, as volunteers cooked food for the evacuees in huge vats, a local library brought its mobile book truck to the shelter so the children could borrow books to read.