Russia hospital fire: 23 killed, 23 injured in fire at psychiatric hospital in Voronezh region, officials say
A fire at a psychiatric hospital in southern Russia has killed 23 patients, most of them elderly, in the latest tragedy to hit mental health hospitals in the country.
Seventy patients and four nurses were in the ward when the fire broke out shortly before midnight Saturday (local time) at the hospital in the village of Alferovka, located in the southern Voronezh region.
Most of those who perished in the blaze were in their 60s and 70s, although some were in their 40s and 50s, according to a list of patients released by the emergencies ministry.
"The bodies of 23 people have been found during an on-site inspection," Russia's Investigative Committee said in a statement on Sunday, adding that a further 23 people were hospitalised.
The state-owned Rossiya 24 news channel said those who died were bedridden patients who had been given tranquillizers.
"They simply did not wake up," a correspondent reported from the scene.
The fire reduced the wooden hospital building to its scorched foundations, with footage showing rescue workers combing through the smoking ruins.
It took more than 440 firefighters and emergency workers, who arrived at the scene aboard 80 vehicles, about three hours to bring the fire under control.
It was not immediately clear what triggered the blaze.
The Investigative Committee, which reports directly to Russian president Vladimir Putin, said it opened a criminal probe into the deaths on suspicion of negligence.
The fire was the latest tragedy to hit a psychiatric institution in Russia, where outdated Soviet-era infrastructure is still in widespread use and managers often take a lax approach to fire safety.
Scores of people also die in house fires each year.
A fire at a psychiatric hospital in north-west Russia in September 2013 left 37 people dead while another blaze in April of the same year killed 38.
In 2009, 156 people were killed in a nightclub fire in the city of Perm, 1,200 kilometres east of Moscow in one of the deadliest accidents in Russia's modern history.