State parks near Big Sur stay closed as Soberanes Fire grows
A stubborn wildfire ablaze in the wooded canyons and ridges south of Carmel in Monterey County — one of several fires burning around the state — grew to 23,5000 acres late Tuesday and is only 10 percent contained, firefighters said.
The Soberanes Fire continued to scorch the steep and drought-stricken terrain near the picturesque Central Coast, where flames have consumed 20 homes and forced the closure of several popular Big Sur state parks since igniting Friday.
The infernos in Big Sur and in Los Angeles County prompted Acting Governor Tom Torlakson to declare a state of emergency. The declaration directs officials to “determine if local government assistance for Monterey County is appropriate.”
After burning strong for five days, the inferno’s effects have reverberated into nearby towns and through the popular hiking and camping destinations around Big Sur.
Pfeiffer Big Sur State Park in the forest along the coast is closed indefinitely as the fire continues to burn. So are Andrew Molera and Julia Pfeiffer Burns state parks.
Point Sur Lighthouse State Historic Park, Pine Ridge Trail to Sykes Hot Springs and Mount Manuel Trail are closed until further notice as well, California State Parks officials said.
The Henry Miller Memorial Library on Highway 1 near the state parks will stay open, but events on Thursday and Saturday night were postponed due to the fire, library representatives said.
The blaze is the first major wildfire near the Bay Area this fire season as California braces for what officials predict will be a particularly destructive year around the state.
In Southern California, the 59-square-mile Sand Fire in Los Angeles County was 25 percent contained Tuesday.
Armed with hose lines, shovels and chainsaws, firefighters attacked the Soberanes Fire Tuesday along the winding and steep roads branching off Palo Colorado Road, protecting remaining homes in the rural communities where residents were forced to flee after walls of flames raged through over the weekend. The fire grew Tuesday to 19,311 acres.
“The fire may increase, but we have more resources out there,” Capt. John Clingingsmith with the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, also known as Cal Fire, said Tuesday after a marine layer that had given firefighters some relief in the morning cleared up by the afternoon.
Crews, he said, are attacking the fire with a “multipronged approach.” Teams of firefighters are focused solely on protecting homes, while others cut control lines along the burn area’s growing edge.
From the air, six planes and 14 helicopters were cleared for attack as the day heated up and visibility for the pilots improved.
On Monday, marine fog helped suppress the fire but kept aircraft grounded for much of the day.
The fire started Friday morning in Garrapata State Park near Carmel Highlands but gained momentum in the late afternoon, sweeping south toward Big Sur and sending residents scrambling, Cal Fire officials said.
Many folks only had moments to grab essential items before the fire pushed into their property. For the 300 people forced to evacuate, it’s now a matter of waiting until they learn the fate of their homes.
“To see these people go, it hurts,” Mid-Coast Fire Brigade Chief Cheryl Goetz said of the evacuees.
Goetz lives in the area and has been defending her neighborhood with other volunteer firefighters from the small agency since Friday.
“We rely on our community and we’re really, really sad,” she said.
The Red Cross set up an evacuation shelter at Carmel Middle School, and on Monday evening, officials held a meeting at Carmel River School packed by hundreds of anxious community members eager for updates on the firefight.
Residents along Palo Colorado, Old Coast, Rocky Creek and Bixby Creek roads were forced to evacuate while those on the south end of Carmel Highlands were warned to be ready to go at a moment’s notice. Late Tuesday, additional evacuations were ordered for the Santa Lucia preserve area.
Cal Fire officials said 1,650 homes remained threatened by the fire.
For the 2,305 firefighters hacking away at the blaze, weather continued to be a challenge. High temperatures and low humidity are fueling the fire’s spread, sending flames racing up the nearly vertical hillsides in the burn area.
Brown smoke hovering over the usually scenic havens of Carmel and Big Sur, has seeped north into the Bay Area. Haze from the fire filled the skies around the South Bay.
The Bay Area Air Quality Management District issued a Spare the Air alert for Tuesday and Wednesday due to unhealthy stagnant air, high temperatures and smoke from the Soberanes Fire.
While the Soberanes Fire continues to pose challenges for crews, the more than 3,000 firefighters in Los Angeles County have made progress battling the Sand Fire.
Many of the estimated 20,000 people evacuated in the Santa Clarita Valley mountains were allowed to return home Tuesday. One person was found dead in the fire area and 18 homes have been destroyed since the fire started Friday.