Germanwings: Lubitz researched suicide, black box found
Dusseldorf, Germany (CNN)Analysis of a tablet device belonging to Germanwings Flight 9525 co-pilot Andreas Lubitz shows he researched suicide methods on the Internet in the days leading up to the crash, a German prosecutor said Thursday.
Dusseldorf prosecutor Christoph Kumpa said that on one day Lubitz also "searched for several minutes with search terms relating to cockpit doors and their security measures."
Police analysis of the correspondence and search history on the device, retrieved from Lubitz's Dusseldorf apartment, demonstrated that the co-pilot used it from March 16 to March 23, Kumpa said.
The search history was not deleted and also revealed searches concerning medical treatment, the prosecutor said.
Lubitz is suspected of deliberately bringing down Germanwings Flight 9525 in the French Alps on March 24, killing all 150 on board. Investigators have since focused on his health as they try to establish his motivation.
Noting he's made a criminal request to German authorities but is for now conducting his own investigation, the prosecutor in Marseille, France, said he is tasked with an involuntary homicide investigation. But prosecutor Brice Robin noted that Lubitz made voluntary actions -- such as guiding the plane toward the mountain and reducing its speed to prevent alarms from going off -- and was "alive and conscious" to the very end.
While cautioning that there are still many holes in understanding Lubitz's motivation, the disclosures about his Internet searches show that he planned to do what he was going to do, according to this official.
Normally white with florescent orange, this discovered recorder lived up to its name as a black box because fire had darkened it with ashes. Even with this damage, the Marseille prosecutor said that investigators should be able to get useful information out of it.
More importantly, investigators have isolated 150 different sets of DNA -- a number that corresponds with the number of people on Flight 9525. Still, the Marseille prosecutor cautioned, "It doesn't mean we have identified 150 victims. We need to compare (the recovered DNA to) DNA from the families and the deceased."
In the weeks leading up to the crash, Lubitz was shopping doctors, seeing at least five, perhaps as many as six, the source said, as he kept going from one doctor to the next seeking help.
The doctors knew he was a pilot and gave him a "not fit to work" notice, which he was apparently required to give to his employer, even though he didn't, the source said.Officials have found doctors handled the matter the way they were supposed to and found no negligence on their part.