Floods could inundate Kempsey town centre 15/06/2011
TONY EASTLEY: Hundreds of people have been evacuated from low-lying areas on the New South Wales mid-North Coast as flooding continues. The Macleay River which runs through Kempsey is expected to peak later today and could inundate parts of the CBD as well as low-lying areas further downstream. The floods have closed parts of the busy Pacific Highway which has had a knock-on effect for traffic all along large parts of the coast. And more rain is forecast. Timothy McDonald reports. TIMOTHY MCDONALD: Graham Belmont lives in New Zealand but he's on holiday in Kempsey. He says he was caught out in yesterday's downpour. GRAHAM BELMONT: At some point it almost stopped and you could like just walk out and wouldn't even feel it. But yeah, some points during the day you couldn't go outside for 30 seconds without being soaked through five layers (laughs). TIMOTHY MCDONALD: Graham Belmont says police came to evacuate the motel he was staying in. GRAHAM BELMONT: Yeah basically it'd been raining all day and I was just going off to bed thinking, wondering how high it was going to get. And the guy comes banging on the door saying, hey, police are saying we'd better move. We all chucked a couple of things in the bag, wandered downstairs and bus turns up after about half an hour, takes us off here to the call and basically don't know where we're going from here. I think it's just a case of wait and see if the river goes up or down or what happens really. TIMOTHY MCDONALD: Hundreds of other people are in a similar situation. Evacuation centres have been set up at a number of schools around the Kempsey region. The river is expected to peak at 6.9 meters later today. It's possible that the town's levee may not be sufficient to contain that much water and the town's CBD will be flooded. Low-lying areas downstream are also likely to be affected. Robert Scott is the director of infrastructure services at Kempsey Shire Council ROBERT SCOTT: On the ground in Kempsey there's an awful lot of water all over the place as you would expect. We do have evacuation orders out for our lower Macleay residents in Gladstone, Smithtown and Jerseyville. And certainly the road system down in that area is becoming increasingly difficult to navigate through because of the floodwaters rising up over the system itself. We've got evacuation order in our CBD as the levels are expected that there's a possibility that they'll create flooding in that area as well. TIMOTHY MCDONALD: How does this one compare to previous floods? ROBERT SCOTT: This one, at this stage the levels and all indications are that it'll shape up pretty close to the levels that we saw during our 2009 flood event during May. However it's interesting at the moment we're still seeing a rainfall in our upper catchment area, we're still seeing increases on the upper catchment flow gauges and there's a likelihood that things could change. TIMOTHY MCDONALD: The Kempsey Shire council was due to finish its repairs from the 2009 floods in the next few weeks. The floods have also affected traffic. The Pacific Highway is still closed at Kempsey between Port Macquarie and Blacksville which is good news for some further inland. Shane Beecher is the manager of Black Mountain Roadhouse just north of Armidale on the New England Highway. He's had additional business from trucks that have been diverted off the Pacific Highway. SHANE BEECHER: Well obviously because of the floods the sales increased, oh I don't know, something like about 70 per cent. We've had a lot of trucks in the yard, a lot of food sales. We get a lot of phone calls prior to trucks arriving here to see if we have parking space. We try and squeeze in as many as we can. We can have up to 40 VR trucks parked here on site at one time. They're upset that they've got to travel this way. It means more cost to them and everything like that. But the Pacific Highway seems to be closed when there's a bit of a flood. Well obviously got to travel extra distance. It's a little bit more hillier road than what the Pacific Highway is. So they tend to burn out more fuel. TONY EASTLEY: Shane Beechey, the manager of the Black Mountain Roadhouse on the New England Highway, ending that report by Timothy McDonald.