Whale-watching boat carrying 27 sinks off Canada's British Columbia, killing five people, one missing
A Canadian whale-watching tour boat with 27 passengers on board has sunk off the coast of British Columbia, killing five people with one missing, rescue officials say.
Twenty-one people had been rescued when the search was called off late on Sunday night local time, Melissa Kai, a spokeswoman for the Joint Rescue Coordination Centre (JRCC), said.
A military rescue helicopter and plane had been sent to the waters off the coast of Tofino after the vessel sent a distress signal around 5:00pm local time, according to the JRCC.
Several other coast guard vessels were involved in the search off the rugged west coast of Vancouver Island.
The case had now been turned over to Canadian police as a missing persons case, Ms Kai said.
Eighteen people were taken to Tofino General Hospital, of which three were transferred to other island health facilities, Island Health spokeswoman Val Wilson said.
All were in a stable condition. Some at the Tofino hospital had already been discharged, she said.
For unknown reasons, the ship capsized in waters less than 10 metre deep.
Investigators have been sent to the site, Canada's federal Transportation Safety Board said.
Earlier in the evening, military planes and coast guard vessels lit up the area where the vessel remained partially submerged, eight nautical miles northwest of Tofino.
The manager of the Shelter Restaurant in Tofino said fishermen and fishing charter companies had joined the rescue effort, with up to 20 boats leaving the tourist town.
"Practically anyone who can go will go," said Matthew, who did not give his last name.
"People here get together to help when things like this happen."
Tofino mayor Josie Osborne told broadcaster CTV the response from the community had been "nothing short of phenomenal".
"The way that people are bringing out blankets and clothing and food, donating what they can and offering all of the services that they have," Ms Osborne said.
Tofino, a community of roughly 2,000 people on the west coast of Vancouver Island, is a popular tourist destination for surfers, hikers and whale watchers from around the world.
"All our attention now is on our passengers and crew so we'll be providing information as soon as the time is appropriate," said a staff member of Jamie's Whaling Station and Adventure Centres, which operated the vessel, the Leviathan II.
In 1998, a boat operated by the same company sank near Tofino, killing the ship's captain and a German tourist.
John Forde, who works at another eco-adventure company, said passengers on a vessel like the Leviathan II, a three-deck 65-foot cruiser that can carry up to 46 people, would not have to wear life jackets.
The boat, like ferries, would only be required to have life jackets on board.
"The sea was three to four metres, a fairly big sea, but not much wind or too unusual for the conditions we deal with on a regular basis out here," Mr Forde, who took part in the rescue for several hours, told Global television. Reuters