10 killed as air ambulance crashes in Faridabad
FARIDABAD: A small aircraft with seven on board crashed into a colony in Faridabad's sector 22 around 10.45 pm on Wednesday, killing all on board. Three more persons were killed on the ground. The aircraft, a PC-12 with registration number VT-ACF, was operating as an air ambulance and initial reports indicated bad weather was the cause of the accident. The plane fell on two houses in the middle of Parvatia Colony , near Jawahar Colony, NIT, and immediately burst into flames. There were five passengers and two crew members on board. They included the 22-year-old patient, Rahul Raj, an attendant, two doctors, one male nurse, the pilot and co-pilot. Those killed were Dr Rajesh, Dr Arshad, Captain Harpreet, co-pilot Manpreet Kataria, Ratnesh Kumar and male nurse Cyril. Rahul Raj and his cousin, Ratnesh, are residents of Bettiah in West Champaran. Rahul Raj had been admitted in the ICU at Patna's Jagdish Memorial Hospital and was on ventilator support, said Dr Harsh who had accompanied the team to Patna airport. Raj was being brought to Delhi for treatment at Apollo Hospital. His uncle, Anoop Kumar, told TOI that he was being accompanied by a cousin brother. The aircraft was being operated by Air Chartered Services Pvt Ltd, which has an office in Defence Colony. It had taken off from Patna at 8.33pm and was expected to land in Delhi shortly after 11pm. Sources said that last time the plane was seen on the radar was at 10.45pm and the last contact between the pilot and ATC was when the aircraft was at a height of 11,000 ft. According to sources, the aircraft had deviated from its path, possibly due to strong winds. At the time of crash, most aircraft landing at IGI airport were unable to stick to their paths due to strong winds. Parvatia Colony is a densely populated area and officials were expecting casualties to rise. The flames from the houses could be seen from a distance of 1.5km and eyewitnesses said the fire was spreading to other houses. The area had been cordoned off and a huge crowd had gathered at the spot, making rescue work difficult for the police and fire personnel.