MH370 debris confirmed, but closure still a long way off for family members
A Queensland woman who lost her sister and brother-in-law on flight MH370 says the announcement debris belongs the missing plane does not yet offer her family any closure.
Overnight, Malaysian prime minister Najib Razak said investigators had “conclusively” determined a wing component found washed-up on Reunion Island belonged to the missing Malaysian Airlines flight.
Mr Najib's widely-expected announcement ends an agonising wait for families of the 239 passengers and crew who have demanded concrete proof of what happened to their missing loved ones.
But next-of-kin, investigators, and the aviation industry are still left with the vexing question of what caused the Malaysia Airlines Boeing 777 aircraft to inexplicably divert on a flight from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing on March 8, 2014.
Queenslander Jeanette Maguire’s sister Cathy Lawton and her brother-in-law Bob were on the fateful flight.
She told The TODAY Show the family had been “99.9 percent” confident the debris found last week had been from MH370.
“Today, while it is sad, it is also very good news for us and the families I’m sure I’m speaking on behalf of,” Mrs Maguire said.
“It’s still raw mixed emotions in there, but it’s a relief.
“It’s part of a puzzle we needed, we needed to find where this plane had landed and ended up, so to have a little bit of information has been very rewarding.”
She said closure for all families grieving their missing loved ones was still a long way off.
“There is so much unknown there that closure isn’t anywhere near close,” Mrs Maguire said.
“But we’ll get there one day, we’ve got to keep going.
“I don’t know when closure will ever happen.”
With the confirmation of the wing’s origin, attention now returns to the difficult task finding the rest of the plane’s wreckage.
Monash University academic Greg Bamber said identifying the wing offers little help to finding the rest of the plane’s wreckage.
“The Indian Ocean is a very large ocean; it’s unexplored, it’s deep,” Mr Bamber told TODAY
“It’s not only the currents, it’s the winds, the waves and depending on the size of the debris, whether it’s above the water or below.
“It’s more difficult than finding a needle in a haystack, because the haystack is huge and it’s moving all the time.”
It is hoped barnacles and shells on the debris could help pinpoint the rest of the plane, which now appears to be on the ocean floor.
The doomed flight apparently veered out over the Indian Ocean, flying for hours after its communications and tracking systems were shut off, in what remains one of the biggest mysteries in the history of aviation.
Mr Najib gave no indication that the analysis of the debris yielded any clues into the cause of the disappearance.
“Today, 515 days since the plane disappeared, it is with a very heavy heart that I must tell you that an international team of experts has conclusively confirmed that the aircraft debris found on Reunion Island is indeed from MH370," Mr Najib told reporters.
"We now have physical evidence that, as I announced on 24th March last year, flight MH370 tragically ended in the southern Indian Ocean."
Malaysian Airlines said the debris had been independently confirmed by expert investigators from France and Malaysia, aviation experts, and the Australian Safety Transport Bureau. 
"Malaysia Airlines would like to sincerely convey our deepest sorrow to the families and friends of the passengers onboard Flight MH370 on the news that the flaperon found on Reunion Island on 29 July was indeed from Flight MH370," the airline said in a statement. 
"This is indeed a major breakthrough for us in resolving the disappearance of MH370.
"We expect and hope that there would be more objects to be found which would be able to help resolve this mystery." 
The piece of debris, a wing component called a flaperon, was found last week on a beach on the French island La Reunion, near Madagascar.
It was flown to the French city of Toulouse where it was examined by French and Malaysian technical experts, and representatives from Boeing to determine any link to MH370.
Many relatives accuse Malaysia's government and the airline of a bungled response to the disaster, possible cover-up, and insensitive treatment of families, charges that are vehemently denied.