Elliot Lake mall roof collapse: Coroner investigating deaths of two women
ELLIOT LAKE, ONT.—In this small town, big questions are being raised as to why it took search and rescue teams four days to find two women trapped under the rubble at a mall whose roof collapsed Saturday.
The bodies of Lucie Aylwin, 37, and Doloris Perizzolo, in her 70s, were recovered on Wednesday. Their teary families and friends, who had been hoping for the best and kept a vigil at the site of the collapsed mall, were told just before the grim announcements were made.
One body was recovered at about 9 a.m., the other just before 1 p.m.
It took crews almost 100 hours to get to them.
There were also questions as to whether the women could have been saved if specialized, heavy machinery had been brought in from Toronto earlier.
A coroner’s investigation is underway to examine how the women died, Dan Hefkey, chief of Ontario Emergency Management, confirmed on Thursday. The Ontario Provincial Police are assisting the coroner and will determine if there are grounds for a criminal investigation.
Three OPP officers, including Commissioner Chris Lewis, a fire chief and Mayor Rick Hamilton, could not provide an answer.
“Sometimes the best just isn’t good enough,” said Lewis.
Bill Neadles, a spokesman for the Heavy Urban Search and Rescue team, stressed there were no other victims. “My thoughts are based on the intelligence we have. There are only two victims in that complex. There is nobody else in there.”
When the roof caved in, people in the town believed those trapped would be quickly rescued. Dozens put in all-nighters, started a memorial, kept vigil at the site of the mall.
When the roof collapsed, it not only brought down slabs of concrete weighing thousands of pounds but also dislodged escalators and made the entire structure unstable.
At one point, structure engineers said the mall could collapse any time.
Getting the two women out became a complicated task, one that took a small army four days.
“No one was going to quit ever ... but it became dangerous for the crews,” said Neadles.
When the Heavy Urban Search and Rescue team started late Saturday night, it never thought it would be so difficult. It started off with determining the general area where people were trapped. Once that was established by Sunday, they started their work — but persistent rain slowed their efforts and added concern about the stability of the structure.
Amid precariously fallen concrete slabs, twisted debris and shattered glass on Monday, the team slowly inched toward where it thought the trapped women were. At one point, the HUSAR team was about three metres away from the victims, said Neadles.
That is when the escalator, weighing thousands of tonnes of metal, began to fall. Searchers pulled back in the face of the danger.
But there were two women in there, maybe alive. They couldn’t leave them.
“We were confident we could go through our normal means,” he said Wednesday.
PODCAST: Why such confusion around Elliot Lake mall roof collapse?
The team, then, made its most ambitious plan yet: to use a giant robotic arm to drop into the big gaping hole, where the roof had caved in, and clear the debris and search for victims. The arm has a flexible reach, almost like claws. Another robotic arm, equipped with floor lights and a camera, would help crews with the debris inside.
But first, they had to get the arm to Elliot Lake from Toronto.
The mechanical arm weighs more than 90 tonnes and had to be delivered to Elliot Lake in three separate trucks. And before it arrived on Tuesday evening, crews at the Algo Centre Mall worked frantically building temporary inclines, shoring up the building’s balconies.
The arm — believed to be the largest of its kind in the province and owned by Priestly Demolition — arrived at the site at 6:30 p.m. By 9 p.m., it was put to work. The idea was to drop it into the hole.
But the arm could not position itself over the hole.
Neadles then decided that a part of the mall had to be torn apart with shears and it had to be demolished from the outside. It was a big departure from the original plan but there was no choice. The arm began tearing through the outer facade of the mall and within a couple of hours, it looked wretched.
Overnight Tuesday, the operation concentrated on a 10-by-25-metre area after earlier efforts swept the rest of the mall and determined no one was in there. The arm’s claws dismantled the escalator and the set of stairs, which were under huge slabs of fallen concrete.
PHOTOS: Click here for a photo gallery of the scene of the collapse.
But as the crews inched closer to the victims, a beam under the escalator had to be cleared. A huge slab of concrete had fallen on it, turning it into a v-shape. It was one more step to get to the victims.
The two victims were found in that area, close to the wall, said Neadles.
One was pinned under heavy concrete.
Gary Gendron, who for three days became the face of the trapped victims as he repeatedly spoke publicly about Aylwin, his fiancée, did not talk to anyone after he learned that her body had been found. The two had met three years ago and were engaged for about a year.
In another part of the town, a neighbour said the Perizzolo family is in shock.
“They’re looking for some peace for a little while,” said Pam Brown, a neighbour and friend who answered the phone at the Perizzolo residence Wednesday evening. “They need some time to absorb some of the things that they’ve been told that people aren’t aware of.”
MORE: Concrete expert says salt seepage could have weakened Elliot Lake mall roof
MORE:DiManno: Amid disaster in Elliot Lake, an inexcusable lack of action