Pakistan fuel tanker truck explosion kills at least 153
Karachi, Pakistan (CNN)At least 153 were killed Sunday when they rushed to collect leaking fuel from a crashed tanker in Bahawalpur, eastern Pakistan, before it suddenly exploded.
The truck veered off the road when the driver lost control, police official Mohammad Akhtar told CNN. As the tanker sat on the side of the road, fuel began leaking out in large pools.
Shortly afterwards an explosion tore the container open like a soda can, engulfing everything around the truck, including women and children, according to the government-run Associated Press of Pakistan
Many victims died immediately, while others succumbed to their injuries at hospitals.
The explosion happened Sunday morning as hundreds of people from nearby villages, as well as workers at a mango garden -- many of them driving cars or motorcycles -- rushed to collect the fuel in pots, according to APP
A tanker truck caught fire then exploded after running off the road and overturning near the eastern Pakistani village of Bahawalpur on Sunday, June 25. Before the explosion, villagers had surrounded the truck to collect spilled fuel.
Burned bodies are strewn around the wreckage of the tanker.
A victim of the blast is brought to a hospital in Bahawalpur.
Victims are loaded onto a stretcher outside a hospital in Bahawalpur, Pakistan.
A burned motorcycle stands next to the wreckage of the tanker truck.
People gather behind burned motorcycles and vehicles at the scene of the explosion.
A Pakistani rescue worker walks by what remains of the tanker truck.
Nishtar Hospital, where many of the wounded were taken, said more than 100 people were injured in the blast. Bahawal Victoria Hospital said it was treating 40 victims, all of whom had suffered burns on at least 70% of their bodies.
At the scene of the blast, photos showed the tanker surrounded by the husks of burned-out motorbikes and automobiles, their windows and tires melted away from the heat.
According to APP, the explosion destroyed 75 motorbikes and six automobiles. Bodies were pulled from cars and a motorcycle rickshaw.
It's not known what cause the wreck to ignite, but some people gathering at the scene began smoking cigarettes and using their cell phones to inform friends and relatives of the crash.
"Sparking from cell phones could ignite fire," Haroon-ur-Rasheed, a former police official who now handles emergency and rescue operations in Bahawalpur, told the APP.
He added the tanker also was fitted with batteries that could have sparked the blaze.
Officers with the National Highways and Motorway Police urged villagers to stay away from the vehicle, but to no avail, police sources told APP.
Images from the scene showed the truck overturned with a gaping hole atop the tanker where the blast had ripped open.
Mohammad Shabbir, a villager, told CNN affiliate Geo TV that the vehicle's driver had warned people to stay away from the truck but his warnings were not heeded.
"What is the use of this petrol? What will you do with it now?" he asked, gesturing towards a bucket in his hand.
It added that the road had been reopened and that traffic had started to flow again.
"The Prime Minister has directed provincial government to provide full medical assistance to the injured with burns," a statement from his office said. "The Prime Minister has expressed sympathies with the bereaved families and prayed for the departed souls."
Amid criticism that the government has failed to respond adequately to the tragedy, the prime minister's daughter tweeted that Sharif would cut short his trip to London and return to Pakistan immediately. He was in London for his grandson's graduation ceremony, Maryam Nawaz Sharif tweeted.
tweeted its condolences The US Embassy in Islamabad tweeted its condolences
"We are so saddened to hear of the terrible oil tanker accident in #Bahawalpur," it said. "Our deep condolences to the families and loved ones of the victims."