Winter Storm Wallops Tri-State With Snow, Single-Digit Temperatures
A powerful nor'easter with blinding snow and bitter winds bore down on the tri-state Friday, forcing flight cancellations, the shutdown of highways and the New York City public school system, and causing major reductions in mass transit service as wind-whipped powder piled up on sidewalks and streets. 
The snow tapered off by midday Friday, but the blustery, numbing winds stuck around, causing more localized blowing and drifting of powdery snow.
A state of emergency was declared in New York and New Jersey ahead of the storm that dumped 10 inches of snow on parts of New York City, more than a foot in parts of Long Island and 8 inches or more in New Jersey and Connecticut.
The storm brought icy high tides to coastal areas of New Jersey. Police in Monmouth Beach said three people, including a mailman, were rescued after their vehicles hit high water on low roads.
New York City schools were closed along with dozens of other districts across the tri-state because of treacherous road and sidewalk conditions.
Mayor Bill de Blasio said Friday that New Yorkers should remain off the roads and take caution in the cold.
“This has been and remains a dangerous storm. It is going to be bitter cold today, and New Yorkers need to be extremely careful going outdoors," de Blasio said.
Get the latest forecast and track the storm with our interactive radar here.
Heavy, steady snow began falling Thursday evening, accompanied by plunging temperatures and whipping winds that made it feel like 10 degrees below zero in some spots overnight.
The Long Island Expressway was closed at midnight Friday as rapid snowfall combined with winds gusting up to 35 miles per hour to create white-out conditions, severely hampering visibility. The highway reopened around 8 a.m. 
WATCH: Snow at Top of the Rock
The wicked weather means a host of changes throughout the tri-state:
After the storm passes, temperatures should rebound slightly Saturday before rising into the 40s Sunday and Monday. By Tuesday, temperatures are expected to plummet again into the high teens. 
Send us your snow photos! Tweet #NBC4NY, emailstormteam@nbcnewyork.comor upload themhere. Please include your name and location. 