Royal Caribbean cruise ship returns home -- with a sickness record
"They claim there were 600; I think there could have as many as 1,000" sick people on board, passenger Sal Panto Jr. told CNN. "Some people I know didn't bother going down to the infirmary. They weren't feeling well, so they went to the state room. They didn't report it."
After the cruise, Kim Waite told CNN that she discovered the scope of the outbreak when she was taken to a makeshift infirmary in a wheelchair and sick passengers were everywhere, vomiting in buckets and bags. She said she waited three hours to be seen.
"I just started crying," she said. "I couldn't believe it. I was in shock. Because I thought I was the only one that was sick, and then when you see everyone else sick, it really upsets you even more."
Before the ship arrived at port in Bayonne, New Jersey, one frustrated passenger voiced her displeasure with the experience. Passengers disembarked in northern New Jersey shortly before 2 p.m. Wednesday, with some set to stay in area hotels until they can catch flights back home -- days before the Super Bowl will be played there.
"Are we bringing this virus off the ship with us?" asked Shannon Blace, a passenger from Toronto who was traveling with a party of 12 people -- 10 of whom have been sick. "We're all going to hotels all over the New York area. Will we be spreading the virus to the Super Bowl this weekend?"
"On Wednesday night, I was in the dining room and a woman was vomiting into her napkin," she said. "There were people walking around in their pajamas with vomit and diarrhea on them. People were barfing all over the place."
On Sunday, five stool samples were sent from the ship to the CDC in Atlanta, where the samples were expected to arrive the next day, CDC sources told CNN. But the arrival of the samples has been delayed because of paperwork issues and the bad weather in the Southeast.
"It will be the third aggressive sanitizing procedure the ship has undertaken since we became aware of the issue, and will additionally provide a window of more than 24 hours where there are no persons aboard the ship, which is a significant help," the statement said.
"Guests scheduled for the next cruise on Explorer of the Seas can be confident that all possible measures will have been taken to prevent further problems," it added.