Brooklyn Fire Kills 7 Children, City’s Worst Toll Since 2007
Just after midnight, flames began to fly off the large hot plate on a first-floor kitchen counter, near the back of the home in the Midwood section of Brooklyn, a neighborhood with many large Orthodox families. On a day of rest, it would have been one of the few electrical appliances in the neighborhood that were flipped on.
In upstairs bedrooms connected to the kitchen by an open stairwell, the Sassoon family slept: their mother, Gayle Sassoon, 45; four girls: Eliane, 16; Siporah, 15; Rivkah, 11; and Sara, 6; and four boys: David, 12; Yeshua, 10; Moshe, 8; and Yaakob, 5. Their father was at a religious conference, and given the Sabbath prohibition on electronic communication, he did not learn what had happened until several hours after the fire, when the Police Department reached him at a synagogue.
For some time, the fire smoldered in the kitchen unnoticed, fire officials believe. But as soon as the blaze reached the stairwell, it shot upstairs, feeding off wood inside the home, the authorities said.
The stairwell became a pillar of flames. Four children in two bedrooms in the back of the house were confined to their rooms as thick smoke filled the area. Three more children were stuck in a front bedroom.
Gayle Sassoon was separated from her children by the flames, Mr. Nigro said. After leaping from the second floor, she stumbled through the smoke to the steps of her cousin Gary Jemal’s house across the street. There, a neighbor and friend of Ms. Sassoon, Victor Sedaka, found her “black, charred,” he said. “You couldn’t even tell who she was.”
With a voice so hoarse it was barely audible, Mr. Sedaka heard her try to scream: “Save my children, save my children.”
Amid the pandemonium, Mr. Jemal later recalled to Mr. Sedaka, he had almost slammed the door on his cousin. Banging on his door and begging for help, Ms. Sassoon was so hysterical that Mr. Jemal did not recognize her.
Flames shot 15 feet out of windows on both sides of the house. Mr. Sedaka and other neighbors awoke to the sound of screams. About 15 firefighters, with hoses blasting, charged inside.
Ms. Sassoon’s second-oldest child, Siporah, had also jumped from a window. “Mommy, Mommy, help me!” a neighbor, Andrew Rosenblatt, said he heard her scream.
But from inside the home, Mr. Rosenblatt said, he heard more muffled cries. Siporah’s seven siblings were trapped behind, wailing from the bedrooms. The smoke had grown so thick that Mr. Rosenblatt could no longer see the back of the Sassoon home, about 40 feet away. “She valiantly tried, although she was badly burned, to get out and get help,” Mr. Nigro said of Ms. Sassoon. “She was very brave.”
Before Mr. Rosenblatt had gotten off the phone with a 911 dispatcher, fire engines were screeching up to the home. By then, flames eating through the first floor forced the firefighters to spray water on the blaze before they could enter. The stairwell was still barely navigable. They knocked down the flames and found the children in their bedrooms, but instead of survivors, they brought out only victims. The children were passed through windows to firefighters who were on ladders and on a porch behind the house.
“They took them out every which way,” said James Long, a fire department spokesman.
The firefighters started resuscitation efforts as they rushed the children, some of them badly burned, to waiting ambulances. They were carried through the yard where Isaac Apton, 18, a neighbor, said the children had been building snowmen this winter, and onto the street where they liked riding their bikes. On the Sabbath after sundown, Mr. Apton said, they played games of wooden blocks with each other before their early bedtimes.
“They’re some of the nicest, most well-behaved kids,” he said. “A great family.”
They were taken to various hospitals. Gayle and Siporah Sassoon both sustained burns and smoke inhalation, and were in critical condition on Saturday. Gayle Sassoon was at Jacobi Medical Center in the Bronx, which has a hyperbaric oxygen chamber for burn victims. Siporah was at Staten Island University Hospital North.
The fire was the city’s deadliest since March 2007, when nine children and a woman from two families were killed in the Bronx. That blaze started in a cord attached to a space heater, then raced up a staircase in a 100-year-old wooden building.
The fire, the leaps to safety and the unsuccessful rescues cast anguish over a Brooklyn block still flecked with the previous day’s snow. A large, square, charred hole gaped from the front of the light-colored, red-roofed house.
On Saturday morning, many neighborhood residents had not yet heard the news because they had turned off their phones, televisions and computers the night before in observance of the Sabbath.
Mr. Sedaka, 46, Ms. Sassoon’s neighbor and friend, said Ms. Sassoon had grown up in Midwood as a moderately religious girl and married her childhood sweetheart, but the couple divorced before having any children.
Ms. Sassoon, who is a Sephardic Jew, soon turned more religious and moved to Israel. There she met her current husband, who is also a Sephardic Jew, and with him she had eight children.
The family moved to Brooklyn from Israel about two years ago because Ms. Sassoon wanted to reconnect with her large extended family. She moved into the house she grew up in, owned by her parents, who spend summers in Deal, N.J., and winters in Florida. One cousin lived right across Bedford Avenue, and a second cousin moved into a house next door to that one in September. The families bonded fast.Mr. Sedaka described Ms. Sassoon as a hardworking mother who delegated parental duties among her children; the older ones helped care for younger ones. They socialized mainly with their own family members, particularly the ones across the street. “They were a unit,” Mr. Sedaka said.
Ms. Sassoon’s husband, whose name the authorities have not released, rarely talks to neighbors and spends much of his time studying religious texts. When Mr. Sedaka walked his dog at 6 a.m., he said, he often saw Mr. Sassoon rushing to synagogue, and said he was often away for weekends at religious conferences.
The family’s home was at least 90 years old, according to records from the Department of Buildings. A neighbor who has been living across the street since 1969, Robert Latish, said the age of the homes — his was built more than a century ago — made him even more vigilant about using smoke detectors.
Mr. Long, the fire department spokesman, said that at a minimum, homes are typically required to have a smoke detector on every floor as well as outside areas where people sleep.
“They’re beautiful homes on this block but god forbid you have a fire,” said Mr. Latish.
At the home of Ms. Sassoon’s parents, a man who described himself as a family friend said only: “They are going through a very tough time right now.” A woman outside the Midwood synagogue that the family regularly attended, Congregation Keter Torah, said the congregation was in pain and asked for privacy.
At Jacobi Medical Center, where Ms. Sassoon had been taken, exceptions were being made Saturday to the Sabbath restrictions on cellphone use. A rabbi chaplain was giving a volunteer an order that included kosher food to be delivered to the hospital: bananas, cake, challah bread, gefilte fish, salad, Diet Coke, spoons and forks.
Heather, a first cousin of Ms. Sassoon, took a car to the Bronx in her pajamas and was in the family waiting area on the second floor at Jacobi Medical Center. She did not want to give her last name because of concerns she would offend religious sensibilities about modesty and privacy. “I saw it on the news,” she said. “It was the house I used to go to every day. I saw the address, I almost fainted.”
She called her cousin “a religious, good girl,” who “gives everybody strength.” The children, she said, sometimes wore matching outfits and were well-behaved “little angels.” Learning that her cousin would likely live was a relief, but raised another troubling question.
“How’s she going to cope?” Heather mused. “How on earth?”
Outside the house on Saturday night, the Sabbath over, Orthodox Jews driving by in their cars slowed down and stared. Police officers, who had set up barricades around the front, waved at them to keep moving.
A stream of friends and neighbors passed by on the sidewalk, some of them wiping away tears.