ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
There are concerns that flood waters have claimed the life of a man in Queensland, as parts of New South Wales are declared a disaster zone.
Police divers began a search at first light for an elderly man whose car was swept away by flood waters at Bajool in Central Queensland.
Police say they have found no sign of the man or his ute, which was swept off the road while traversing a creek.
Local resident Cory North says the community is worried.
"He's been here a lot of years before me, so he's known a lot about this place, so yeah, very sad," he said.
The Weather Bureau says the worst of the weather has moved off the coast, but more heavy rain is expected over southern Queensland this afternoon.
Meanwhile, several flood affected areas of New South Wales have been declared a natural disaster zone, with an estimated $500 million worth of crops lost to the heavy rains.
The situation is easing in Victoria, but it may take some time for the flood waters there to recede.
Residents have been evacuated from the town of Eugowra in central New Souh Wales, and are on high alert at Wagga Wagga in the south west.
The NSW declaration covers the Mid-Western Regional Council and Weddin, Wellington, Warrumbungle, Cootamundra, Coonamble, Harden and Young shires.
Emergency Services Minister Steven Whan says further flooding is expected and financial assistance will be made available for people living in disaster declared areas.
"We are expecting more rain. We've got areas including Wagga which are looking at evacuations today. And it's expecting more rainfall in the coming weeks," he said.
A flood peak of more than 10 metres is expected to hit Gundagai later today and will travel downstream to Wagga Wagga on Monday.
Emergency services are meeting to decide whether or not to issue an evacuation order for North Wagga Wagga, Gumly Gumly and other outlying towns.
Local councillor, Kerry Pascoe says the area experienced flash flooding due to heavy rain earlier in the week, and it is now facing a major flood peak.
"All the emergency services were on full alert right through Thursday night and into the early hours and all day yesterday, so they'd be pretty drained at the moment to now back up and handle the whole situation that's coming on the outside of the levee bank now," she said.
SES Spokeswoman, Erin Pogmore says there has also been a number of flood rescues since the rain began on Tuesday.
"We've had 35 flood rescues since the 29th, and they've been fairly widespread in those areas that have been affected by flooding. There have been cars washed off causeways, animal rescues, a whole raft of things," she said.
Mr Whan says farmers have been severely affected.
"Our farmers really have done it tough through through this. They had in prospect an excellent crop and unfortunately that's been severely damaged by this weather," he said.
"Natural disaster declarations give access for farmers to loans, but it is still going to be a really significant loss and it's a very distressing situation."
The State Water Authority says it is trying to make sure that major water releases will not add to flooding in the Riverina and Central West.
A majority of dams are full, and heavy rains have forced the authority to release water into the swollen Murrumbidgee, Macquarie and Namoi rivers to maintain structural safety.
The acting manager of Water Delivery Scott Barber says there is a risk the releases may contribute to flood waters over the weekend.
"We've been focusing mainly on Burrendong Dam upstream of Dubbo in the central west, and Burrinjuck Dam down in the south at the top end of the Murrumbidgee system," he said.
"From Keepit Dam up in the northern part of the state upstream of Narrabri we're letting out 10 thousand megalitres are day."
Mr Barber says the authority is also regulating the ungated Blowering Dam as much as possible to ensure that Tumut River is not flooded.