Record rains force evacuations in NSW, but Victorians are staying put
EMERGENCY service workers are on standby in the southern NSW town of Cooma in case two of its creeks burst their banks.
Mass evacuation from NSW floods ACT dam about to overflow Victorian town inundated by floodwaters About 500 people in homes and businesses in low-lying areas, mainly in Mulach and Hawkins streets, were advised to evacuate early this morning.
By lunchtime, 200 residents had registered their details at an emergency evacuation centre in Vale Street, including 70 residents of the Sir William Hudson nursing home.
Beds have been set up at the centre in case it needs to be used tonight night.
Inside the hall, a small group mingled over sandwiches and cups of tea.
"There have been floods, but not as bad as they expect now," Jan Hebron, 85, told AAP.
"I packed up everything as best as I could."
Ms Hebron planned to stay at the centre for dinner before heading to a hotel arranged by the Department of Health. Others will stay with friends and relatives.
Arthur Kent was half way through packing up his belongings when he got a text message from the State Emergency Service urging him to leave his home. But despite the flood warnings, many chose to remain at home.
Up to 75 per cent of NSW is either under water or threatened by floodwaters.
About 500 people at Cooma have been ordered to leave 370 properties.
"The two surrounding creeks are just rising too rapidly," NSW State Emergency Services (SES) Deputy Commissioner Steve Pearce told ABC Radiotoday.
"We've lost all readings from the river gauges."
Ambulance paramedics commenced an evacuation plan at 9am this morning to evacuate the residents of Sir William Hudson Memorial Nursing Home in Cooma, which is at risk of flooding.
As at 12pm today, three Ambulance crews have evacuated 33 residents to Cooma Services Club and three stretcher patients to Cooma Hospital.
They are in the process of evacuating another 10 residents to nearby nursing homes in Bombala and Delegate.
Mr McCole has arranged for his mate Mal to take his 12 chickens to higher ground.
And he's ready to take its dog too.
"You can sort of replace all the stuff in the yard, but animals - you've got to save them," he said.
In western Sydney, large swathes of land are expected to be swamped by floodwaters as Warragamba Dam spills for the first time in 14 years today.
"We are already telling people to move their livestock onto higher ground," SES spokesman Phil Campbell told AAP.
When the dam spills the water will flood into the already swollen Hawkesbury-Nepean River.
People at about 30 caravan parks have been told the prepare to evacuate.
Downstream from Jerrara Dam people are being told to prepare for evacuation, with 10 properties affected.
"We've got 75 per cent of NSW either in flood or potentially impacted by flood," Mr Pearce told Network Seven.
"It's an enormous area... (and) we're still expecting a large deluge of rain."
Residents in low-lying areas of Queanbeyan, just outside Canberra, have been issued evacuation warnings.
Homes in several streets have been warned they might have to evacuate within the next 12 hours.
The local tourist park has also been warned residents might have to evacuate. Preparations have also been made to lift the park's cabins to higher ground, if the Queanbeyan River keeps rising.
There have been around 800 calls for help since the slow-moving rain band hit NSW on Monday, as well as 11 flood rescues.
"It's a slow moving system and it's not just moving away," Mr Pearce said.
A moderate flood watch is in place for the Nepean Hawkesbury Valley, with flooding expected tomorrow.
Up to 100mm of rain is forecast for the valley in the coming days and the SES predicts the deluge will close the Windsor and North Richmond bridges by this evening or tomorrow, isolating low-lying areas.
Meanwhile, people in Sydney's west have been urged to consider staying home this morning, with low-lying roads expected to become inundated.
"Low-lying roads in western Sydney are likely to be covered so it will be harder for people to get to work and kids to get to school," Mr Campbell said.
"We are telling people to prepare themselves and make different arrangements."
A severe weather warning is in place for much of NSW, including the Illawarra, Snowy Mountains and South coast.
The Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) said the Illawarra, Southern Tablelands, Snowy Mountains, South Coast and southern Central Tablelands districts are expected to be hit with more than 100mm of rain today.
Defiant residents are staying to defend their properties despite warnings to evacuate a town in Victoria's north.
Locals are using boats and utes to ferry sandbags to protect their homes from rising waters in Tallygaroopna, 17kms north of Shepparton.
The State Emergency Service (SES) has warned residents that the channel to the east of the town is now overflowing and residents should evacuate.
While some families have fled to Shepparton or Numurkah to the north, others have chosen to wait it out, with some coming from nearby towns to lend a hand with the sandbagging.
Mother-of-two Melissa Jones said they would have nowhere to go if the water flooded their house in further heavy falls forecast for this Saturday.
"We won't be able to stay, we'll have to rent a hotel room in town," she said.
Meanwhile a deluge has made a string of roads in Central Australia impassable, with the wet weather expected to continue until Saturday.
A senior forecaster at the Bureau of Meteorology, Chris Davies, says some areas in Central Australia have had more than 100mm of rain in the past two days.
An NT government website shows flooding across parts of the red centre has made many roads impassable or restricted to four-wheel-drive vehicles.