Top Gun director Tony Scott dies after jumping from Los Angeles bridge
The 68 year-old, originally from North Shields, North Tyneside, died after he plunged almost 200 feet from the Vincent Thomas Bridge, in the city's south, at lunchtime on Sunday.
Director Tony Scott and John Travolta on the set of The Taking of Pelham (Rex)
Witnesses reported seeing the father-of-two calmly parking his black Toyota Prius near the bridge, before walking to the south side where he leapt off "without hesitation" just after 12:30pm local time.
Within hours of his death becoming public, a shocked Hollywood paid tribute to the younger brother of film-maker Sir Ridley Scott, who was frequently seen behind the camera in his signature faded red baseball cap.
The US Coast Guard said officials found a note listing contact information inside his car, parked on an eastbound lane of the cable-suspension bridge, the scene of several Hollywood productions.
A suicide note was later found at the West Hollywood office of the movie legend, who also directed Days Of Thunder and Beverly Hills Cop II. It was suggested the notes were addressed to "loved ones".
Unconfirmed reports suggested Scott, who who grew up by the river Tyne in northern England, had depression.
Today, it was believed that his actress wife, Donna Scott, who appeared in several of her husband's films, was being comforted by friends and family at their Beverly Hills home. The pair had twin 12 year-old boys Frank and Max.
He had been married twice previously, firstly to Gerry Scott whom he divorced in 1974 after seven years of marriage and the Glynis Sanders, an advertising executive whom he divorced after a year of marriage in 1987.
“I can confirm that Tony Scott has indeed passed away,” said his publicist, Simon Halls.
“The family asks that their privacy be respected at this time.”
The Los Angeles County Coroner's Office said a dive team using sonar equipment pulled the body from the murky waters in Los Angeles harbour several hours later after a massive search.
Lieutenant Joe Bale, a watch commander for the coroner's office, said there was no evidence to suggest foul play.
“At this point we are investigating this as a suicide,” he said. “There is nothing to lead us to believe otherwise. A note was left in the car.
"We will go where the facts take us. We have no reason to believe it was not a suicide."
Tony Scott with his wife Donna and sons Max and Frank (Picture: AFP/ GETTY IMAGES)
A port mortem examination will be performed later today. One lane of the eastbound side of the bridge was closed as investigations continued by the Los Angeles Police Department and the coroner's office.
"It's a dolorous task and we're working to treat the deceased with the utmost dignity and respect," said Los Angeles Fire Department spokesman Brian Humphrey.
Completed in 1963, the 6,060-foot bridge, which spans San Pedro and Terminal Island in Los Angeles, is a known suicide spot. It has been used in movies including Charlie's Angels And The Fast and the Furious.
Today colleagues and fans struggled to explain why the successful director, whose full name was Anthony David Scott, would commit suicideas many took to Twitter to post their tributes.
Over his successful career he directed more than two dozen movies and television shows and produced nearly 50 titles.
Friends told how he would always send personal, handwritten notes and "always drew a cartoon caricature of himself, smoking a cigar, with his hat colored in red".
Director Ron Howard, led tributes, saying: "No more Tony Scott movies. Tragic day."
Val Kilmer, the actor, wrote: "RIP Tony. You were the kindest film director I ever worked for. You will be missed."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Val Kilmer - RIP Tony. You were the kindest film director I ever worked for. You will be missed. &lt;a href="http://t.co/q9U16vI0" target="_blank"&gt;http://t.co/q9U16vI0&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/noframe&gt;
Director Edgar Wright said he could not believe the news.
The Shaun Of The Dead filmmaker said: "As I hope was evident in my work, I was big fan of his. Rest In Peace, sir."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: edgarwright - I just woke up to hear about Tony Scott. Can't believe it. As I hope was evident in my work, I was big fan of his. Rest In Peace, sir.&lt;/noframe&gt;
"The Last Boy Scout, True Romance, Crimson Tide, Man On Fire and yes, Domino too. Tony Scott was a rambunctious cinematic spirit."
Stephen Fry, the British actor, said: "Deeply saddened to hear the news about Tony Scott. A fine film-maker and the most charming, modest man."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Stephen Fry - Deeply saddened to hear the news about Tony Scott. A fine film-maker and the most charming, modest man.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Michael Moore, the director, said: "True Romance. The scene with Christopher Walken and Dennis Hopper in a Detroit railyard is a classic. RIP Tony Scott.
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Michael Moore - True Romance. The scene with Christopher Walken and Dennis Hopper in a Detroit railyard is a classic. RIP Tony Scott.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Film Director Duncan Jones posted: "Just heard about Tony Scott news. Horrible ... Tony was a truly lovely man who took me under his wing & ignited my passion to make films."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Duncan Jones - Just heard about Tony Scott news. Horrible... Tony was a truly lovely man who took me under his wing &amp;amp; ignited my passion to make films.&lt;/noframe&gt;
"Awww Tony. Wish you had felt there was a way to keep going. What a sad waste. My thoughts go out to his wife and beautiful children."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: Duncan Jones - Awww Tony. Wish you had felt there was a way to keep going. What a sad waste. My thoughts go out to his wife and beautiful children.&lt;/noframe&gt;
Elijah Wood, the actor, said: "awful news about Tony Scott. rest in peace."
Documentary-maker Morgan Spurlock, wrote: "RIP Tony Scott. So sad to hear this."
David Krumholtz, the actor, said: "Shocked to hear of Tony Scott's tragic death. He was a sweet, and funny man who loved making movies. His vision for "Numb3rs" was inspired."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: David Krumholtz - Shocked to hear of Tony Scott's tragic death. He was a sweet, and funny man who loved making movies. His vision for "Numb3rs" was inspired.&lt;/noframe&gt;
James Gunn, a film-maker, added: "RIP Tony Scott. Damn. He was a huge inspiration. Very sad."
&lt;noframe&gt;Twitter: James Gunn - RIP Tony Scott. Damn. He was a huge inspiration. Very sad.&lt;/noframe&gt;
British actress Keira Knightley, who worked with Scott on his 2005 film Domino in which she starred as a bounty hunter, also praised the director, calling him "one of the world's true originals".
She said: "Tony Scott was one of the most extraordinary, imaginative men I ever worked with.
"It was a privilege to have spent the time I did with him. He was a firecracker and one of the world's true originals. My thoughts go to his family."
Ivan Dunleavy, chief executive of Shepperton Studios, which backed some of his most successful films, said: "We are deeply saddened to learn of the tragic news that Tony Scott has died.
"He was not only an incredibly gifted film-maker and ambassador for the UK film industry, he was a significant part of the history of Shepperton Studios.
"He directed some of the most successful films of all times and at Shepperton. He will be sadly missed and our thoughts and prayers are with his family at this difficult time."
Catherine Deneuve and David Bowie star in Tony Scott's 1983 film The Hunger (Picture: REX FEATURES)
Born in 1944 as one of three sons to working-class parents, Scott went to art school where he became interested in cinematography. His first foray into films started as a teenager in front of the camera, starring in his older brother film Boy and Bicycle.
He later earned a masters degree from London's Royal College of Arts and directed the 1971 picture Loving Memory for the British Film Institute from an original script financed by Albert Finney. He was previously a painter.
After making a string of television commercials, he landed his first feature director's role in 1983 with The Hunger, a sexually charged vampire film starring Catherine Deneuve, David Bowie and Susan Sarandon.
He would later become known for his behind the scenes work, in which he was known for his distinctive style to his films using fast editing and digital effects. He shot to fame in the 1980s with a string of action films.
But he never won critical aclaim or an Academy Award throughout his illustrious, with critics often dismissing his movies for emphasising style over substance.
Nonetheless his big-budget movies, mainly action thrillers, attracted some of Hollywood's biggest names including Denzel Washington, Tom Cruise, Eddie Murphy, Will Smith, Robert De Niro, Gene Hackman, Bruce Willis and Brad Pitt.
"The biggest edge I live on is directing. That's the most scary, dangerous thing you can do in your life," Scott said in 1995.
"The scariest thing in my life is the first morning of production on all my movies. It's the fear of failing, the loss of face and a sense of guilt that everybody puts their faith in you and not coming through."
He operated Scott Free Productions with his 74 year-old brother Ridley in Los Angeles almost 40 years after the pair formed London-based commercial production company Ridley Scott Associates.
Top Gun, a film about the US fighter jets starring Cruise and Kelly McGillis, was one of the highest-grossing films of the 1980s and quickly became a cult classic.
Since its release in 1986, it has grossed almost $354 million (£225 million) worldwide.
Top Gun's producers, Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer, signed Scott to direct the movie after being impressed by a commercial he had done for Swedish automaker Saab in the early 1980s in which a car races a fighter jet.
The trio worked together again four years later on the NASCAR-set Days of Thunder, which also starred Cruise and his soon to become wife Nicole Kidman.
He believed the actor's youthful charm, optimism and never-ending energy would guarantee success.
"Tom can sit behind the wheel of a race car and smoke a cigarette and this movie will make a fortune," Scott once said.
"I went back and I stole from all race movies to date. I took the better elements, then tried to build on them. Really, the speed, the energy and the placement of the audience inside some of the cars came in the editing room. ...
"I'm always pushing for something new and fresh in the way things are shot, and the rest happens in the editing room. ... The real speed comes from the cutters and what they do with the celluloid."
Crimson Tide, the 1995 submarine thriller, was another blockbuster whose cast included Washington and Hackman. He directed Hackman and Smith three years later in Enemy of the State, an espionage thriller.
Scott frequently worked with Washington, most recently on the runaway train drama Unstoppable in 2010.
Scott and Washington collaborated on other films including Man on Fire, Deja Vu and The Taking of Pelham 123, which also starred John Travolta.
Other films included True Romance, Man On Fire, The Hunger, The Last Boy Scout, The Fan and Spy Game.
The Scott brothers were working jointly on a film called Killing Lincoln," based on the best seller by Bill O'Reilly.
Their company also produced the CBS dramas NUMB3RS and The Good Wife as well as a 2011 documentary about the Battle of Gettysburg for the History Channel.
His most recent production with his brother was Coma, a four-hour medical thriller which was due for release next month.
He was also reported to be in production as the director of a film called Emma's War about a British aid worker in Sudan who marries a warlord seeking to control part of the country.
He was also said to have recently completed filming on Out of the Furnace," a drama he was producing about an ex-con starring Christian Bale, which was due to be released next year.
In 2002, the Scott brothers won an Emmy award for the television movie The Gathering Storm.
He said during an interview before the release of Taking of Pelham 123: "My whole career I’ve always tried to avoid CGI, whether it’s planes, cars or trains.
"It’s something in terms of the drama and the performances that gives me a reality and more of an edge.
"I like changing the pace of my life, changing my discipline. It gives me ideas for how to see the world differently."
Last year Cruise confirmed talks were underway about a sequel to Top Gun that would have seen him reprise the role of fighter pilot Lt Pete “Maverick” Mitchell.
On the red carpet in Munich, Cruise confirmed he has been developing a script with Scott and producer Jerry Bruckheimer.
Cruise toured a Naval Air Station near Fallon, Nevada, last week preparing to film the sequel, according to local reports.
Film director Tony Scott died after jumping off the Vincent Thomas Bridge in Los Angeles (Pictures: AFP/ GETTY IMAGES/ AP)