French film-maker Claude Chabrol dies
Tributes pour in for a founding father of Nouvelle Vague movement who turned out more than 80 films
The world of French cinema is in mourning for one of its greatest and most prolific directors, Claude Chabrol, who died today aged 80.
One of the founding fathers of the New Wave of French film, Chabrol was best known for his masterful suspense thrillers, subversive female roles and stinging critiques of the bourgeoisie. His first work, Le Beau Serge, was released in 1958 and he made more than 80 films, his last – a murder mystery starring Gérard Depardieu – released last year.
In the wake of his death, announced with no further details by a cultural official at Paris city hall, tributes poured in, both professional and personal. Speaking on French radio, Depardieu said: "Claude was joie de vivre itself. I cannot bring myself to believe he has gone. At no moment did he speak of death."
Chabrol, whose career began amid the creative boom that was French cinema in the late 50s and 60s, continued to make films long after the initial excitement of the Nouvelle Vague, adapting his style and themes according to the changing times. He remained fascinated with psychological tensions and inspired by class restlessness, often making unsettlingly dark films that contrasted with his real-life public image as a genial bon vivant.
"He was an absolutely delicious man: mischievous, with an incredible intelligence of which he only let certain sides come through," said Serge Toubiana, director of the French Cinémathèque in Paris, who drew particular attention to the years in which Chabrol released The Butcher, a thriller that Alfred Hitchcock said he wished he had made, and 1969's The Unfaithful Wife.
"I would dare say that there was a period in French cinema, I'm thinking about the late 60s ... when he was, in my opinion, the best French film-maker," said Toubiana.
Some of Chabrol's most respected later films - including Story of Women, his haunting 1988 tale of a Vichy-era abortionist, and La Cérémonie, released in 1995 – featured Isabelle Huppert, the award-winning actor whose disturbing portrayals of women on the brink of madness often have fitted well with Chabrol's vision.
It was for her role as a young murderess in Violette Nozière that she won the best actress award at Cannes in 1978, and as a bitter postal office worker in La Cérémonie that she garnered her only Cesar.
Thierry Frémaux, chairman of the Cannes film festival, said Chabrol would above all be remembered for his love of those he cast in his films. "He was someone who tapped into many generations of actors," Fremaux said on French radio, describing the director's death as "a thunderbolt". "[He] was 80 years old but he was still working, and his energy, joie de vivre ... gave the feeling that he was here for good."
It was not only Chabrol's fellow artists who paid him tribute but also France's political leaders. The former culture minister Jack Lang saluted his "vital energy"; the Socialist leader, Martine Aubry, hailed his "great finesse".
In a statement, Nicolas Sarkozy said: "He took after Balzac in the skill of his social depiction. He took after Rabelais in his humour and certainly also in his truculence, but he was above all himself in his films as in life."
Chabrol is survived by a rapidly diminishing cohort of Nouvelle Vague greats, foremost among them Jean-Luc Godard, the 79-year-old Breathless director currently keeping Hollywood on tenterhooks as to whether or not he will show up to collect an honorary Oscar this year. Most of the other major names of the period, including Francois Truffaut, have long gone; Eric Rohmer died in January.
"Every time a film-maker dies, a singular view of the world and a particular expression of our humanity is irreparably lost to us," said the French film directors' association.