Bradley Manning nominated for Nobel Peace Prize: Alleged Wikileaks informant, Bill Clinton, Helmut Kohl among nominees
OSLO — A total of 231 nominees are up for the Nobel Peace Prize this year, the Nobel Institute said Monday, with Bill Clinton, Helmut Kohl, the EU and WikiLeaks suspect Bradley Manning known to be on the list.
“As always, there are the usual ’nominees’ and some newcomers, some famous and some unknowns, hailing from the four corners of the world,” the head of the Nobel Institute, Geir Lundestad, told AFP.
With 188 individuals and 43 organisations, the number of candidates comes close to last year’s record of 241, when the prestigious award went to Liberian President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Liberian activist Leymah Gbowee, and Yemeni “Arab Spring” activist Tawakkol Karman.
Thousands of people are eligible to submit nominations, including members of parliament and governments worldwide, university professors, past laureates and members of several international institutes, who had until February 1 to propose candidates.
The Nobel Institute keeps the names of nominees secret for 50 years, but those who are entitled to nominate are allowed to reveal the name of the person or organisation they have proposed.
Among the people known to have been nominated for this year’s prize are former U.S. president Clinton, ex-German chancellor Kohl, who led his country’s reunification process, and Ukraine’s ex-premier and now jailed opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko.
Also on the list is jailed US soldier Manning, who has been charged with 22 counts in a U.S. military court for turning over a massive cache of classified US documents to anti-secrecy site WikiLeaks.
Despite its current crisis, the European Union is also among the candidates, as are Congolese doctor Denis Mukwege, Cuban dissidents Oswaldo Paya and Yoani Sanchez, and Russian rights group Memorial and its founder Svetlana Gannushkina.
Yet others include U.S. political scientist Gene Sharp, known for his theory of non-violent resistance which inspired some of the key figures behind the Arab Spring; Tunisian President Moncef Marzouki, who was brought to power in 2011 by the revolution in his country; and television news channel Al-Jazeera.
The winner or winners will be announced in October.
The prize generates a media frenzy every year and occasionally sparks controversy — as in 2009 when U.S. President Barack Obama was honoured just a few months after taking office.
Recently, the Norwegian Nobel Committee which selects the laureate has been accused of not following the wishes of prize creator Alfred Nobel as stated in his 1895 last will and testament.
Swedish authorities tasked with ensuring that foundations created by wills follow their statutes — including the Nobel Foundation — are investigating whether the Norwegian Nobel Committee is correctly carrying out the task assigned to it by Nobel.
The Swedish inquiry follows repeated criticism from Norwegian lawyer Fredrik Heffermehl, author of the book “The Nobel Peace Prize: What Nobel Really Wanted.”
Heffermehl claims that the five-member prize committee has gone astray by honouring human rights activists, such as Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo in 2010, environmentalists such as Al Gore and the IPCC in 2007, and humanitarian workers like Mother Teresa in 1979.
In his will, Nobel stipulated that the Peace Prize should go to the person or organisation that “shall have done the most or the best work for fraternity between nations, for the abolition or reduction of standing armies and for the holding and promotion of peace congresses.”
“We are eager for this debate to end,” Lundestad said Monday.
“The debate has been going on for years and nothing has really come of it,” he said.
“I’m eager for the debate to start. For four years I’ve neither seen nor heard a single response to my questions,” he retorted.
“What cause and which people did Nobel have in mind when he spoke of ’champions of peace’? The answer is so easy and so clear that if Lundestad and his committee accepted it, their only reaction would be to resign immediately,” he said in an email to AFP.