College football proved to be Gordon Gee's undoing
In the end, the football coach did not fire Gordon Gee, which might be a victory of sorts.
But Ohio State's president – who said Tuesday he would retire effective July 1 – was undone by his own remarks, including that especially infamous line. When asked in March 2011 whether the school had considered firing embattled coach Jim Tressel, a grinning Gee said: "No. Are you kidding? Let me just be very clear. I'm just hopeful the coach doesn't dismiss me."
Tressel resigned two months later. Gee lasted two more years. But his exit was hastened by remarks made last December at a meeting of the school's Athletics Council, which came to light last week after an open-records request. Among other statements, Gee referred to Notre Dame officials as "those damn Catholics," and said, "The fathers are holy on Sunday, and they're holy hell on the rest of the week."
And it's an example of how an ultra-successful college administrator – Robert H. Schottenstein, chairman of Ohio State's Board of Trustees, hailed Gee as "transformational" – cannot afford to be too often sensational.
Even before the remarks from last December became public, Gee's greatest hits list of gaffes (usually followed by apologies) was lengthy: He disparaged the foootball schedules of national title hopefuls Boise State and TCU, saying Ohio State did not play "the Little Sisters of the Poor." He likened the complex job of running a university to "the Polish Army."
And he tried that joke about hoping Tressel wouldn't fire him.
"I found that just bizarre," said Dave Frohnmayer, president emeritus at Oregon, who said he's known Gee for many years. "It may have been an attempt at humor that just went sour, but its core wasn't funny. It reinforced an unhappy perception."
Regardless of the intent or context, the remarks also seemed more like something a brash, unfiltered football coach would say at an offseason fan event than anything a university president would say in any setting. And in the end, they overshadowed a résumé that included top leadership posts at West Virginia, Colorado, Vanderbilt and Brown in addition to Ohio State.
In two stints at Ohio State (1990-97 and 2007-13), Gee was responsible for helping raise millions of dollars and had a reputation, according to Frohnmayer, as "a prodigious, hard worker." Frohnmayer told of watching Gee, during meetings of university presidents, writing thank-you notes and congratulatory letters "nonstop."
"It was, 'There's old Gordon, he's on duty all the time,' " Frohnmayer said.
"He among all people should know you're really not off duty, ever," Frohnmayer added. "I certainly was aghast at his inappropriate and inopportune gaffes."
Two of the primary roles of a present-day college president are to be a great fund-raiser for the school and a great representative for the school. Gee was performed well at the former but failed miserably -- and publicly and frequently -- at the latter.
"You're expected to be the embodiment of the institution and its values," Frohnmayer said. "It's high visibility, but it's very sensitive. There's a certain expectation that without being pompous, you should be responsible, reflective – not brash, off the cuff or smart-alecky."
Referring to Arkansas coach Bret Bielema, who left Wisconsin last December, as "a thug" would seem to fit the latter category. And it pointed to something Gee himself had noted after another gaffe. Frohnmayer, who once headed the Bowl Championship Series' presidential oversight committee, noted that college sports, "and particularly football, can get a president's administration into trouble faster than almost anything except having their hand in the till."
After the "Little Sisters of the Poor" crack in 2010, Gee said he shouldn't publicly comment on college football. Referring to his trademark bow ties, he said: "What do I know about college football? I look like Orville Redenbacher. I have no business talking about college football."
Now, he can say all he wants.
George Schroeder, a national college football reporter for USA TODAY Sports, is on Twitter @GeorgeSchroeder.