Syrian artist Ali Ferzat gets hands broken by gunmen
BEIRUT - A renowned political cartoonist whose drawings expressed Syrians’ frustrated hopes for change was grabbed after he left his studio early yesterday and beaten by masked gunmen who broke his hands and dumped him on a road outside Damascus.
One of Syria’s most famous artists, Ali Ferzat, 60, earned international recognition and the respect of many Arabs with stinging caricatures that infuriated dictators including Iraq’s Saddam Hussein, Libya’s Moammar Khadafy, and, particularly in recent months, Syria’s autocratic Assad family.
Ferzat remembers the gunmen telling him that “this is just a warning,’’ as they beat him, a relative told the Associated Press.
“We will break your hands so that you’ll stop drawing,’’ the masked men said, according to the relative, who spoke anonymously for fear of retaliation.
The paper was an instant hit, with copies of each issue selling out a few hours after hitting the stands. It was soon shut down, however, as Assad began cracking down on dissent and jailing critics after the brief, heady period known as the Damascus Spring quickly lost steam.
Human rights groups said Assad’s forces have killed more than 2,000 people since the uprising against his autocratic rule erupted in mid-March, touched off by the wave of revolutions sweeping the Arab world.
An endearing figure with a bushy gray beard, Ferzat drew cartoons about the uprising and posted the illustrations on his private website, providing comic relief to many Syrians who were unable to follow his work in local newspapers because of a ban on his drawings.
His illustrations grew bolder in recent months, with some of his cartoons directly criticizing Assad, even through caricatures of the president are forbidden in Syria.
Ferzat, who usually works late into the night, left his studio at 4 a.m. yesterday, but a jeep with tinted windows quickly cut him off, according to the relative. Four masked gunmen then dragged him out of his car, bundled him into the jeep, and drove him to the airport road just outside Damascus, beating him and making threats all the while.
The men then singed the artist’s beard, put a bag over his head, and dumped him on the side of the road.
“They broke his hands in the most disgusting and deplorable way to send a message,’’ said State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland. “It’s not only Ali Ferzat that we’re worried about. The regime has also locked up a number of other prominent dissidents to send a message.’’
Assad’s crackdown has not spared other Syrian intellectuals and artists who dared to voice criticism. A group of intellectuals and artists, including Syrian actress May Skaff, were jailed for a week last month after holding a protest in Damascus.