New York City Opera Plans to Leave Lincoln Center
“We love Lincoln Center,” said George Steel, City Opera’s general manager and artistic director. “It’s a wonderful place. But the reality is that the fixed costs of living here are simply too high. That’s why we are looking at leaving.”
He added, “I think we’re leaving for good.”
But many questions remained. Mr. Steel declined to identify what operas the company would perform or where. He also refused to give the amount of the budget, although he said it would be “significantly smaller” than this year’s budget of $22 million. Charles R. Wall, the chairman, said, “We just don’t want that information to be in the public domain.”
This season’s deficit amounted to $5 million. Mr. Wall pledged to make up half of the gap and said efforts were under way to cover the rest. Meanwhile, the endowment, which was raided to pay for operating losses and shrank further in a bad economy, has dropped to $9 million from a recent high of $55 million.
Now, just five months before the season, potential ticket buyers do not know what music they will hear, who will be singing, what the tickets will cost or where to go to take their seats. The prospect is almost mind-boggling in a world where schedules are fixed years ahead.
Mr. Steel did say that two of the five productions would be on a smaller scale — Baroque works or the like — and would play in theaters of, say, 300 to 900 seats. The others would be in a “relatively unorthodox” performance space comparable in size to the Koch theater, which has about 2,600 seats. The company is also looking for administrative offices.
“My plan is to establish a home base for the company at a single venue and branch out,” Mr. Steel said. “We have a very good idea where we will do these productions.” City Opera also presented five operas in each of the last two seasons, compared with four times as many in past decades.
It was also not clear what legal and contractual steps were necessary to part company with Lincoln Center, or what the effect would be on the whole complex.
“The relationship is too complicated for me to summarize it handily,” Mr. Steel said. “We are going to sit down with all of the stakeholders and have a discussion.”
A Lincoln Center spokeswoman, Betsy Vorce, said it was “premature for us to comment on New York City Opera’s situation” and declined to address what the financial effect on Lincoln Center would be.
City Opera has long been frustrated by the poor acoustics of the Koch Theater, which were primarily designed to muffle the footfalls of the dancers of its co-tenant, New York City Ballet. It had previously looked at locations including the World Trade Center site and Damrosch Park in Lincoln Center.
When its latest plan — a projected new home on Amsterdam Avenue and 66th Street — fell through in July 2006, Susan L. Baker, then the chairwoman, remained unswayed, saying, “We feel even more firm in our resolve about the need and desire to have a new home.”
Seven months later, the company hired the Belgian impresario Gerard Mortier to be its general manager. Mr. Mortier immediately announced that the company would stay put, and a major renovation was undertaken. The designers installed a hydraulic lift for the orchestra pit, enlarged the pit, carved out two aisles through the rings of seats and sought to improve acoustics. Mr. Mortier resigned in 2008.
Mr. Steel declined to comment on the seesaw history. “I didn’t make most of the decisions you are referring to,” he said.
Mr. Wall also said he felt no embarrassment about the company’s leaving its prestigious home. “It’s going to be quite nice to be in another outstanding venue in the city,” he said. “Not everybody is built to be at Lincoln Center.”
The renovation work forced the company essentially to halt operations for a season, digging it a deeper financial hole. The situation is now complicated by looming contract negotiations with important unions. Alan Gordon, the president of the American Guild of Musical Artists, which covers the chorus, singers and stage managers, saw the very existence of a season — even if the stages were unknown — as positive.
“It doesn’t matter to us where they perform,” he said in a telephone interview. “If they can satisfy the guarantee of 26 weeks or close to it, that’s good.”
But in a later e-mail, he also criticized Mr. Steel for trying to eliminate guaranteed salaries and to pay employees per rehearsal and performance, like “an old-fashioned shape-up on the waterfront.” Under that structure, he said, the company would “not be an opera company worth existing,” and guild members “would not work for that sort of company.”
He added, “Steel’s approach is out-and-out stupid and it’s designed to assure that City Opera goes out of business.”
The chairwoman of the orchestra committee, Gail Kruvand, a double bassist, was more circumspect. “We will just sort of wait and see,” she said. “It would be very easy to second-guess. We can’t do that right now.” She added that the renovations made the pit a much more comfortable place to play.
“Should it come to pass that we move out,” she said, “yeah, we’ll miss it.”