Oh, what WILL I do without those grumpy old men? (And their broom wielding battleaxes)
We know all good things must come to an end. But some of us had hoped fate would make an exception for Last Of The Summer Wine.
Its record life span - 31 series spread over 37 years - was, in itself, enough to make it seem as indestructible as the limestone landscape in which it was filmed.
And the idea it might go on for ever was encouraged by its consistent quality. Devotees of the series were also persuaded to believe in the immortality of its characters. 
Last Of The Summer Wine, after all, was the story of a band of elderly Peter Pans who resolutely refused to grow up. Now, however, it really is over. Compo, Clegg and Nora Batty have passed into history.
Last night, after the last ever episode, we were left to contemplate, perhaps for the first time, what that evocative title really meant.
The programme was meant to entertain and we should not be too serious or solemn about its meanings and messages. But at its heart was a joyous idea: that age should never prevent life from being fun. We grow old. But we do not have to become bored or boring.
The poet Andrew Marvell made the same point 400 years ago: 'Thus, though we cannot make our sun stand still, yet we will make him run.'
And so they did - all the characters which Roy Clarke, the writer from start to finish, created to enthral the Sunday audiences which, at the peak of the series' popularity, numbered more than 20million. 
Only Norman Clegg, played by Peter Sallis, was a genuine adult - in his heart and mind, as well as on the evidence of his birth certificate. As the calm and careful Clegg - rarely seen without his cardigan and cap - he was always the fulcrum of the story. The elderly schoolboys he called his friends and confederates revolved around him.
Clegg's world-weary tolerance of their irresponsibility emphasised the mindless pleasure they found in simple things and the importance of making the most of every minute. When the series began, Clegg's greatest friend was Compo. It was an attraction of opposites. Clegg was neat, well-organised and polite. Compo - played by Bill Owen until he died - was dirty, dishevelled and disrespectful.
His defining characteristic (apart from his need for a good bath and wearing clothes that should have been in an incinerator) was his infatuation with Nora Batty.
She was the formidable and house-proud widow who became as famous for her wrinkled stockings as for the ferocity with which she repulsed the indomitable Compo's amorous advances.
One of the most memorable moments in the whole of television history is Nora standing on the steps outside her house and preparing to defend her honour with the aid of a broom, which she brandishes like a lance. Now those steps are a place of pilgrimage for Last Of The Summer Wine fans when they visit Holmfirth, the west Yorkshire town where the series was filmed.
This scene radiates innocence. Compo, the elderly swain, is suffering from - and profoundly enjoying - an outbreak of puppy love.
The height of his ambition is to sit with Nora in the back row of the cinema. But Compo was not only reckless in love. He lived in constant danger of death or serious injury. No challenge was too great.
He was always ready to risk his neck in any escapade, experiment or fantasy dreamed up by his companions. Compo fell over cliffs, was submerged in ponds, disappeared over hills on tandems and hung in mortal peril from rotting branches.
But he always ended up safe and, more importantly, smiling. From his bobble-topped hat to his mud-encrusted wellies, he was the spirit of eternal youth - an antidote to the elf 'n' safety brigade.
The motto by which he lived was: 'It's never too late.' Compo was indomitably amorous. Clegg, on the other hand, was celibate to the point of misogyny.
But despite his disapproval of romantic associations - intensified by his innate respectability - he was remarkably tolerant of his friends' peccadilloes.
He was particularly protective towards Howard, an elderly Romeo who pursued the luridly blonde and heavily made-up Marina while in constant fear of being caught by his ill-natured wife Pearl.
The sight of Howard and Marina, in Lycra shorts and riding racing bicycles, was one of the great images of Last Of The Summer Wine - particularly as they peddled furtively through the spectacular Yorkshire West Riding countryside that I myself love so dearly.
Minor characters were one of the series' greatest strengths. And great actors were attracted to play them. Norman Wisdom, Thora Hird, Dora Bryan and, most memorably, Jean Alexander, as a crazily avaricious junkshop owner, all appeared from time to time.
It was a mark of the programme's quality.
It must be admitted that the series did not portray women in a universally favourable light. Occasionally, they were supportive. But more often than not they were an encumbrance - which prevented the enjoyment of tinkering with car engines or risking life a on an ill-advised adventure. They expected their men to spend their time cleaning windows and polishing door knobs.
The men of Last Of The Summer Wine, however, would have regarded 'new men' as traitors to their sex. The show was built around the friendship of gloriously good-humoured elderly men.
It is a magical subject, but not one that television normally regards as worth exploring. Apart from Norman Clegg, who survived from start to finish, membership of the group changed with the years.
At different times it included Foggy (Brian Wilde), who was obsessed with the often exaggerated memories of his war service, Seymour (Michael Aldridge) whose 'inventions' grew increasingly fantastical, and Truelove (Frank Thornton), a retired police officer who never forgot that he had once been a man of authority.
They were all inventive, curious and incorrigibly energetic. Improbable though the characters were, they all broadcast the same message. Never give up. Give it a go.
Peter Sallis once compared Last Of The Summer Wine to The Wind In The Willows - with Cleggy as wise Badger and Compo as Toad. Perhaps that is why the series felt so timeless, so immortal.
I shall remember it most for bringing to television life a song by Stephen Sondheim: 'Everybody says don't. Don't sit on the grass. Don't skate on the ice. But I say do...'
Last Of The Summer wine was dedicated to enjoying life - even if a few risks have to be taken and reputations put in jeopardy. And that's a very good principle to live by.