Beyonce, Adele Lead Nominees for 2016 MTV Video Music Awards
MTV Video Music Awards “Video of the Year” nominees Adele, Beyoncé, Drake, Justin Bieber and Kanye West revealed in a panoramic street mural in New York City's East Village on July 25, 2016.
Beyoncé and Adele are the leading nominees for the 2016 MTV Video Music Awards, with Bey leading all contenders with a career high 11 noms for her visual album Lemonade. The British singer is just behind her with 8 nods for her global smash 25. Also snagging multiple noms for the show -- that will air live from New York's Madison Square Garden on Sunday, Aug. 28 at 9 p.m. ET -- are Drake, with 6 for his "Hotline Bling" clip, Ariana Grande (5) and Rihanna (4).
Adele stacked up 7 nominations alone for her YouTube crushing "Hello" video, which will go up against  Beyonce's “Formation,” Drake’s “Hotline Bling,” Justin Bieber's “Sorry” and Kanye West’s “Famous” for the Video of the Year prize. The nominees were unveiled via a Facebook Live broadcast from New York on Tuesday (July 26), during which the Video of the Year nominees were revealed with a huge street mural.
Beyonce Concertgoer Freaks Out Over Pokémon Go Player in Front of Him
Beginning Tuesday, fans can vote for Video of the Year, Best Male Video, Best Female Video and the new Best Long Form Video category at . Voting for Best New Artist will stay open through the VMAs pre-show, which will air at 8 p.m. ET; fans can also cast their votes for the category on Facebook Messenger starting Aug. 15. Nominees for the socially voted category, Best Song of Summer, will be announced at a later date.
Calvin Harris ft. Rihanna – “This Is What You Came For”
The Weeknd – “Can’t Feel My Face”
Ariana Grande ft. Lil Wayne – “Let Me Love You”
Calvin Harris ft. Rihanna – “This Is What You Came For”
Calvin Harris & Disciples – “How Deep Is Your Love”
The Chainsmokers ft. Daya – “Don’t Let Me Down”
Missy Elliott ft. Pharrell – “WTF (Where They From)”
Tame Impala – “The Less I Know The Better”
Adele – “Send My Love (To Your New Lover)”
The Weeknd – “Can’t Feel My Face”