Lady Gaga's 'Bad Romance' Wins Video Of The Year VMA
[artist id="3061469"]Lady Gaga[/artist] has done it again. After dominating the night with 13 -- count 'em, 13! -- Video Music Awards noms, the seemingly overnight superstar took home the night's top prize, Video of the Year.
The award was presented by pop legend Cher, who reminded us that she went risqué back when some of the nominees were zygotes by wearing the same revealing outfit she donned in her "If I Could Turn Back Time" video 21 years ago. "I have shoes older than most of these nominees," she joked.
Accepting the freaky-fashion baton passed on by Cher, Gaga stood to accept her sixth statue of the night, wearing a thigh-length cloth version of her now-infamous meat outfit from the cover of Vogue Hommes Japan.
"I never thought I'd be asking Cher to hold my meat purse," she said, as she passed the flesh-colored pouch.
Directed by Francis Lawrence — who also did videos for Britney Spears, Will Smith and Aerosmith, as well as the films "I Am Legend" and "Constantine" — Gaga's "Bad Romance" video follows the alter ego of the woman born Stefani Germanotta into a surreal bath house where, depending on who you ask, supermodels drag her, kidnap her and sell her into sex slavery (or record-label bigwigs trap her, make her over into something she is not and force her to bed the music industry ... which she kills). And some people had the nerve to think it was just a song about being in love with your best guy friend.
Last year, Gaga was MTV's Best New Artist. This year, the New York native, who has sold more than 15 million albums and 51 million singles worldwide, beat out an eclectic group of musicians to claim this year's top prize. The other Video of the Year contenders were B.o.B's "Airplanes," Eminem's "Not Afraid," 30 Seconds to Mars' "Kings and Queens," Florence and the Machine's "Dog Days Are Over" and one of Gaga's own videos "Telephone" (the collabo she did with Beyoncé).
"I promised that if I won this, I would announce the name of my new album," Gaga said. "It's called Born This Way." She then sang the chorus to the yet-to-be-released title song.
Are you happy Gaga won the night's big prize? Let us know in the comments!
The Moonmen have all been handed out and the stars have gone home, but there's plenty of 2010 MTV Video Music Awards news, interviews, behind-the-scenes scoop, party reports and more still to come, so keep it locked on MTVNews.com.