Festival, Robert De Niro pull anti-vaccination film
One day after defending the scheduled screening of a controversial documentary linking vaccinations to autism, Tribeca Film Festival co-founder Robert De Niro announced Saturday that the film, directed by the author of a discredited study on the subject, is being pulled from the event.
The film, Vaxxed: From Cover-Up to Catastrophe, was scheduled to debut April 24 at the 15th edition of the prestigious film festival. It is directed by Andrew Wakefield, known to many as the father of the anti-vaccine movement. He authored a 1998 report on vaccinations and autism that was later retracted, He also had his medical license revoked.
The decision to include the film in the festival, which runs April 13 to 24 in New York, resulted in outrage from many who are upset that the film's inclusion could offer legitimacy to a study debunked by leading scientists.
De Niro, who had defended the screening Friday, announced Saturday that Vaxxedwould not be shown at the festival. The statement was included as an update on the festival's Facebook page.
“My intent in screening this film was to provide an opportunity for conversation around an issue that is deeply personal to me and my family. But after reviewing it over the past few days with the Tribeca Film Festival team and others from the scientific community, we do not believe it contributes to or furthers the discussion I had hoped for," he said. The Oscar-winning actor's statement continued: "The Festival doesn't seek to avoid or shy away from controversy. However, we have concerns with certain things in this film that we feel prevent us from presenting it in the Festival program. We have decided to remove it from our schedule.”
The statement followed one a day earlier in which De Niro explained why he and his wife, Grace Hightower, supported showing the film.
“Grace and I have a child with autism and we believe it is critical that all of the issues surrounding the causes of autism be openly discussed and examined. In the 15 years since the Tribeca Film Festival was founded, I have never asked for a film to be screened or gotten involved in the programming," he wrote. "However this is very personal to me and my family and I want there to be a discussion, which is why we will be screening VAXXED. I am not personally endorsing the film, nor am I anti-vaccination; I am only providing the opportunity for a conversation around the issue.”