Yothu Yindi's music keeps its singer and his dream alive
George Negus discusses his friendship with and admiration for the band's co-founder and lead singer
Being able to call Mr Yunupingu a friend is an enormous privilege.
He wasn’t just one of this country’s best known and most successful Indigenous Australians.
He was an incredibly special human being.
Just to be in his company was a learning experience.
Whether it was his music or just chatting to him, he was trying to teach us what it meant to be an Aboriginal Australian living in a country, his Country, dominated by white European culture.
I can’t say I ever heard him being angry about our failure to come to grips with, let alone resolve, the dilemma of finding a proper relationship with him and his people, past and present, but he was certainly disappointed that conflict had never been sorted.
He once told me why his internationally acclaimed band Yothu Yindi was called what it was called. He explained to me that it meant mother and child, that the whole world was either Yothu (mother) or Yindi (child of the mother).
No matter what your religious beliefs or lack of them, Aboriginal Australians make more sense when they talk about life than we do.
He was an educator.
He talked often about his “both ways” philosophy – in a few words, why Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal Australians should talk to each other, not about each other.
I’ve heard and seen people all over the world dancing and singing to his most famous, gigantic hit, Treaty.
Governments before and during his life failed to achieve his dream of a treaty between black and white Australians. I suspect those after it will too.
I know he must have been deeply disappointed that we couldn’t even get that far by now.
I remember talking to him once, probably on the beautiful Arnhem Land beach near his home, about why he thought, somehow, over 220-odd years, we white Australians had managed to turn the enormous privilege of having an indigenous race of people as our fellow dwellers on this continent into what appears to remain an insoluble problem.
He explained to me that we don’t see the problem as a “two-way” problem, that we should not be trying to change each other but to learn from each other.
I’m sure he saw saying sorry as the beginning, not the end, of the process of reconciliation.
Patting ourselves on the back for apologising for what we have done to his people over the last two centuries was never going to be enough.
He was such a gentle but wise man that I never heard him call us invaders in 1788. But we were.
He was just too nice to say it.
He will be with us while his music survives – which it will.
The last time we saw him – clearly unwell but still involved – it was last August, and he was presenting the band of the year award at the Australian Indigenous Music awards in Darwin to a band called East Journey – the latest offshoot of the Yunupingu musical dynasty, as is the miraculous Geoffrey Gurrumul.
Clearly Mr Yunupingu always believed that singing, playing, dancing and enjoying music that explained his people’s plight to us as he entertained us, was way better than haranguing us for our western European ignorance of his culture and his people.
There are certainly enough of his Yolgnu “mob” around to keep his two-way dream for our country alive.
Thank you for allowing us to share your Country, mate. Thank you for your legacy. Thank you for your spirit.