Kate Middleton and Prince William 'grateful' for royal baby warm wishes
The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge said congratulations they have received from the public meant 'a great deal'
They added they were 'hugely grateful' for the kind wishes of people celebrating their newborn daughter's birth
Kate and William spent the day at home in Kensington Palace with their daughter and one-year-old Prince George
Carole, Pippa and Michael Middleton visited the baby this afternoon alongside Prince Charles and Camilla
The Queen is in Sandringham where she will remain until Tuesday and will likely meet her great-grandchild there
Kate and William are planning to decamp to Anmer Hall, their private home on the Norfolk estate, this week  
The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge have said they are 'hugely grateful' for all the warm wishes they have received since the birth of their daughter. 
In a statement issued on the couple's behalf they said the congratulations of people around the world meant 'a great deal' to them as thousands continued to celebrate the little princess's birth. 
Born yesterday at 8.34am, the baby girl - whose name is still not known - was taken home to Apartment 1A at Kensington Palace by her proud parents last night. 
This morning Kate and William's relatives flocked to meet her, with Carole and Pippa Middleton the first to arrive. They were followed by Charles and Camilla who beamed with delight as they drove themselves past the palace gates. 
The Queen is staying privately in Sandringham where she will remain until Tuesday. She will likely meet the baby, her fifth great-grandchild, when the Cambridges decamp to Norfolk tomorrow. 
The princess, whose name has still not been revealed, was born at the Lindo Wing of St Mary's Hospital yesterday weighing 8lbs and 3oz. 
'The Duke and Duchess are hugely grateful for the messages of congratulations they have received from people all over the world,' a Kensington Palace spokesman said this afternoon. 
'It means a great deal to them that so many people have celebrated the arrival of their new daughter.' 
It also emerged the couple would not reveal their daughter's name this evening. Officials said the couple did not plan to make any further statement this evening, meaning the world will have to wait another day to learn the name of the princess. 
In the same statement Prince Harry was quoted as saying: 'She's absolutely beautiful. I can't wait to meet her.' 
Earlier today the princess's grandparents visited Kensington Palace to become acquainted with the new arrival.  
Looking sternly on the road ahead of her, Carole Middleton was the first to arrive, driving herself into the palace this morning with daughter Pippa in the passenger seat. 
They are the first to visit the baby girl, with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge having chosen to spend their first night with their daughter as a family of four with Prince George. 
Less than two hours later Prince Charles and Camilla arrived in an Audi estate car. The Duchess of Cornwall offered a wide smile from the car's passenger seat as her husband, who previously told of his desire for a granddaughter, drove them in. 
After around an hour-and-a-half, Prince Charles and Camilla were seen leaving. They offered slight waves to those gathered around the palace gates in west London.  
The Queen will not be among the visitors at Kensington Palace today as she is spending the Bank Holiday weekend privately in Norfolk.
The sovereign and Prince Philip are currently staying at Wood Farm, a sprawling farmhouse in the grounds of her private estate at Sandringham as the main house as just opened to public visitors.
They attended a church service this morning where the congregation offered prayers for their new great-granddaughter. 
The 89-year-old queen wore pink for the second day in a row in a fitting tribute to the birth of the little princess.  
Royal sources have told Mail Online that the monarch – and now great-grandmother five times over - will return to Buckingham Palace on Tuesday. 
This suggests that she will meet the latest addition to her family when William and Kate leave London to return to Anmer Hall, their country home on the edges of the Queen’s estate, tomorrow.
The ten-bedroom mansion, which was a gift from William’s grandmother, is just a few minutes’ drive away from where the Queen and her husband are in residence.
Yesterday as the Duke and Duchess presented their daughter for the first time cheers erupted outside the Lindo Wing.   
The couple looked happy and relaxed as they waved for photographers before disappearing back into the hospital to fix the new princess into her car seat. 
They reappeared moments later and quickly got into a waiting Range Rover. With his wife and daughter safely strapped in the back seat, William appeared relieved as he drove the car away. 
Kate wore a Jenny Packham buttercup-print shift dress that the designer, one of the Duchess's favourites, says was made especially for her, teamed with a pair of nude Jimmy Choos, as she had done when George was born. 
After they had returned home a statement on the Kensington Palace Twitter account posted a message from the proud new parents. 
'Their Royal Highnesses would like to thank all staff at the hospital for the care and treatment they have all received,' it said. 
'They would also like to thank everyone for their warm wishes.' 
At around 4pm William left the hospital to collect Prince George and returned minutes later.  
After being lifted out of the car and put on the ground to walk, George stretched out his arms to be lifted back up by his father before offering a timid wave to the gathered media and fans.
Cheers erupted for the young prince, who has not made a public appearance in the UK since his own birth in 2013, as he made his way towards the Lindo Wing in his father's arms.
After walking a few steps holding his father's hand, the one-year-old stretched out his arms to be picked back up by his father before being encouraged to wave to the gathered crowds. 
Beaming with pride, William was seen mouthing 'good boy' in his son's ear before giving him a tender kiss on the head. 
The pair then disappeared behind the hospital doors to reunite with Kate and the new princess in a scene reminiscent of Prince Harry's birth in 1984 when William toddled up the Lindo Wing steps holding the hand of his father Prince Charles. 
The princess's birth was announced in a statement released by Kensington Palace shortly after 11am on Saturday morning. 
 It was then posted on the palace's official Twitter page two minutes later.
'Her Royal Highness The Duchess of Cambridge was safely delivered of a daughter at 8.34am,' it said. 
'The baby weighs 8lbs 3oz. 'The Duke of Cambridge was present for the birth. 
'The Queen, The Duke of Edinburgh, The Prince of Wales, The Duchess of Cornwall, Prince Harry and members of both families have been informed and are delighted with the news. 
'Her Royal Highness and her child are both doing well.'
At around 12.30 a framed certificate signed by Kate's medical team was placed on an easel outside Buckingham Palace with the same words. 
The baby's name is not yet known but Alice and Charlotte are the most popular among bookmakers. 
Prince Charles and the Duchess of Cornwall released a statement saying they were 'absolutely delighted' with the arrival of their granddaughter while the Earl of Spencer, Prince William's uncle, said: 'It's wonderful news - we are all thrilled for all four of them.'
The Prime Minister was among the first to congratulate the couple writing on Twitter: 'Congratulations to the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge on the birth of their baby girl.
He was followed by Nick Clegg who said: 'Congratulations to the Duke & Duchess of Cambridge on the birth of their new baby. Miriam & I wish them all the best as their family grows.' 
Labour leader Ed Miliband also offered his congratulations, writing on Twitter: 'Congratulations to the Duke and Duchess on the birth of their daughter. Wishing them lots of joy and happiness - and hopefully some sleep!' 
Nigel Farage said he had told 'every Ukip candidate in the country to raise a glass to the royal baby girl', adding, somewhat bizarrely, that he was glad her weight (8lbs 3oz) had been given in imperial measurements.
President Barack Obama also sent his well wishes to the family, saying: 'Michelle and I are delighted to congratulate the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, her Majesty the Queen and the Royal Family, and all the people of the United Kingdom on the birth of the Royal Princess.
'On behalf of the American people, we wish the Duke and Duchess and their son George much joy and happiness on the occasion of the arrival of the newest member of their family.'
Kate was admitted to the Lindo Wing at St Mary's Hospital at 6am on Saturday morning, giving birth two-and-a-half hours later.  
When news of the baby's birth was announced, chants of 'Princess! Princess!' could be heard outside the Lindo Wing. 
Royal super fan Terry Hutt, who was given a birthday card and cake by Kensington Palace on his 80th birthday last week, said: 'I'm on top of the world.'
He said he did not expect the birth to happen so quickly after Kate was admitted but said: 'Babies come when they're ready.' 
The prince was welcomed around 11 hours after she was admitted to the Lindo Wing on July 22, 2013, while the newborn princess arrived just two-and-a-half hours after Kate was driven there. 
The baby girl, who arrived around one week late, is three pounds lighter than her big brother was when he was born. 
News of the birth was celebrated at Kate's favourite pub in the village of Standford Dingley in Berkshire. Locals wet the baby's head by popping champagne and raising glasses in a toast.
Many of them have known the Duchess since she was a little girl - Kate and her sister Pippa grew up in Bucklebury and went to school locally, and their parents Carole and Michael Middleton have a £7million mansion in the village. 
There was also a celebratory atmosphere in Cafe Diana, located across the road from Kensington Palace, where the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge live.
Managers let off pink and union jack balloons and handed out lemon cake to their customers to mark the arrival of the couple's baby girl.
The cafe, which opened in 1989, is named after Diana, Princess of Wales and covered in photographs of the royal.
Cafe owner Abdul Daoud, 59 brought in a life-sized cardboard cut-out of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge as he released the balloons.
He said: 'It's a special day. Prince William came here with his mum many years ago when he was at school and lived with his mum. 
'The cafe was named after Princess Diana and when we opened she came and congratulated us and supported us. She was very fond of the cafe.
'I hope Prince William and Kate will come and visit us one day.' 
William and Kate’s new daughter, a younger sister for Prince George, who was born at the same hospital in July 2013, is fourth in line to the throne.
Although she is unlikely to ever become queen, it is not unheard of for a second child in the direct line of succession to accede to the throne.
Mostly recently the Queen’s own father, King George VI, replaced his elder brother, King Edward VIII, who abdicated over his love for the ‘unsuitable’ American divorcee Wallis Simpson.
Thanks to a recent change in the law, the couple’s daughter cannot be superseded in her claim to the throne by any younger brother who may yet come along.
The Succession to the Crown Act, passed in 2013, means that male heirs no longer precede their elder sisters in the line of succession
A 2012 intervention by the Queen also means that the new baby will automatically become an HRH – Her Royal Highness – and be permitted to take the title of princess.
As the second child of the second heir to the throne she would, until then, only have been a Lady.
Her arrival will shunt her uncle, Prince Harry, down to fifth in the order of succession. Her great uncle, Prince Andrew, will fall out of the top five for the first time to sixth.
Many royal watchers had been desperately hoping for a girl – the last to be born in the direct line of succession was Princess Anne back in 1950.
Both Prince Charles and William’s late mother, Diana, Princess of Wales, both openly longed for a girl to add to their family.
Indeed when congratulated by a member of the public about the news that he would become a grandfather again last year, he said candidly; ‘It’s wonderful to be a grandfather again. I’m looking forward to it. But I hope it will be a girl this time.’
Kate herself has said William was hoping for a daughter, although his brother, Prince Harry, joked William probably doesn’t realise what he is taking on
News of her birth came in the form of a press release to media organisations followed by a formal – and very modern - announcement two minutes later on the palace social media channels on Twitter and Instagram.
However it was made public only after the Queen and other family members had been informed, including Prince Charles, now a grandfather twice over, the baby’s uncle Prince Harry, who is currently on an army detachment in Australia, and, of course, Kate’s parents, Michael and Carole Middleton, who will play a dominant part in their new grandchild’s life. 
Kensington Palace had barred journalists from camping outside the hospital in advance in an attempt to retain what it described as the ‘privacy and dignity’ of the event.
Hospital authorities were also said to be keen to avoid what had been described as the ‘media circus’ around Prince George’s birth.
Instead media crews were invited to set up only after the Duchess had been admitted, having been driven from her home at nearby Kensington Palace.
Prince William had faced a potential two-hour dash to the hospital to be with his wife if she suddenly went into labour while he was away training in his new role as a pilot for East Anglia Air Ambulance.
But earlier this week it emerged that he had completed the initial stage of his training ‘earlier than expected’ and is now taking six weeks’ unpaid leave until it resumes on June 1.
The happy coincidence meant that he could be with Kate and George in the run up to the new baby’s arrival and can take a hands-on parenting role in the coming weeks.
In recent days the Duchess, who carried out her last public engagement in March, had been taking her mind off the impending birth by spending some time with her parents, Michael and Carole Middleton, at their sprawling Georgian mansion in Bucklebury, Berkshire.
On Sunday she and Carole took her eldest son, Prince George, for a visit to nearby Bucklebury Farm Park where youngsters can meet a variety of animals from lambs to wild boar and enjoy a large outdoor playground. The little prince is a frequent visitor to the park with both his mother, nanny and grandmother.
Kate appeared unbothered by her pregnancy, according to onlookers, as she carried George, accompanied by a low-key Scotland Yard security detail. 
William, Kate and George returned to London on Sunday night but have kept a low profile since.
Aside from suffering again from the debilitating ante-natal vomiting condition hyperemesis gravidarum in the early stages, the Duchess has apparently enjoyed another healthy pregnancy.
At Easter she was seen energetically running about with George at a farm park in Norfolk, close to the couple’s home, Anmer Hall, with her bump barely showing still.
William’s determination to be at the birth, as he was at George’s, is in contrast to other royal fathers. Prince Philip was enjoying a game of squash when his first-born son, Charles, was delivered.
The couple’s new daughter will be the Queen’s fifth great-grandchild - of which four are girls - and a great-great-great-great-great grandchild of Queen Victoria.
It is not yet known whether little George, who will turn two in July, will go to the hospital to meet his new sister before the family eventually depart.
But sources say they will return to Apartment 1A at Kensington Palace for ‘a few days’ to recuperate before travelling to Norfolk to set up home at Anmer Hall, their new country estate.
‘The family will return to Kensington Palace where they are expected to stay for at least a couple of days. After their time at Kensington Palace the couple will return to their home in Norfolk,’ an aide revealed.
It will be while the couple are at Kensington Palace that an announcement will be made about the new baby’s name.
Kate, who undertook her final public duty last month, has not specified how much maternity leave she intends to take or indeed when her first public engagement after the birth might be. 
But an aide added: ‘As you suspect with two very young children her focus will be on her family over the summer.’
Officials have also dismissed recent claims that the couple plan to employ a maternity nurse in addition to their existing nanny, Maria Borrallo.
‘At this stage the Duke and Duchess do not intend to take on any additional staff’ said one.
The couple have proved to be fiercely protective about their eldest son’s privacy and are likely to be no different with their daughter.
One photographer who recently shot pictures of Prince George playing in a London park was threatened with legal action.
The future king has not been seen in the flesh by the British public since the day he left hospital, although a number of carefully-selected pictures have been released.
A spokesman for the couple said recently that they had been 'touched' by the public reaction to the birth of their new baby.
In a statement about the impending royal arrival, he said: ‘The Duke and Duchess are hugely grateful for the warm wishes they have received from people throughout the UK and indeed around the world over the last few months.
‘They know that people are excited Prince George will soon have a little brother or sister and it means a great deal to them that so many will be celebrating this important moment for their family.
‘They are very appreciative that so many people share their excitement as they await the arrival of their second baby.’
Kensington Palace were forced to reveal news of the Duchess’s condition several weeks earlier than planned last September after she once again developed Hyperemesis Gravidarum, the same chronic ante-natal sickness that saw her hospitalised while she was expecting George.
This time she was treated by doctors at Kensington Palace, although sources told the Mail that her condition was ‘just as severe as before’.
As a result the Duchess, who was barely six weeks pregnant at the time, was forced to cancel a string of planned public engagements, including her first solo foreign visit to Malta, and palace officials decided they had no choice but to make news of her condition public.
She was not well enough to undertake public engagements until the end of October when she and her husband officially greeted the President of the Republic of Singapore on behalf of the Queen at the start of a state visit to London.
Kate told them that she was delighted to ‘be out of the house’.
Fortunately she made a full recovery and continued with a light diary of public engagements until March this year, setting the fashion world alight with a range of stylish maternity outfits that ranged from a £35 polka dot dress from online retailer ASOS to a £995 silk chiffon dress by Erdem, with coats by Mulberry, Seraphine and Alexander McQueen – all with her trademark high heels.
William, who is one of two children while his wife is one of three, said recently that he was looking forward to the birth but described the arrival of his second child as a ‘game changer’.
BABIES BORN ON THE SAME DAY AS THE PRINCESS: WE MEET THE MOTHER'S THAT WENT INTO LABOUR ON THE SAME DAY AS THE DUCHESS OF CAMBRIDGE  Farrena Sadiq, 28, gave birth to a little girl at the Princess Royal Maternity unit in Glasgow 40 minutes before the newest Royal was born These beaming new mothers proudly showed off their new babies who will share their birthday with the Princess of Cambridge. The new mothers at Southmead Hospital, Bristol, introduced the newborns to the world as Kate Middleton gave birth to the fourth in line to the throne. The Duchess of Cambridge welcomed her daughter into the world at 8.34am on Saturday morning and just an hour or so before that, little Emilia Florence Gibbs was born weighing 7lb 14oz. She was born at 6.10am on Saturday May 2 to mum and dad Jennifer, 38, and William Gibbs, also 38. It is their third little girl and Jennifer said she was over the moon Emilia had arrived at the same time as the Princess. She said: 'I will definitely follow the progress of the new royal baby now. It's quite fun that we had Emilia at the same time. 'My due date was the same as the Duchess' as well - last Saturday - so it seems like it was destiny that they would arrive at the same time. 'It is something to tell her when she gets older.' Also sharing a birthday with the princess is Finley Charles Cross, who was born at 3.52am in the morning weighing a healthy 8lb 4oz. Mother Pearl Cross, 29, from Clevedon, North Somerset, said she only heard news of the royal arrival when her friends congratulated her on the good news. She said: 'We have been up all night so we didn't notice the royal baby until later on. 'It is special. It's nice that they will be sort of linked now, so we will definitely be following the progress of the princess. I was really excited to hear Kate had a girl. 'It is interesting to picture her going through exactly the same thing as me, especially because I was overdue as well.' Father Nathan, 33, added: 'We keep an eye on the royal family and this makes Finley's birth extra special.' Cindy and Lee Corbett, from Frenchay, Bristol, welcomed baby Owen Xiang-Yang Corbett at 7.15 in the morning. Lee, a computer-aided design manager, said: 'If we get a commemorative coin like the babies did that were born on the same day as Prince George, that will be nice. 'I expect we will keep an eye on what the princess is up to now - you can't help looking at your peers and seeing how their children are doing. 'We knew it could happen on the same day, but obviously when you are overdue it could come at any time.' Cindy, who works in a college, added: 'I was really interested to see Kate when she was pregnant. 'I am originally from Taiwan and the culture there tends to mean that we keep an eye on how much weight women put on in pregnancy. 'There is a big focus on staying healthy and not putting on too much weight. 'Kate always looked amazing and so smart, and I think she was a great role model. 'She looked really healthy, and it goes to show that you don't need to pile on weight when you are pregnant.' In Glasgow, a happy couple have celebrated the arrival of their own princess. Proud mother Farrena Sadiq, 28, a business studies teacher and Mohammed Imran, 31, a financial consultant both from Pollokshields celebrated the birth of their daughter on Saturday. Their daughter was welcomed into the world at 7.53 in the morning at Princess Royal Maternity in Glasgow- 40 minutes before the latest royal was born. The, as yet, unnamed baby girl weighed nine pounds and three ounces and had a full head of hair upon arrival. Farrena said: 'We're waiting until after we hear what Kate has named her baby to name ours - just in case we choose the same one. 'I didn't even know until she arrived that she'd be a girl. It's a nice claim to fame for her. She's our wee princess. 'She's a little diva already. She's loving all the attention that she's getting. 'Her big brother Ibrahim, who is two years older, has been very protective so far - just like I'm sure Prince George is. 'I'm sure that she'd have loved to have had a load of people camping outside to welcome her.'