Sky launches Europe's first 3D TV channel
The station has been live since April 3, but other than 14 Premier League football matches and several other sports games, has only been playing promotional snippets of 3D footage.
The station is only available to those with the Sky+ HD package, a 3D-enabled television and 3D glasses.
Earlier in the week, Virgin launched a 3D Movies On Demand channel, three days ahead of Sky's launch. The service, which also requires a 3D TV, the glasses and a Virgin HD+ set top box, is open to any customer, but content is available on a pay-per-view basis.
Currently, there is just one movie on offer, StreetDance 3D, which costs £5.99 for a 24-hour rental. The company will be scaling up its 3D content, but the service will remain on-demand (as opposed to live-channel), so it will not screen sports events in 3D.
The BBC, meanwhile, is yet to be fully converted to the case for 3D and is still experimenting with the technology. A spokesman confirmed that there would not be a BBC 3D channel appearing “any time soon”. The corporation is, however, considering a modest series of trials in the lead-up to the 2012 Olympics.
Only two per cent of British consumers plan on buying a 3D TV over the next 12 months, according to recent Deloitte research. Guy Bisson, a senior TV analyst at Screen Digest, is not surprised at the indifference. “3D TV will not have as much impact as HD," he says. "People will end up being left with 3D TVs, whenever they purchase their next set, as the technology will be built in.
“The case for HD was much more compelling, as it was easy to understand why people would want a clearer picture on their screen. Whereas with 3D, most people don’t feel TV needs enhancing in this way. It’s great for certain movies, but when it comes to TV, it’s still just a bit of a gimmick at the moment – until the content catches up to convince everyone. Plus the glasses don’t help either.”
Sky's 3D station's launch weekend highlights include three days of live Ryder Cup coverage and two 3D films, Bolt and Monster vs Aliens.
Other movies lined up to feature on the channel, as it expands it offering in the run-up to Christmas are: Alice in Wonderland, Harry Potter & The Half Blood Prince and Ice Age – Dawn of the Dinosaurs.
The Premier League will also be shown from launch, along with other live sport.
The station will run fresh first-run content in peak time, and show Sky’s ‘best-of 3D content’ during the rest of the day.