Gene Wolfe wins grand master award for science fiction and fantasy
Gene Wolfe, author of The Book of the New Sun and, according to Neil Gaiman, "one of our finest living writers", has been named a grand master of science fiction and fantasy.
The Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA) announced Wolfe as their 2012 recipient of the Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master award for "lifetime achievement in science fiction and/or fantasy" on Thursday. The author, known for his intricate, literary epic The Book of the New Sun, set far in the future as the sun slowly dies, joins a list of former grand masters including Ursula K Le Guin, Isaac Asimov and Ray Bradbury.
"It's not that Gene Wolfe is, in the opinion of many (and I am one of the many), our finest living science fiction writer. It is that he is, in the opinion of the Washington Post (and of me, too) one of our finest living writers," said Gaiman. "He has been our uncrowned grand master for a long time, and now the rest of the world will know as well."
The novelist John Scalzi, president of the SFWA, said "you'd have to search far and wide to find a contemporary fantasy writer who has not been directly influenced by Gene Wolfe", calling his prose "a joy to read", his stories "dense and deep", and his worlds "dark and rich beyond compare".
As well as The Book of the New Sun, Wolfe is also acclaimed for the novels The Fifth Head of Cerberus and Peace. Last year's grand master, Connie Willis, also praised his short stories: The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories, The Death of Dr. Island, Golden City Far, The Detective of Dreams, Memorare and Seven American Nights.
Wolfe warned the selection committee for the award to watch their step: "You're raising me to a height I would never have imagined," he said. "If you keep this up I'll start thinking I'm a good writer."
The author spoke of the first time he realised he was a writer; living "paycheck to paycheck" with his wife Rosemary and children, and "barely getting by", he'd had three "not terribly good" stories published in a college magazine, and thought he might try and make a little extra money by writing on the side.
"I sold a few stories. Then it was time for school to start again, and Rosemary began badgering me for money for school clothes. I would gladly have given it to her if there had been any. Another story, Car Sinister, sold, and instead of depositing the check I got the manager of the hardware store to cash it for me. I took it to Rosemary: 'Here's every dime I got for that story. That's how much you have for school clothes.' A few days passed, and I was sitting on the kitchen floor trying to mend a chair. Rosemary came up behind me and said, 'Shouldn't you be writing?'" said Wolfe. "That's when I knew I was a writer."
Wolfe will be presented with his prize next May, at the Nebula awards in San Jose. The author is already the recipient of a host of prizes, including the Nebula, World Fantasy and Locus awards.