Queen photobombs BBC newsroom as she opens Broadcasting House
BBC News viewers see monarch peering from behind glass in background of live bulletin as she is given tour of building
The Queen "photobombed"the news on Friday in one of the more surreal moments in live broadcasting history as she officially opened the BBC's revamped Broadcasting House in central London, without her husband by her side.
While the Duke of Edinburgh was in hospital where he underwent exploratory abdominal surgery and was said to be "progressing satisfactorily", his wife found herself doing something she was quite unused to – providing the backdrop.
As BBC News presenters Julian Worricker and Sophie Long addressed viewers from their glass-windowed studio, the Queen, who was being given a studio tour, loomed into view behind them, peering intently from the newsroom.
The two turned to see her, resplendent in turquoise coat and hat, lingering for several long seconds as BBC journalists crowded behind her raised a resounding cheer.
Staff had apparently been instructed to remain in their seats during the royal visit, but ignored orders from on high and swamped the diminutive monarch, snapping away on cameraphones.
It provided one of the more bizarre spectacles during the one-and-a-half-hour visit, which was to inaugurate the extension to the broadcaster's ­London headquarters, which has undergone a £1bn revamp.
Another was the sight of the Queen, with trademark inscrutable expression, listening politely in the Radio 1 Live Lounge to a performance by singer Danny O'Donoghue, of the BBC talent show The Voice, and his band the Script, as they sang a cover version of David Bowie's song Heroes.
While not in the station's target audience, the 87-year-old Queen – a classical music lover who normally wears earplugs when duty requires her attendance at pop concerts – nevertheless revealed surprising knowledge of popular culture when O'Donoghue told her he was playing the Glastonbury festival.
"Oh Glastonbury, the place you get covered in mud?" she remarked drily. He replied: "You've got to bring good wellies."
The visit went ahead despite the absence of the duke who is expected to spend two weeks in hospital. Buckingham Palace said that Friday's operation, which was carried out under general anaesthetic, was a planned admission following investigation carried out over the past week, and that the duke "is in very good health". It is his third hospital admittance in 12 months.
After the operation, the palace said in a short statement: "His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh has had an exploratory operation following abdominal investigations. The results will now be analysed. At this early stage he is progressing satisfactorily. Further updates will continue to be issued when appropriate."
Prime minister David Cameron, on a visit to Scotland, said Prince Philip was in the nation's thoughts.
"He's an extraordinarily dedicated ­public servant and such an enormous support for our sovereign that I know the whole country will be thinking about him, thinking about the family, and wishing him well," he said.
Philip, who is 92 on Monday, was admitted to the London Clinic on Thursday immediately following a garden party at Buckingham Palace.
It means that a plaque, unveiled by the Queen during the BBC visit, will have to be returned for reinscription, as it says she was accompanied by the duke.
The veteran broadcaster and Today ­programme inquisitor-in-chief John ­Humphrys, who met the Queen in a lineup of presenters, inquired how he was. "I have no idea," the Queen replied shrugging her shoulders. "He has only just gone in." When the broadcaster added that Philip had looked well at the garden party, she stated: "That's because he's not ill."
Humphrys's next encounter with her, when he presented her with a Save the Children digital radio, also failed to elicit much in the way of smalltalk by the ­monarch. As he wished her happy hours listening to it, she thanked him, but told him: "Well, I don't get an awful lot of chance."
In the Today programme studio, James Naughtie and Sian Williams were presenting a nostalgic programme about the BBC's long decades of public broadcasting when the Queen was shown in.
In keeping with her policy of never ­giving interviews, she was spared a grilling by Naughtie. Instead, she delivered a short address officially opening the building, in which she referred to a previous visit to Broadcasting House with her husband shortly before her coronation 60 years ago.
"I was struck then, as I am now, by the sheer pace of change which has transformed your industry over the past 60 years; years during which broadcasting has enriched our lives in so many ways," she said.
This was her sixth visit to Broadcasting House. The first was when she accompanied her father, George VI, her mother, Queen Elizabeth, and sister, Princess Margaret, shortly before the war.
After meeting selected BBC stars including David Dimbleby, Cambridge professor Mary Beard and Strictly Come Dancing host Bruce Forsyth, she attended a private reception for senior BBC staff.
Lord Patten, chairman of the BBC Trust, who greeted the Queen with the BBC's director general, Tony Hall, said: "The BBC's broadcast of the coronation in 1953 was the first major national TV event which brought the nation together around their TV sets for the first time, so nothing could be more appropriate than Her Majesty opening new Broadcasting House today."
As the royal car eventually drove off, Forsyth summed up. "It's a great day for the BBC. It's about time the BBC had a great day," he said.
Hinting at the Jimmy Savile scandal that has dogged the BBC, Naughtie said, after the visit: "The BBC has had had quite a difficult year for one reason and another, I think the warmth of this occasion is in part saying everybody here is very relieved and it's a good day to celebrate".