The 2017 Emmy Nominees in The New Yorker
In a recent interview, Stephen Colbert, who will host the Emmy Awards on Sunday night, was asked to name the biggest TV star of the past year. “Undoubtedly Donald Trump—no one’s close,” he said. “Kind of like how the Bible outsells every book of all time. Donald Trump is the Bible of the 2016–2017 television season.” Fittingly, this year’s list of Emmy nominees includes a slew of what we might call Talmudic scholars, including Alec Baldwin and Melissa McCarthy, nominated, respectively, for their bravura interpretations of Trump and Sean Spicer on “Saturday Night Live.” In the talk-show category, there’s Samantha Bee, America’s Comedian-in-Chief, and Colbert himself, whose relentless attacks on the Administration have given his “Late Show” a demonstrable Trump bump. There was little room for pure escapism in any TV category this year (not when the Oval Office insists on acting “Veep”-ish), but let’s pause and remember that the Emmys are really about a different kind of politics: arguing over which of our favorite TV shows have been honored and which were unjustly snubbed. (Don’t get Emily Nussbaum started.) Before the ceremony, catch up on The New Yorker’s past coverage of this year’s Emmy nominees.
In her review in the magazine, Emily Nussbaum described the series as “a come-hither drama that introduces itself as a science-fiction thriller about cyborgs who become self-aware, then reveals its true identity as what happens when an HBO drama struggles to do the same.” On the Web site, Tom Bissell wrote about its creators, while Aaron Bady examined race and the Western and why the show is no “Game of Thrones.”
Emily Nussbaum reviewed HBO’s adaptation of Margaret Atwood’s book, writing that it dramatizes “claustrophobia through gorgeous tableaux of repression.” Alexandra Schwartz made the case for the show’s feminism, and Moira Wiegel considered what it reveals about our own reproductive dystopia.
In her review, Emily Nussbaum described how the show “emphasizes character and mood, place and flow, a different type of originality.” Cassie da Costa wrote about the show’s new hip-hop sensibility.
Emily Nussbaum wrote about how Ryan Murphy, the creator of the miniseries, “lets the contradictions sizzle: he knows that schlock can double as great art.” Meanwhile, Richard Brody analyzes what the show misses about the art of movies.
“How to Get Away with Murder”
Last year, John Lahr wrote a Profile of Viola Davis, who is nominated for her performance as Angelica Keating, and how she came “to show the private moments of this tough, brilliant professional, who has a difficult, and promiscuous, past.”
“Generous to its characters, even those who begin as clichés, the series becomes a reflection on trauma,” Emily Nussbaum wrote in a review earlier this year. Jia Tolentino recapped the drama’s cathartic finale.
Michael Schulman wrote about the “sumptuous and surprisingly engrossing Netflix series” and the screenwriter Peter Morgan’s interest in Britain’s Queen Elizabeth II.
Carrie Battan called Pamela Adlon’s prickly comedy “possibly the most poignant love letter to single motherhood that has ever aired on TV.”
Rachel Syme on the HBO series, which is a campy show about the construction of faith.
Alex Okeowo examines the magnificent performance of Riz Ahmed and the tragic development of his character.
Ian Crouch describes why Alec Baldwin makes a perfect Donald Trump, and Alexandra Schwartz explains why casting Melissa McCarthy as Sean Spicer was a “stroke of comedic brilliance.”
Emily Nussbaum writes about how the HBO series is both a pastiche and an original, and Joshua Rothman traces the show’s nostalgia for the eighties—and beyond.
Ian Crouch on the unavoidable similarities between this season of “Veep” and the Trump Presidency.
“The Man in the High Castle”
In a Cultural Comment, Aaron Bady considers the grim resonance of the adaptation of Philip K. Dick’s novel and the author’s vision for resisting fascism in America.
Richard Brody on what the documentary reveals about the flow of information in the pre-Internet age.