Nina Bawden, author of Carrie's War, dies
Bawden (Nina Mary Mabey) was born in Ilford on January 19, 1925 and was a evacuated along with classmates from Ilford County High School for Girls. Carrie's War, published in 1973, was based on her childhood evacuation to Wales. In 1943, she went to Somerville College, Oxford, to read politics, philosophy and economics.
Bawden's mother, Ellaline Ursula May (known as Judy), was a teacher and her father was a marine engineer, who was away much of the time. Absent fathers feature in many of her books. A 2004 adaptation of Carrie's War for the BBC starred Keeley Fawcett as Carrie, and Prunella Scales starred in a West End stage adaptation.
Bawden's life was filled with tragedy. In 1981, her eldest son Nicholas - from her first marriage to Harry Bawden - died at the age of 33. He had been suffering drug and mental health problems and after a spell in prison he was found dead in the River Thames. One of the characters in Circles of Deceit was based on Niki. "I couldn't keep him out," she once said, although in the novel the missing boy comes home.
One of Bawden's last books, Dear Austen, followed thePotter's Bar rail crashin 2002, which killed her second husband, Austen Kark (with whom she had a daughter called Perdita). Bawden and her husband, the managing director of the BBC World Service, were on their way to an 80th birthday party in Cambridge when their train was derailed at Potter's Bar after leaving King's Cross. Bawden's ankle was smashed - she had pins and plates for the rest of her life - and her arm, leg, shoulder, collarbone and several ribs were broken. She could not remember much about the accident and later said: "The psychiatrist says that's the best way - you have plenty of self-protective defences."
She remained angry about the lack of a proper investigation into the accident and once wrote: "The murder of my husband by the railways has altered the way I think about everything. I had always thought that the majority of people were decent and honourable. In the wake of the crash, what made me angry more than anything else was the realisation that this was not true. I still find it very hard to come to terms with."
Playwright Sir David Hare, who portrayed Bawden in his play The Permanent Way, paid tribute to the writer, saying: "I am extremely sad to hear of Nina's death.
"Nina was an uncomplicatedly good woman, whose long fight to obtain justice for the victims of the Potters Bar crash was a model of eloquence, principle and human decency."
Her son, Robert Bawden (from her first marriage) said that the writer died at her home near Regent's Canal in north London, surrounded by family.
Her publisher at Virago, Lennie Goodings, said: "Nina Bawden was a gently fierce, clever, elegant, wickedly funny woman. She wrote slim books but they were powerful and extraordinarily acute observations about what makes us human. She was especially good on what goes on behind the facade of good behaviour. With the help of her son, Robert, she finished a piece on growing up in the 1940s for a forthcoming anthology just days before she died."
She was immensely proud of her 48 books, 19 of which, including The Peppermint Pig and Keeping Henry, were for youngsters. "Children often have a much stronger concept of morality than adults," she once said.