Israel vows to intensify attacks on Hamas as death toll climbs in Gaza Strip
Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu has vowed to ramp up a campaign against Gaza Strip militants that has killed at least 40 people in two days.
Israeli warplanes and helicopters have so far hit 550 targets in the Palestinian coastal enclave while Hamas militants have fired more than 200 rockets into Israel.
At least five rockets fired from Gaza were shot down over Tel Aviv by Israel's Iron Dome defence system, army radio reported.
Israel's neighbour Jordan demanded an end to what it said was a "barbaric" Israeli assault, but Mr Netanyahu vowed to intensify the strikes until rocket attacks stopped.
"We have decided to further intensify the attacks on Hamas and the terror organisations in Gaza," his office quoted him as saying after consulting defence chiefs in southern Israel.
"The army is prepared for any eventuality."
Mr Netanyahu warned Israel would continue to take action against Hamas.
"Hamas will pay a heavy price for the firing of rockets at Israeli civilians. Security for the citizens of Israel is first and foremost," he said.
Israel says most of the targets it hit were concealed rocket launching sites, but some were buildings which serve a dual purpose being both homes of Hamas leaders and command centres.
In those cases, Israel says it telephoned warnings to people inside the building to leave to before the attacks.
Health Ministry sources within Gaza reported that five women and six children were among those killed in Gaza in two days.
More than 370 people have been wounded.
The deadliest single strike took place shortly after midnight (local time) when a missile slammed into a house in the northern town of Beit Hanun, killing Hafez Hammad, a senior Islamic Jihad commander, and five of his family members, including two women and two children.
A senior Hamas official pledged that militants would not "surrender" in the face of the latest air strikes on Wednesday.
"There are no ceasefire talks, in the conventional sense. There are ongoing contacts. The Israelis are not interested in mediation, they are looking for surrender," said Osama Hamdan, who is based in Beirut.
"The situation will clear up in the coming hours. We will respond to this escalation, and Israel might be convinced that the escalation does not help them."
Jordan, one of just two Arab countries to have signed a peace treaty with Israel, has urged Israel to stop the deadly air raids against the Gaza Strip.
Government spokesman Mohammad Momani said Jordan "condemns the military aggression that Israel has launched in the Gaza Strip" and calls for "its immediate halt".
He said the "barbaric aggression" had "negative repercussions on the Gaza Strip and the whole region".
Egypt has also urged Israel and Hamas to halt their escalating conflict.
Egypt, which has a 1979 peace treaty with Israel, played a key role in mediating ceasefires in past wars between Hamas and the Jewish state.
But it has signalled a more hands-off approach in the latest conflict, which comes at a time of mounting tensions between the new government in Cairo and Hamas.
"There is no mediation, in the common sense of the word," Egyptian foreign ministry spokesman Badr Abdelatty said.
"Egyptian diplomatic efforts are aimed at immediately stopping Israeli aggression and ending all mutual violence. [Egyptian] contacts have not yet achieved a result."
Israel has said a ground invasion of the Gaza Strip is possible, but not imminent, and has urged citizens within 40 kilometres of the enclave to stay close to bomb shelters.
The surge in violence along the Gaza border - the worst since an eight-day war in 2012 when Tel Aviv was also targeted - followed a chain of events that were triggered by the abduction of three Israeli youths in the occupied West Bank on June 12.
The Israeli youths were found dead, as was a Palestinian teen abducted in East Jerusalem last Wednesday in a suspected revenge murder for which six Israelis have been arrested.
Israeli police say three of those people have confessed to the murder.
Hamas, which has neither confirmed nor denied any role in the kidnapping of the Israeli youths, has threatened an "earthquake" against Israel.
The United States has backed Israel's actions, saying no country can accept rocket fire aimed at civilians and that it has a right to defend itself.
German chancellor Angela Merkel has also condemned rocket attacks on Israel from Gaza, saying there is "no justification" for them in a telephone call with Mr Netanyahu.