Obama Says Plane Was Shot Down From Rebel-Held Ukraine Area
“It’s too early for us to guess the intentions of those who launched the missile,” the president said. “We have confidence in saying that shot was taken within territory that is controlled by Russian separatists.”
The message from the White House about the downing of the plane has become steadily more assertive as the hours have passed.
Mr. Obama’s first comments, at the beginning of a speech on Thursday afternoon on the need for more infrastructure spending, noted only that there “may be a terrible tragedy,” and he said the United States would work to determine what happened. The president made no mention of Russia.
By the time Mr. Obama landed back in Washington on Thursday night, the White House had issued a much more aggressive statement from Josh Earnest, the press secretary. The statement focused on Russia’s role in the creation of what Mr. Earnest called “the context” of the current situation.
“This incident occurred in the context of a crisis in Ukraine that is fueled by Russian support for the separatists, including through arms, matériel and training,” Mr. Earnest wrote.
The statement called on Russia to “take concrete steps to de-escalate the situation in Ukraine and to support a sustainable cease-fire and path toward peace that the Ukrainian government has consistently put forward.”
“This should snap everybody’s head to attention,” Mr. Obama said of the international community. “We don’t have time for propaganda. We don’t have time for games.”
In taking a more public posture, Mr. Obama joins his ambassador to the United Nations, Samantha Power, who on Friday morning criticized Russia for not doing more to end the separatist movement in Ukraine. Ms. Power, speaking at the United Nations, said the missile that brought down the Malaysian plane was probably shot from territory the separatists control.
The president, buffeted by an extraordinary confluence of international crises this week, also expressed support for the Israeli assault on Gaza that began on Thursday, even as he cautioned about the risks of civilian casualties.
In a telephone call on Friday morning with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, Mr. Obama said he "reaffirmed my strong support for Israel’s right to defend itself."
“No nation should accept rockets being fired into its borders or terrorists tunneling into its territory,” Mr. Obama said, noting that during the call, sirens were blaring in Tel Aviv, signaling an impending rocket blast.
But he also said the United States and its allies were “deeply concerned about the risks of further escalation and the loss of more innocent life,” and said his understanding was that Israel’s military operation was limited to targeting Hamas’s network of underground tunnels.
“We are hopeful that Israel will continue to approach this process in a way that minimizes civilian casualties,” Mr. Obama said. He said Secretary of State John Kerry was prepared to travel to the region “following additional consultations” to support Egypt’s efforts to broker a cease-fire.