Bomb attacks in Afghanistan kill 11
Afghan security forces are seen through the shattered glass of a bus at the scene of the roadside bomb blast in Kabul on Nov. 10. Two fatal bombings in Afghanistan were aimed at local police. (Shah Marai/AFP/Getty Images)
Two attacks targeting Afghanistan’s police killed at least 10 officers and a civilian Monday, underscoring an uptick in violence in the country since the inauguration of a power-sharing government in September.
The blasts occurred a day after a suicide bomber infiltrated the heavily fortified police headquarters in the capital, Kabul, killing a senior officer and wounding several others.
On Monday, a suicide bomber killed at least seven officers, including a senior commander, outside the main police station in the eastern province of Logar, an hour’s drive south of Kabul, according to an Interior Ministry statement.
“The bomber had disguised himself in a police uniform and blew explosives attached to his body among the local police who had gathered outside the station,” said provincial spokesman Deen Mohammad Darwish. One civilian also was killed, Darwish said in a telephone interview, and four officers were wounded.
The second attack targeted a vehicle carrying police instructors in Jalalabad, an eastern city near the border with Pakistan. Three officers were killed in the blast, which was set off when explosives hidden under a rickshaw were detonated remotely, officials said.
The Taliban asserted responsibility for both attacks.
The Islamist group was ousted from power by U.S.-backed forces in the wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and has since been waging an insurgency in Afghanistan. Most foreign forces are set to pull outof the country by the end of the year, and insurgent violence has increased as coalition troops have been steadily drawing down and responsibility for security has shifted to Afghan forces.
Thousands of Afghan security personnel have died in Taliban attacks in the past decade.
On Monday, a third explosion caused by a magnet bomb wounded several civilians near a university in a residential section of Kabul. A convoy of security forces was the apparent target.