U.S.-Led Raid Frees 8 Qaeda Hostages From a Yemeni Cave
The operation appeared to be at least partly an attempt to bolster the stature of Mr. Hadi, a committed but wobbling United States ally whose authority was badly undermined when a rebel group suddenly seized control of Yemen’s capital in September.
In an apparent effort to play down the leading American role in the clandestine operation, the Pentagon referred questions about what had happened to the Yemeni government.
“I would just tell you we continue to support Yemeni counterterrorism efforts and would refer you to them to talk to any operations,” Rear Adm. John F. Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, told reporters on Tuesday.
A statement from the Yemeni government made no mention of any American role in the hostage rescue, which is one of the principal missions of Joint Special Operations Command troops like the Army’s Delta Force or the Navy’s SEAL Team Six.
With militias gaining ground and Yemen’s political order upended, Mr. Hadi has increasingly seemed like a bystander to arguments and violence beyond his control. He came to power two years ago after Ali Abdullah Saleh stepped down as part of an internationally brokered deal.
Mr. Saleh, who was president for 33 years and remains a powerful political broker, was widely suspected of aiding the ascent of the rebel group, known as the Houthis.
The Houthis, whose leaders come from the minority Zaydi sect, a branch of Shiite Islam, had fought six wars against Yemen’s central government before they swept into the capital, Sana, in September. Seizing on popular anger with Mr. Hadi’s government, Houthi fighters took over government buildings, state media facilities and military bases.
The military broke apart, some units appeared to side with the rebels, and the prime minister abruptly resigned.
Since storming Sana, the Houthis have sought to consolidate their power, including by vanquishing their Islamist political enemies. They have also eclipsed the military at the vanguard of the battle against Sunni extremists of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, with the Houthi fighters engaging the extremists on a growing number of fronts across Yemen.
The fighting has led to fears of an escalating sectarian war. The Houthis’ ascendance has angered Al Qaeda, which views Shiites as heretics and the Houthis as pawns of Iran. Houthi fighters have been making advances outside Sana, taking over cities, apparently with the agreement of the local authorities.
All the while, in southern Yemen, a movement calling for independence for the south has threatened a more forceful effort to press its demands.
Earlier this month, in another attempt to bolster Mr. Hadi, the Obama administration imposed sanctions on two Houthi leaders, as well as Mr. Saleh. The United States’ action, though, seemed only to prompt new controversy and further isolate Mr. Hadi.
The captives were held in Hadhramaut, Yemen’s largest province and a sparsely populated region where vast spaces outside its cities are beyond the government’s control. Long known for its fierce independence, the oil-rich province has also struggled in recent years with a security vacuum. It has become the stage for a growing number of shadowy militant attacks on the security forces, for which the government blames Al Qaeda.
And the province, which stretches from the Gulf of Aden in the south to the desolate Empty Quarter near the border with Saudi Arabia, has also been the site of repeated strikes by missile-firing United States drones.
The Supreme Security Committee in Yemen said in a statement carried on the official Saba agency that one of those freed was Khalil al-Mekhlafi, who was kidnapped from the southern province of Bayda in June 2013. Mr. Mekhlafi holds a doctorate in computer science from China and lectures at Al Bayda University.
According to Mr. Mekhlafi’s friends, he was abducted along with two of his colleagues after finishing classes last year. Prof. Sailan Al Arami, president of Al Bayda, said Mr. Mekhlafi was installed as a teacher at the university last year after serving for months at a police academy in the capital.
But a local journalist who has followed Mr. Mekhlafi’s abduction said that Qaeda militants had kidnapped him because they thought he had expertise in making explosives, and because he had worked as a police officer. “They think that he would help them making bombs,” said the journalist, who spoke on the condition of anonymity out of fear for his safety.
The official statement did not say whether the freed Saudi citizen was Abdullah al-Khalidi, a Saudi diplomat who was kidnapped from the port city of Aden in 2012 and has appeared on Qaeda videos, appealing to his government to secure his release. A spokesman at the Saudi Embassy in Washington said he had no information about the Saudi who was reportedly released.