'Team America: World Police' screenings canceled in wake of controversy over 'The Interview'
A marionette representing former North Korean leader Kim Jong-il is seen in an image from the 2004 comedy 'Team America: World Police.' (Paramount)
First "The Interview," now "Team America: World Police." In the wake of the hacking of computers at Sony Pictures and subsequent terrorist threat that forced the studio to cancel release plans for the comedy "The Interview" -- a film that depicts the assassination of North Korean leader Kim Jong-un -- Paramount Pictures is now reportedly pulling the plug nationwide on planned screenings of the 2004 film "Team America: World Police."
Directed by "South Park" co-creator Trey Parker, "Team America" features a cast of marionettes representing various public figures and world leaders, most of which are killed violently on-screen. Notably among them: Kim Jong-il, the father of Kim Jong-un and his predecessor as the leader of North Korea.
A number of movie theaters around the country had planned to screen "Team America" in place of "The Interview," both as a way to fill screens left empty by the cancellation of the film and, apparently, to send a message to those making the terrorist threats. Now, those screenings have been scuttled as well, reportedly at the request of Paramount.
"We regret to inform y'all that we have had to cancel our screening of 'Team America' this weekend," read a message posted Thursday on the Facebook page of the independent New Orleans moviehouse Indywood, which -- even before the eruption of the "Interview" controversy -- had scheduled "Team America" as part of a weekend showcase of films it was calling its "Puppet Movie Christmas Spectacular."
The theater's message continues: "In the case of North Korea vs. Indywood, North Korea has won. ... Now it seems all the major studios are scared of being hacked. This morning we got a frantic call from Paramount shutting down 'Team America,' which also makes fun of North Korea."
Other theaters elsewhere in the countryfielded similar calls from the studio.
Indywood organizers are replacing planned screenings of "Team America" with the 1986 film "Thunderbird 6," also a marionette film. The theater's "Puppet Movie Christmas Spectacular" runs Friday night and Saturday, Dec. 19 and 20.
The controversy over "The Interview" started months ago, when North Korea declared the planned release of the film, which stars Seth Rogen and James Franco as entertainment reporters enlisted to assassinate Kim Jong-un, "an act of war." Then, in November, computers at Sony Pictures -- the parent company of "Interview" distributor Columbia Pictures -- were hacked by a group calling themselves the Guardians of Peace. In subsequent days, reams of sensitive internal documents as well as copies of unreleased movies were leaked online in apparent retaliation for the film's planned release.
The stakes were upped this week when the hackers released a message invoking the specter of the Sept. 11 attacks and warning American moviegoers to steer clear of theaters showing "The Interview." The nation's major theater chains responded by cancelling screenings of "The Interview," which was set to open on Christmas. Once it became clear that it would have few to any screens on which to show the film, Sony announced late Wednesday it was cancelling the film's planned release altogether.
North Korea has denied having anything to do with the hack attack, but U.S. officials say they have evidence to suggest that isn't the case.
Sony has said it has no plans to release "The Interview" -- directed by Rogen and Evan Goldberg -- on on-demand or other home-video platforms.