North Korea's Internet still spotty
Internet service in North Korea is still intermittent, Dyn Research, a company that monitors Internet performance, announced on Twitter Tuesday morning. Service went down completely for about nine hours earlier, Dyn Research said.
"Usually there are isolated blips, not continuous connectivity problems. I wouldn't be surprised if they are absorbing some sort of attack presently," Doug Madory, director of Internet analysis at Dyn Research, said when the Internet was down.
Matthew Prince, president of CloudFlare, a performance and security company, described the disruption as if "all the routes to get to North Korea just disappeared.
"It's as if North Korea got erased from the global map of the Internet," he said.
Prince, who also spoke when the Internet was down, told CNN it's well within the realm of possibility that a single individual could have been behind the interruption but said he can't conclude at this point that an attack took place.
"If it is an attack, it's highly unlikely it's the United States. More likely it's a 15-year-old in a Guy Fawkes mask," he said.
The outage brought down sites run by the Korean Central News Agency and the Rodong Sinmun -- major mouthpieces for the regime -- according to the South Korean news agency Yonhap.
The regime is upset over Sony's controversial comedy, "The Interview," which follows a plot to assassinate its leader, Kim Jong Un.
U.S. President Barack Obama told CNN on Sunday that the hack was "an act of cybervandalism that was very costly, very expensive" but that he didn't consider it an act of war.
He had previously said that the United States would "respond proportionally" to the attack on Sony, without giving specifics.
"We aren't going to discuss -- you know -- publicly, operational details about the possible response options or comment on those kind of reports in any way, except to say that as we implement our responses, some will be seen, some may not be seen," Marie Harf told reporters.