Suspected Plotter of U.S. Embassy Attacks Abu Anas Al-Libi Dies in New York
NEW YORK — A one-time associate of Osama bin Laden died in New York on Friday while awaiting trial for allegedly plotting the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
Abu Anas al-Libi, 50, was captured in Libya by U.S. commandos in Oct. 2013 and brought to New York where he was due to stand trial. He had been wanted for more than a decade and there was a $5 million reward for his arrest. Al-Libi had pleaded not guilty.
The al Qaeda terror suspect has been in poor health and suffered liver disease as a result of hepatitis C, according to published reports.
In a court filing, U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara said that al-Libi was taken from the Metropolitan Correctional Center to a New York hospital on Wednesday "due to sudden complications arising out of his long-standing medical problems."
Bharara added that al-Libi's condition "deteriorated rapidly" and he died on Friday.
"We understand that, in addition to his counsel, an imam was with al-Libi at the hospital and that appropriate arrangements are being made with his family," Bharara wrote.
A spokesman for Bharara declined comment. An FBI spokesman did not immediately return a request for comment.
Al-Libi's attorney Bernard Kleinman had recently said his client's health was deteriorating. Kleinman did not immediately return a call for comment early Saturday.
Al-Libi's wife, Um Abdullah, told The Associated Press that being in his experience only worsened his ailments, including hepatitis C, leading to his death. "I accuse the American government of kidnapping, mistreating, and killing an innocent man. He did nothing," Abdullah said.
Abdullah said her husband underwent liver surgery three weeks ago, went into a coma and was moved prematurely back to prison where he suffered complications.
His wife said that she spoke to al-Libi last time from prison on Thursday. "His voice was weak and he was in a bad condition," she added.
Al-Libi had argued in court that he was illegally kidnapped and interrogated for seven days aboard a Navy ship after members of an Army Delta Force swooped into his property in Tripoli and pulled him from his car.