Netanyahu says Israel will defend itself amid rockets attack from Syria - Xinhua
JERUSALEM, Jan. 27 (Xinhua) -- Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said on Tuesday evening that Israel will defend itself from future attacks, reacting to the rockets attack from Syria into the Golan Heights.
"Israel views this attack from Syria's territory severely," Netanyahu said at an event commemorating the International Holocaust Remembrance Day at the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial museum, "those who will try to challenge us within our borders will know we can defend ourselves."
"If you play with fire, you'll be hit by fire," he warned.
Israeli security forces believe Hezbollah orchestrated the attack, along with Syrian forces of President Bashar al-Assad, in retaliation to an alleged Israeli airstrike last week in Syria, killing a Hezbollah commander and an Iranian general.
At least four rockets were fired from Syria into northern Israel's Golan Heights, territories Israel annexed in the 1967 Mideast War. Two rockets landed in open territories. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) retaliated with artillery fire. Syrian media several injuries from the artillery.
There were no injuries or damages from the rockets attack. The Hermon Mountain ski site was evacuated from visitors, Israeli police erected roadblocks in the nearby roads and farmers were warned by the IDF not to approach fields near the Syrian border.
The IDF has been on high alert in northern Israel following last week's airstrike. The Ha'aretz daily reported on Tuesday the army had installed concrete blocks on the Lebanon border, to protect against possible shooting attacks from Lebanon. There have also been reports of deployment of Iron Dome anti-missile batteries in northern Israel.
Although not officially confirmed, it is believed Israel carried out several air strikes against Syria, targeting weapons transfers believed to be sent by Iran and addressed to Hezbollah, in response to overspill of fighting from the Syrian Civil War into northern Israel.