At Least 19 Killed in Fighting in Eastern Ukraine
“Krasnohorivka and Maryinka are in flames,” Yevhen Deydey, a Ukrainian member of Parliament and former commander of the Kiev-1 volunteer battalion, posted on Facebook. “All along the line close combat is taking place. Fighters are trying to break through.”
Separatist leaders denied that they had attacked, and a rebel spokesman said the Ukrainian military had withdrawn from Maryinka on its own.
By evening, it was unclear whether Ukraine’s military had lost the towns. At one point, Mr. Deydey wrote on Facebook that Maryinka had been “70 percent” captured by separatists. Later, though, Ukrainian military authorities said a cease-fire had silenced the guns and restored government control there.
Maryinka, though an eerie ghost town after heavy fighting last summer, is strategic because it lies along the main access road for civilian traffic into Donetsk. If Maryinka is captured, it will become the most significant territorial advance by the Russian-backed separatists since they surrounded and overran the town of Debaltseve in February.
In the fighting on Wednesday, stray artillery shells knocked out electricity to two coal mines in rebel-held territory, trapping at least 350 miners underground before they were rescued.The Ukrainian general military staff said in a statement that Russian-backed forces had deployed at least 1,000 fighters, 10 tanks and self-propelled artillery in the assault on Maryinka. It said Ukraine had informed the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which is monitoring the cease-fire, that the military was moving artillery and heavy weapons back within range, to join the fight.
The attack began hours after talks scheduled for Tuesday on carrying out other elements of the Minsk agreement broke down, though without signifying any broader abandonment of the deal. By midafternoon, Ukrainian officials were issuing contradictory assessmentsof the combat, with some suggesting a significant breakdown in the cease-fire and others not.
Andriy Lysenko, the Ukrainian military spokesman, said at a briefing in Kiev that the fighting, while grave, was not a “wide-scale attack” on government positions. “We see engagements every day and night,” he said. “This advance and attack is taking place on a narrow front.”
Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk, speaking during a visit to a base where American soldiers are training Ukrainian National Guard members, said Russia had violated the Minsk accord by ordering the attack after negotiations foundered. “Russia yesterday broke up the trilateral meeting and today gave an order to its terrorists to begin a military operation,” he said. “This is another challenge for the world community.”
In Washington, the State Department blamed Russia for the new attacks, saying its troops and separatist fighters “have reportedly utilized Grad rockets and other heavy weapons that should have been withdrawn under the February Minsk plan.” Marie Harf, a State Department spokeswoman, said, “Russia bears direct responsibility for preventing these attacks and implementing a cease-fire.”