Islamic State claims responsibility for Tunisian resort attack
TUNIS, Tunisia — A lone gunman hiding a Kalashnikov under his umbrella opened fire on a Tunisian beach resort, killing 39 people, mostly tourists — one of three deadly attacks Friday from Europe to the Middle East.
The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack at the Imperial Marhaba hotel, according to SITE Intelligence Group, a U.S.-based organization that monitors terrorists' activity online.
At least 36 people were wounded in the nation's deadliest onslaught before the shooter was killed by security forces. The gunman was identified by the Islamic State as Abu Yahya al-Qayrawani, according to SITE.
"Tunisia is in a constant war against terrorism," said President Beji Caid Essebsi, vowing to crack down on terrorism in his country. "Tunisian state is concerned about this issue, and it will take its responsibilities and take measures that could be painful but necessary."
The president said he would revoke the right of political parties and groups to assemble, if necessary, if they advocated militancy or expressed solidarity with the Islamic State.
Witnesses at the resort town of Sousse said bodies were strewn in the sand alongside beach chairs as the gunman opened fire on sunbathers.
The interior ministry initially said at least two gunmen were involved, but revised its report as investigators examined the chaotic scene and decided there was a single shooter.
"A terrorist infiltrated the buildings from the back before opening fire on the residents of the hotel, including foreigners and Tunisians," Ministry of the Interior spokesman Mohamed Ali Laroui said.
Sousse, a popular vacation spot for European tourists, is about 90 miles southeast of the capital Tunis.
Earlier Friday, Tunisia media outlets identified the gunman as Seif Eddine Rezgui, 23. Radio Mosaique reported Rezgui was radicalized at mosques in Kairouan — about 40 miles west of Sousse — where he earned his degree in electronics and enrolled in a master's program at a local sciences and technology university.
Tunisian security forces have been on alert since March when two Tunisian gunmen opened fire on the Bardo museum in Tunis, killing 22 people, mostly tourists. Two gunmen were killed in that attack, for which the Islamic State also claimed credit.
The scene of the massacre Friday was one of utter chaos, witnesses said. The gunman began his carnage on the beach before moving to the pool area and then into the hotel itself.
British Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond said at least five Britons were among the dead.
"There was a mass exodus off the beach," British tourist Gary Pine told Sky News. He said guests at his hotel were first told to lock themselves in their rooms, and later to gather in the lobby.
Elizabeth O'Brien, a tourist from Dublin, told Ireland's RTE News At One that at first she thought she heard fireworks going off, then realized the sound was gunfire.
"I ran to the sea to my children and grabbed our things and, as I was running toward the hotel, the waiters and the security on the beach started shouting 'Run, run, run,'" she said.
"We ran to our room, which is like a little bungalow, so we are actually trapped in our room, because we have no contact the phone here doesn't work to call reception."
The Imperial Marhaba hotel is owned by Spain's RIU Hotels & Resorts, which has more than 100 hotels in 19 countries. The company offered its condolences to the victims and their families.
Spainish Interior Minister Jorge Fernandez Diaz raised his country's terror alert level to 4 on a scale from 1 to 5.
A British tourist, Alan Callaghan, told the BBC guests at his hotel were taking shelter in the quarters of the hotel's staff and were being told to wait for an all-clear. Another British tourist told Sky News he was by the swimming pool when he heard "quite a large explosion," and guests began running back toward the hotel from the beach.
The two other attacks that occurred Friday were in Kuwait and France, but it was unknown yet if the incidents were related. In Kuwait City, the Islamic State claimed responsibility for a suicide bombing at a Shiite mosque during Friday prayers that killed more than two dozen people. In France, near Lyon, a driver rammed his truck into a U.S.-owned gas factory, triggering an explosion. A decapitated body was found at the scene with the head hanging at the factory entrance.