Boko Haram gunmen kill scores in attacks on Nigerian towns of Kukawa and Musarram
Maiduguri, Nigeria: Islamists from Boko Haram killed 145 people in attacks on two Nigerian villages in recent days, according to residents.
The militants attacked the village of Musarram in the north of Borno state on Tuesday, picking out 48 men and killing them, said Kaka Haruna, a local resident.
In another attack on Wednesday in the town of Kukawa near the border with Niger, 97 people were killed, according to Kakami Idris, a farmer in the area. He said the attack was carried out by more than 50 gunmen who opened fire on people praying after breaking their Ramadan fast.
A former local official in the town of Kukawa near Lake Chad said many had been killed after the suspected Islamist militants attacked in the early evening. A member of a local defence group said the death toll could be as high as 97.
"Many people were killed," said the military source, adding that the casualty figure "may be very high".
Boko Haram has killed thousands of people and left about 1.5 million others displaced during a six-year insurgency to create an Islamic caliphate and impose Islamic law in the northeast of Africa's most populous nation and top oil producer.
Neighbouring states including Niger and Chad have been drawn into the conflict, helping Nigeria's effort to crush the group.
The military and police in Maiduguri, the state capital, didn't immediately comment on the reports. Mohammed Tahir Monguno, a local lawmaker, told reporters that he had been informed about attacks on villages. He said that many militants had moved to that region after security forces drove them out of their bases in the Sambisa forest.
The last month has seen a resurgence in attacks, most of them in the Borno state capital of Maiduguri, the biggest city of northeastern Nigeria where the army's new command centre for the campaign against Boko Haram is now located.
President Muhammadu Buhari, who was inaugurated on May 29, has held talks with officials from neighbouring countries Chad, Niger, Cameroon and Benin to set up a regional force to tackle the insurgents. 