Multiple bomb attacks shake Afghanistan's capital with dozens killed targeting police, NATO and civilians
A wave of attacks on Afghan police, army and NATO installations in Kabul has killed at least 50 people and wounded hundreds, dashing hopes that Taliban insurgents might be weakened by a leadership struggle after news of their longtime leader's death last week.
The attacks on Friday, which included a massive truck bomb in a heavily populated civilian area and a suicide attack on a police academy, were some of the most serious in months.
They were also the first in Kabul since the Taliban named a new leader.
A member of Afghanistan's residual NATO force was killed in an overnight battle at Camp Integrity near Kabul's airport, said a spokesman for NATO's Resolute Support mission in Afghanistan, Colonel Brian Tribus.
The death marked the second international service member killed in Afghanistan this year, after most foreign troops withdrew at the end of 2014.
A Taliban spokesman claimed responsibility for the attack on the police academy in Kabul.
"The bomber was wearing a police uniform and detonated his explosives among students who had just returned from a break," a police official said.
At least 26 people were killed and 28 more wounded at the police academy, according to an Afghan police official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Shortly after the explosions, military jets were heard flying over the centre of Kabul.
Less than 24 hours earlier, a huge truck bomb exploded near an army compound in a residential area of Kabul, killing at least 15 people and wounding nearly 250.
Unlike the attack on the police station, the Taliban did not claim responsibility for the truck bombing, which claimed mainly civilian casualties, killing and wounding people in their sleep and wrecking shops and homes.
"Last night's attack was a cowardly terrorist attack against civilians," presidential spokesman Sayed Zafar Hashemi said.
The increase in attacks highlighted growing insecurity in the country amid a faltering peace process with the Taliban as Afghan forces faced their first summer fighting season without full NATO support.
A UN report published on Wednesday said civilian casualties in Afghanistan hit a record high in the first half of 2015.
The report said 1,592 civilians were killed, a 6 per cent fall from last year, but the number of injured jumped 4 per cent to 3,329.
Overall, casualties reached their highest level since the UN began issuing its authoritative reports in 2009.
The statistics are a grim indicator of the expanding insurgency, with Afghan forces increasingly battling the militants on their own after NATO's combat mission ended in December.
US-led NATO forces still have a 13,000-strong residual force for training and counter-terrorism operations.
The Taliban face growing internal divisions after Mullah Akhtar Mansour was named as the new head of the insurgent movement last week.
This came shortly after the Taliban's confirmation of the death of Mullah Omar, who led the militant movement for some 20 years.
The escalating violence demonstrates Mullah Mansour's attempt to boost his image among Taliban cadres and drive attention away from internal divisions over his leadership, observers say.