Attacks, and Accusations, Escalate in Eastern Ukraine
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on Tuesday blamed Ukraine. After emerging from a dive in a miniature submarine in the Black Sea off the coast of Crimea, the peninsula Russia annexed last year, Mr. Putin said that, “regrettably, we are now seeing this conflict escalation and the blame lies not with the Donbas militia but with the rival side.”
Sergey V. Lavrov, Russia’s foreign minister, said on Monday that the Ukrainian authorities had failed to carry out the political points of the February cease-fire, which he said called for Kiev to cede power to the two separatist regions.
The Ukrainians, he said, are “more concerned over how to keep alive Russophobia in the West and how to artificially whip up tension.”
Before the latest escalation, four vehicles belonging to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe were burned outside the Park Inn hotel in Donetsk, limiting the group’s ability to monitor rebel military actions.
Ivica Dacic, the foreign minister of Serbia, which holds the chairmanship of the O.S.C.E., issued a statement last week condemning the arsons and subsequent resumption of fighting, at the time focused around one village, Starohnativka, northeast of the strategic Ukrainian-controlled port of Mariupol.
Since then, skirmishes have become general along the length of the front, the European monitoring mission’s statements suggest.
On Saturday, European monitors reported hearing 184 explosions in Donetsk that were consistent with mortar fire on the front that runs through the city’s outlying northwestern districts. South of Donetsk, along a river that roughly defines the front line, monitors found fresh craters from howitzers and rocket artillery on both sides.
On the government side, monitors noted that the Ukrainian Army had removed eight Grad rocket-launching trucks from a holding area, where they had been taken to comply with the cease-fire.
The separatist news agency DAN reported that artillery fire killed three people in the town of Horlivka and two in Donetsk.
The Ukrainian Army reported that one soldier was killed in the fighting, and officials said that two people were killed overnight Monday from shelling in a Ukrainian-held village on the outskirts of Mariupol. A third resident of the village, a mother who had been caught in the open with her 10-year-old daughter while running for cover, died on Tuesday in a hospital.