'Russia kills US-backed Syrian rebels in second day of air strikes as Iran prepares for ground offensive'
• Iran and Hizbollah in Syria 'for ground operation' • Russia launches more air strikes against rebels • Moscow denies yesterday's strikes killed civilians • Russia launches airstrikes in Syria - as it happened • Vladimir Putin’s catastrophic plan for Syria would deliver war without end
Here is our summary of events in Syria on Thursday, from Richard Spencer, Middle East Editor, Nabih Bulos in Beirut and Ruth Sherlock in Washington:
• Iran was on Thursday night moving up its ground forces in Syria in preparation for an attack to reclaim rebel-held territory under the cover of Russian air strikes, according to sources close to Damascus. Hizbollah, the Lebanese Shia militia which has come to the Assad regime’s rescue in battle-fronts across the country in the past two years, is being prepared to capitalise on the strikes, a Syrian figure close to the regime told The Telegraph
• Sources in Lebanon told Reuters that Iran, which is the main sponsor and tactical adviser to Hizbollah, was sending in hundreds of its own troops to reinforce them. Iran made no comment on the claims but Josh Earnest, the White House spokesman, said the move would be an "apt and powerful illustration" that Russia's military actions had worsened the conflict.
• A Hizbollah-backed advance would fit the pattern of Russian air-strikes, which have predominantly targeted those rebels not aligned to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant who currently present the gravest threat on the ground to core regime territory.
• The long-term aim would be to defeat or demoralise the non-Isil opposition, so that Isil became the regime’s only enemy. That would force the West to back President Bashar al-Assad against it. “They want to clean the country of non-Isil rebels, and then the US will work with them as Isil will be the only enemy," the Damascus source said.
• The Russians continued their aerial bombardment on Thursday. Targets included Jisr al-Shughour and Jabal al-Zawiya, areas under the control of Jaish al-Fatah, the Army of Conquest, an alliance of Islamist groups which have won significant victories against the regime this year. They also included Isil targets in Raqqa and Deir Ezzour provinces, including a Syrian Air Force base which fell to Isil earlier this year after a long siege.
• The Kremlin admitted on Thursday that targets included non-Isil targets - something it had previously denied - and that its aim was to shore the regime “in its weak spots”.The White House last night said the failure to discriminate between Isil and other rebel groups was a “grave miscalculation”.
• Among the dead from Wednesday’s strikes was said to be a prominent rebel leader in north Homs province, Captain Iyad al-Deek, a former regime officer who defected early in the uprising.
• The rebels have promised to take the fight to the Russians, some in blood-curdling comments online. “Is it not time for the knight to mount his steed? Is it not time to cut off the heads? What are we waiting for? What remains?” said one man, Mohammad al-Maghaweer, who claimed to be a front-line fighter with Jaish al-Fatah.
• The rebels also claimed there were a number of civilians among the dead. "The mosque was virtually destroyed, and there was a body under the ruins, and there were eight wounded, among them a child,” said Tareq Abdul-Haq, a media activist who visited Jisr al-Shughour after the Russian bombing. He said a “poor, civilian” neighbourhood had been hit.
• Russia is preparing both a United Nations resolution purporting to cover both its bombing campaign and that of the US-led anti-Isil coalition under one formulation, and a new round of peace talks.
US and Russian military officials spoke for a little over an hour on Thursday evening about how to improve the safety of air crews conducting simultaneous air strikes in Syria and agreed to consider each other's proposals, a Pentagon spokesman said.
"Both sides agreed to consider the proposals and provide feedback in the coming days," Peter Cook, the Pentagon spokesman, said in a news briefing.
Cook said Elissa Slotkin, an acting assistant secretary of defense who was on the call, had noted to the Russian officials US concerns that Russian strikes so far had not targeted strongholds of Islamic State militants.
Richard Spencer, Middle East Editor, has this handy Q&A of why Russia has launched Syrian air strikes.
The same spokesmen are sometimes vague - referring to Isil and terrorists in the same breath. By “terrorists” they mean the same as Bashar al-Assad - anyone part of the armed opposition. And it so happens that the gravest threat to the regime’s core areas - Damascus, and the central and western plains to the coast - comes from non-Isil rebels. Vladimir Putin, the Russian president has also said that he believes the survival of the Assad regime is very important, so it makes sense to target them first.
Reports are coming in that on Thursday morning there were strikes on a former regime air base near the Isil capital Raqqa and on Isil positions near Deir Ezzour city in eastern Syria. It is not quite clear whether there was any particular tactical purpose to these strikes.
The Syrian war is a lot more complicated than that. The regime long ago gave up any hope of recapturing Isil-held areas in the near future. So the number of “live” battle-fronts between the regime and Isil are comparatively few. However, there is a fierce war going on between Isil and other rebel groups, so it may be that by bombing them the Russians are actually helping Isil. Russia denies that.
Its strategy may be that if it can help the regime defeat the non-Isil rebels, the world will gather round and help Damascus seize control of Isil-held areas too.
The groups they are bombing a spectrum of opposition groups from an alliance called Jaish al-Fatah - Army of Conquest - to brigades of “moderate” rebels backed and even, according to one account, trained by the US. Jaish al-Fatah made up of hardline groups that include Jabhat al-Nusra, which is aligned to al-Qaeda, so they are formally designated by the West and the United Nations as terrorists.
The big question is whether these bombing raids are followed up by a ground offensive. A Telegraph source in Damascus said Hizbollah and the regime are preparing a major ground offensive on rebel-held parts of Homs following the Russian aerial bombardment while another report said Iranian reinforcements are arriving in Syria to assist in an attack also on rebel-held areas.
That will send a challenge to the rebels - and their backers in Turkey, Qatar and Saudi Arabia: do they also want to escalate the conflict?
Feridun Sinirlioglu, Turkey's foreign minister, has said he is concerned by the Russian air strikes and described it as a "very worrying development".
We feel serious concern over the information that Russia's air strikes in Syria targeted opposition positions instead of Daesh (Isil) and that as a result civilians also lost their lives.
"If these reports are confirmed, then this is a very worrying development.
"This would escalate the crisis and is the last thing we need in Syria's tragic and chaotic environment.
"In this case... the problems will increase for the Syrian people."
John McCain, the US senator, said today that he could "absolutely confirm" that Russian air strikes had hit Free Syrian Army rebels who had been armed and trained by the US, writes David Lawler in Washington.
“Their initial strikes were against the individuals and groups that have been funded and trained by our CIA in an incredible flaunting of any kind of co-operation or effort to conceal what Putin’s first priority is, and that is of course to prop up Bashar al-Assad,” Mr McCain told CNN.
“I can absolutely confirm to you that they were strikes against the Free Syrian Army or groups that have been armed and trained by the CIA because we have communication with people there…this is an Orwellian experience.”
Nabih Bulos in Beirut has spokesn to an activist named Tareq Abdul-Haq from Jisr al-Shughour via telephone. He tells our reporter that he went to Jisr Al-Shughour earlier today after the bombing, where a mosque was struck:
The mosque was virtually destroyed, and there was a body under the ruins, and there were eight wounded, among them was a child. The planes used one rocket on the mosque, and there was another strike on the old Latakia-Jisr al-Shughour road.
"This was a different explosion. We've seen many bombings by the Syrian air force, but people told me the whole town shook when the Russians struck, and the damage and the rubble left behind by their weapons was very big.
"It was out of the ordinary. Syrian air force bombs can't do this.
"We didn't see the planes themselves, because they were very high and it was also partially cloudy. They had coordinates it seems, and we don't know where they got them from. But I know this neighborhood and the people in it. I can assure you that this particular neighborhood has nothing military in it.
"It's a poor neighborhood with simple people. There was only martyr, Marwan Al-Ahmad, but the others were not wounded too badly. There weren't people in the mosque itself, but in the homes surrounding it. The martyr himself was at the door of the mosque, and that's why he died. The rest, the civilians, were inside. The child, for example, was adjacent to the mosque, so she got a piece of shrapnel but she's fine."
Benjamin Netanyahu is speaking at the UN General Assembly in New York and Harriet Alexander is watching.
He has been speaking a lot about the Iran nuclear deal but on Syria said: "Both Iran and Isis are our enemies. And when your enemies fight each other, don't strengthen one - weaken both."
A Syrian from Damascus with close contacts to regime officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Hizbollah and the regime are preparing a major ground offensive on rebel-held parts of Homs following the Russian aerial bombardment, Ruth Sherlock in Washington and the Telegraph's former Middle East correspondent reports.
There is no Isil in that area. It's part of a project to secure the area between the Alawite heartland Latakia and Damascus. In a precursor to potential de facto partition of the country, the regime is focusing on making this area its heartland.
Two sources told the Telegraph that recent negotiations have been taking place in Zabadani, a flashpoint on the border with Lebanon trying to move its remaining population to rebel held Sunni majority Idlib, whilst, at the same time, repopulating it with people from Shia villages in the north of the country.
The air strikes are not targeting Isil, the Syrian source said: "They want to clean the country of non-Isil rebels, and then the US will work with them as Isil will be the only enemy," he said.
Lavrov has just given a supremely assured press conference at the UN in New York, writes Harriet Alexander.
He laughed off the reports that Russian air strikes had targeted CIA-trained rebels against Assad: "Then you know more than me," he said.
Asked whether he would expand the bombing, he replied:
"We are not planning to expand our airstrikes to Iraq. We are polite people, as you know. We will not come unless we are invited."
And he described his relationship with John Kerry as: "We talk about bad things nicely." But behind the bonhomie it was deadly serious.
He reiterated Moscow's absolute denial that they were doing anything but targeting "terrorists", and said that terrorists included Jabat al-Nusra - but not the Free Syrian Army.
He said it was hypocritical of the American-led coalition to see the Assad regime as a legitimate partner to work with on chemical weapons, but not to work with them on defeating terrorism.
And he would not be drawn on any Iran-backed ground invasion, saying only - ominously - that he was not a military planner, and that he was working in conjunction with Syrian government forces.
"We have not altered operations in Syria to accommodate new players on the battlefield," Colonel Steve Warren told reporters.
The US military spokesman said coalition planes had conducted several sorties over Syria in the last 24 hours, some of which resulted in air strikes, AP wrote.
The Lavrov press conference continues. The Russian foreign minister dismissed ideas that Isil could be defeated if Assad was defeated.
"Isil will be defeated if only Assad disappears? For me, that is not serious. We have been demonising international leaders.
"Saddam Hussein, hanged - is Iraq safer? Gaddafi, murdered - is Libya a better place? Can we please try to draw lessons?"
The first military contact between his country and the United States on Russia's airstrikes in Syria will happen "very, very soon".
Mr Lavrov said Russia did not consider the opposition Free Syrian Army a terrorist group and it should be part of a political solution in Syria.
More from Associated Press regarding Mr Lavrov's comments. He told reporters that the US and Russia " have the same approach: It's Isil, Nusra and other groups."
He defended Russia's actions, asking how the Syrian government could be left out of such a fight in its own country.
He rejected claims that Syria was being used to distract the world's attention from the fighting in Ukraine.
"It's always possible to find some absurd interpretation of what's going on."
Mr Lavrov repeats the diplomat's line earlier that Russia won't bomb Iraq unless invited.
"We are not planning to expand our airstrikes to Iraq. We are polite people, as you know. We will not come unless we are invited."
Russia has denied claims that CIA-trained rebels were hit by their air strikes. Sergei Lavrov said it was "not true".
"Americans tried to dissuade from listing Isil as terrorist organisation. Americans said it was part of al-Qaeda. Russia says not."
Harriet Alexander is at the UN General Assembly in New York where Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov is speaking.
He was asked whether Russia is fighting Isil and said: "As regards what are the targets of the coalition, and what are the targets of Russia: it's Isil, Nusra and other groups."
"It is distorted and perverted position" to say fighting the Syrian people on behalf of Assad, he said.
Russia will consider launching air strikes in Iraq if the government asks, a senior foreign ministry official has said, AFP reports.
"If we get such a request from the Iraqi government or a Security Council resolution that depends decisively on the will of the Iraq government," Moscow would consider launching the strikes, Ilya Rogachev, told the RIA Novosti state news agency.
Russia's defence ministry releases footage of four more air strikes in Syria. The ministry posted footage on its official YouTube page that it says shows night air strikes by Russian aviation on four Isil sites in Syrian territory.
The ministry said on its YouTube page militant infrastructure in Hama as well as near Idlib was destroyed by the air strikes.
Turkey has been fairly quiet since Russian launched its air strikes. In yesterday's UN General Assembly speech, Turkish prime minister Ahmet Davutoglu did not bring up the strikes, only stressing the need for a safe zone (which Turkey has long argued for).
But now Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the Turkish president, has said in a speech to the Turkish parliament in Ankara that Turkey will not allow "terror to take root" or "fait accompli situations" next to its borders.
UPDATE: One journalist suggests that these comments refer to PYD - the Kurdish forces in Syria.
Meanwhile, the commander of a rebel group that has been given military training by the CIA in Qatar and Saudi Arabia, confirmed that a training camp they run was hit.
Hassan Haj Ali, head of the Liwa Suqour al-Jabal rebel group, said the camp in Idlib province was struck by around 20 missiles in two separate sorties.
One of the most famous "moderate rebel" figures in Syria has tweeted a picture of what he says is a Russian air strike near his town, writes Richard Spencer, Middle East Editor.
Since the start of the uprising, the town of Kafranabel (there are various different spellings) has become well-known for its weekly photographs, distributed through social- media, of banners displaying English-language slogans containing sarcastic commentary on the state of the war and western inaction to stop it. They also attack Isil.
The man behind the campaign, Raed Fares, says the outskirts of Kafranabel were targeted by today's bombings, and tweeted a picture:
The picture may be a still from a video made by another local activist, Hadi Abdullah, writes Nabih Bulos in Beirut.
"It's back, it's back," says one person off-camera as the roar of a jet is heard overhead.
"The shape of the explosion is very different from the one that would result from bombing by the Assad forces," says Abdallah. Behind him, the camera captures a multi-headed plume of smoke rolling above the landscape.
According to Vladimir Putin reports that civilians were killed in strikes is an "information attack" and says Moscow is coordinating with the US on Syria.
"We are ready for such information attacks," he said in a live broadcast from the Kremlin. "The first reports of civilian casualties came even before our jets took off."
Meanwhile in the US, John McCain, head of the senate armed services committee, told CNN that CIA-trained Free Syrian Army recruits were hit by strikes.
"I can absolutely confirm to you that they were strikes against our Free Syrian Army recruits that have been armed and trained by the CIA because we have communications with people there."
The United States - as well as many non-Isil groups - say Russia’s air strikes yesterday targeted non-Isil rebels who are threatening Syrian regime forces in the west and north-west of the country, including the western-backed Free Syrian Army.
The official Russian position is that its airforce yesterday targeted Isil, and did not kill any civilians in the process, writes Roland Oliphant.
But just in case, Russian officials are also arguing that there’s little difference between Isil and any other rebel group anyway.
Alexei Pushkov, the chairman of the Russian parliament’s international affairs committee, summed up an argument frequently made yesterday by interviewees on state television channels in this tweet:
"'The moderate opposition' is largely a myth invented by the United States. Its fighters are not fighting against Isil, join Al-Qaeda, and fired at the Russian embassy. Is that 'moderation'?”
In other words, the only groups fighting against the Assad regime in Syria are terrorist groups, and there is only one way to deal with terrorists.
The exception to this seems to be Kurdish militia groups, who Vladimir Putin and other Russian officials have been careful to praise for taking on Isil. That may signal Russian willingness to include the Kurds in whatever post-war settlement is eventually negotiated.
We can take the the second Russian claim, about no civilian casualties, with the same vast bucket of salt we would approach similar Nato statements with.
The sources that Reuters have spoken to say the arrival of Iranian troops with weapons and Hizbollah joining the operation aims to help Bashar al-Assad recapture territory.
The ground operation would accompany the Russian strikes as mentioned: "The (Russian) air strikes will in the near future be accompanied by ground advance by the Syrian army and its allies," one of the sources said.
Reuters' Lebanese sources say hundreds of Iranian forces arrived in Syria 10 days ago with weapons to take part in ground operations.
The same sources say the Russian air strikes will soon be accompanied by Syrian army and allied ground advances.
Hizbollah itself is preparing to take part in a big ground operation in northern Syria.
Russia's MoD has finally confirmed the whereabouts of yesterday's air strikes, writes Roland Oliphant in Moscow.
"A terrorist headquarters and ammunition store was destroyed near Idlib, as was a three-level fortified command post in the vicinity of Hama," General Konashenkov says.
He also claims a direct hit on a bomb and ammunition factory, which he said was used to prepare suicide car bombs, north of Homs.
Four more positions were hit over night, he said, bringing Russia's officially announced tally of targets to 12.
Despite reports to the contrary, Russia's defence ministry is claiming that a new round of air strikes overnight on Thursday did target Isil and "strictly avoiding populated areas"
News agencies reported that the ministry confirmed that Sukhoi-24M and Sukhoi-25 aircraft flew eight sorties. They hit an ammunition depot near Idlib as well as a three-storey Isil command centre near Hama.
It said a pinpoint strike had destroyed a facility located in the north of Homs aimed at rigging cars with explosives for suicide attacks, Reuters writes.
Trump: I'll send all refugees back to Syria if elected president
Donald Trump, the Republican presidential candidate frontrunner, has said he would send back Syrian refugees in the US back to Syria because they may be Isil.
The billionaire businessman said that if he won the presidency, he would send them back to their homeland.
"Look, if Russia wants to go in there, would have been nice if we went in as a unified front, to be honest. But if Russia wants to go in there and knock out Isis and maybe stabilize, this big migration with 200,000 people into the United States..." Mr Trump said.
"If I win, I'm going to say it right now and I'll say it to you, those 200,000 people - they have to know this and the world will hear it - are going back.
"We're not going to accept 200,000 people that may be Isis. We have no idea who they are. And I'm telling you now, they may come in through the weakness of (President Barack) Obama," but would return to their homeland if Mr Trump makes it to the White House, he said.
The Czech interior minister has pointed out that air strikes "solve nothing" and in fact could make the current European refugee crisis worse.
Milan Chovanec said he looked at Russian military force in Syria with "deep distrust", adding that millions of Syrians are already displaced within their own country.
"If they lose hope the war will end ... they'll be again heading for Germany."
The Russian strikes reported this morning in north-west Syria are a major step up, and as they have been reported by the al-Mayadeen television station, known to be close to the Assad regime, they will be hard for Moscow to deny, writes Richard Spencer, Middle East Editor.
They are important because there can be no pretence that these are about the war on Isil. Jebel al-Zawiya - the first major area to fall under unchallenged rebel control in Syria back in 2012 - and Jisr al-Shughour, a town which fell to the rebels in April - have no Isil presence.
Indeed, they are held by an alliance - Jaish al-Fatah, or Army of Conquest - that has been fighting Isil more successfully across northern Syria than the regime for the last 18 months.
They have however been key targets of regime jets trying to force back non-Isil rebels, who have been making major advances from these areas on regime territory this year.
The Jaish al-Fatah includes a number of Islamist groups, most powerful among them Ahrar al-Sham and Jabhat al-Nusra. Jabhat al-Nusra is the local affiliate of al-Qaeda, so it will be hard for the West to criticise these attacks or to quibble at the Russian description of the targets as "terrorist".
However, it will also be hard for the Russians to present them as part of the war on Isil.
There is also, now, a tremendous risk of escalation. These rebels earlier in the summer mounted an attack on Latakia to the west, which is the heartland of the Alawite sect from which the regime comes. They then failed to press their attack, concentrating forces further south, presumably a political decision. Jaish al-Fatah - or at least, some of its constituents - are backed by Turkey and Qatar, which exercise some restraint over them and would not want to see bad publicity arising from attacks on Alawite civilians.
There is now a risk - highlighted by some Western analysts with good contacts among rebel groups - that the Jaish al-Fatah will now press forward with attacks in Latakia in retaliation.
That might be part of the strategies - now closely co-ordinated - of Mr Assad and Mr Putin. The real threat to the regime comes from the non-Isil rebels. Mr Assad's best hope of survival is not of beating them outright - he has admitted that he cannot - but that they can be gulled into overtly sectarian attacks, which their backers have tried to prevent them from carrying out.
This might force their Western-allied backers, like Turkey, Qatar and Saudi Arabia, to withdraw financial and military support. That is all the more likely if President Barack Obama, already vacillating in his support for Mr Assad's overthrow, feels that his broader international strategies are better served by accommodation with Russia than by keeping sweet Middle Eastern allies like Saudi Arabia and Qatar whom his public generally dislikes.
Pro-opposition sources are saying there are five casualties so far from the attack on Jisr al-Shughour. Conflicting reports on whether five dead or five wounded, reports Nabih Bulos.
Hizbollah's news channel al-Manar reported four strikes on the Army of Conquest's headquarters in Jisr al-Shughour and Jabal al-Zawiyah in the Idlib countryside. They also targeted weapons depots in al-Hawash village.
On Twitter, a member of the Army of Conquest said "the alliance of Russian pigs launched its operations... by destroying a mosque in Jisr al-Shughur and flattening it", AFP reported.
But Syrian Civil Defence in Jisr al-Shughour claims one dead, 7 wounded.
According to Nabih Bulos, there are reports of additional strikes on Talbiseh. An opposition activist there just posted another picture of a missile strike.
The Syrian civil defence says on Twitter the strike on Talbiseh hit the bread distribution depot. which is also home of the local civilian council.
Those targeted today including Jisr al-Shughour, held by an alliance of insurgents including al Qaeda's Nusra Front as well as Idlib province, including the Zawiya Mountain region, as well as areas in Hama province further south via Reuters.
The news agency notes that Idlib is of greater strategic importance due to its proximity to Bashar al-Assad's heartland in Latakia province on the Mediterranean coast.
The Army of Conquest had made gains in north-western Syria alongside other insurgent groups since May, seizing Idlib city and Jisr al-Shughour from government forces and advancing towards the coastal areas.
Pro-government supporters on social media as well as a Hizbollah-aligned Lebanese news station reported the strikes on parts of Jisr al-Shughour, Hama, and Jabal al-Zawiyah, writes Nabih Bulos in Beirut.
There was no mention of the attack by Syrian state media.
An opposition activist from Jisr al-Shughour confirmed the report, uploading a picture to social media purporting to show the aftermath of a missile hit in his area.
The strikes' targets have been the centre of fierce battles between forces loyal to Bashar al-Assad and armed opposition rebels. Last March, the Army of Conquest, a grouping of Islamist factions that includes the hardline Ahrar al-Sham and al-Qaeda's affiliate Jabhat al-Nusra, began a wide-scale campaign to take over large swathes of north-western Syria.
The offensive forced government troops to cede strategic territory to the rebels, putting the government stronghold province of Latakia within firing range of the opposition's mortars.
We're getting updates from the Russian president's spokesman about the recent air strikes launched.
According to Dmitry Peskov, those targeted were among a list of well-known terrorist organisations agreed with the Syrian military.
"These organisations (on the target list) are well-known and the targets are chosen in coordination with the armed forces of Syria."
But it was too early to say whether Russian president Vladimir Putin believed they had been effective, the spokesman added.
The money for the strikes are wholly from Moscow, the spokesman said, adding that Syria had made no financial contribution.
Russian jets have bombed rebel positions in Syria on Thursday including rural areas near the north-western town of Jisr al-Shughour, carrying out at least 30 strikes.
They hit the town held by an alliance of insurgents, Army of Conquest, including al-Qaeda's Nusra Front, Lebanon-based al-Mayadeen TV said.
The strikes "targeted the militants", the pro-Damascus channel said.
According to Nabih Bulos, Russian planes conduct 30 strikes, targeting areas of the Army of Conquest in the countryside of Jisr Al-Shughour, Hama, and Jabal Al-Zawiyah.
The Russian business daily Kommersant has some new details about the Russian force in Syria this morning, writes Roland Oliphant in Moscow.
According to “unofficial information,” the air contingent deployed to the Russian airbase near Latakia consists of SU-24M interceptors, SU-34 strike fighters, SU-25 ground attack aircraft, and SU-30 M multi-role fighters, as well as Mi-24 and Mi-8 helicopters.
The paper says the aircraft were deployed to Syria under cover of large scale exercises between September 11 and 20.
Four of the SU-30s are from the 120th aviation regiment based at Domna airbase near the east-Siberian city of Chita, and flew to Syria via Azerbaijani, Iranian, and Iraqi airspace on September 18, the paper said. Others, including six SU-34s, by-passed Azerbaijan by flying straight over the Caspian sea.
Sir Malcolm Rifkind has been on BBC Radio 4 speaking about Russia's actions in Syria. He offers the stark warning that Russia has "escalated the crisis" if it is true Syrian moderate opposition forces were targeted.
The foreign secretary said the UK needed to cooperate with Russia because the latter has "enormous influence over Assad". Below are his quotes in full.
I think if the reports of the targets that were used yesterday are correct then Mr Putin has escalated what already is a terrible crisis and his actions are extremely dangerous.
"I think we need to cooperate with Russia," he said. "I have no doubt about that whatsoever. Russia has enormous influence over Assad when it chooses to use it."
"We know that Russia can influence Assad and therefore it's in our interest to work with the Russians, however distasteful that maybe for other reasons.
"But that cooperation can't happen if Russia is saying that it is going to use its air power to attack Isis when in fact it is using it for a quite different purpose."
(Thanks to Press Association for the quotes.)
Speaking at the United Nations in New York on Wednesday, Abdallah Al-Mouallimi said: "The delegation of my country expresses its profound concern regarding the military operations which Russian forces have carried out in Homs and Hama today, places where Isil forces are not present. These attacks led to a number of innocent victims. We demand it stop immediately and not recur."
We have more from the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, speaking to journalists in New York, who denies the strikes hit civilians.
The rumours that the target of these airstrikes was not Isil positions are unfounded. [The strikes were] in response to the appeal of the Syrian leadership to help fight Isil and other terrorist groups.
"Talk began that civilians were hurt by air strikes. We have no such data," he added. "We carefully make sure that these target strikes are precise."
He repeated Russia's claims that it only went after terrorist groups, saying Russia had asked US officials to back up their accusations with firm evidence, AFP reported.
Russia's foreign minister Sergei Lavrov has claimed this morning that reports of Russian jets targeting non-Isil rebels and hitting civilians are "unfounded".
Good morning and welcome back to our live coverage of the escalating conflict in Syria, where Russia launched airstrikes for the first time yesterday.
Overnight, the foreign ministers of Russia and the US emerged from a UN Security Council meeting in New York to announce they would be holding a series of urgent talks to avoid clashing in the skies above Syria.
These "deconfliction" talks could begin as soon as later today.
However, reports have also emerged overnight in US media outlets including the New York Timesand the Wall Street Journalthat Russian airstrikes specifically targeted US-backed rebels in Syria - claims which, if verified, could immediately complicate further the relationship between Washington and Moscow.
Russian air strikes risk driving Syria’s “entire opposition” into the arms of Isil, Britain warned on Wednesday, as President Vladimir Putin's jets bombed targets in three different provinces, reports Harriet Alexander in New York and Roland Oliphant in Moscow.
US officials have now said that at least one strike directly targeted rebels that were trained and supported by the US, according to the Wall St Journal.
The SU-24 strike aircraft launched a series of raids in Homs, Hama and Latakia. The Russian defence ministry said that 20 sorties were flown against eight targets, described as “military vehicles” along with “arms, ammunition and fuel depots” belonging to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isil).
But a US defence official flatly contradicted this claim, saying: “We have not seen any strikes against Isil, what we have seen is strikes against Syrian opposition.” Later reports said that seven locations controlled by non-Isil rebels were attacked, all in areas where Bashar al-Assad’s forces are under severe pressure.
This raised fears that Russia’s intervention in Syria is primarily designed to save Mr Assad, not damage Isil. Speaking on the margins of the United Nations General Assembly in New York, Philip Hammond, the Foreign Secretary, warned of the possible consequences.
"We are clear that if Russia wants to join with the coalition in air strikes against Isil then we would welcome that. If what Russia is doing is carrying out air strikes in defence of the regime then that is a very different issue,” said Mr Hammond.
“The message we are trying to get across to the Russians – we are genuinely trying to explain this to the Russians – is that trying to prop up Assad as part of a counter-Isil strategy simply will not work. Because all you will do is drive the entire opposition to Assad into a single camp, led by Isil. That is the worst possible outcome."
The Free Syrian Army, a Western-backed rebel group, said that one of its commanders had been killed by Russian bombs. Iyad al-Deek, who defected from the Syrian army, died in an air strike in Homs province.
David Cameron also voiced concern about Russia’s offensive. “If this is part of international action against Isil and that appalling terrorist death cult outfit, then that is all to the good. If, on the other hand, this is action against the Free Syrian Army and in defence of Assad the dictator, then obviously that is a retrograde step.”
On Wednesday night John Kerry, the secretary of state, held a meeting with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov. He said they had agreed to "a military-to-military deconfliction meeting" - which could take place on Thursday.
"We want to avoid seeing this being intensified and getting beyond our control," he said.
Russia gave America one hour of warning before the air strikes began, reducing the risk of any contact between its jets and the US warplanes striking Isil elsewhere in Syria.
• Analysis: Can Russia afford to fight another war in Syria?
The upper house of Russia’s parliament unanimously approved the onset of combat operations in a closed session. Sergei Ivanov, Mr Putin’s chief of staff, said the operation would only involve “air support”, adding: “There is no discussion of ground operations.”
How the Russian air strikes in Syria unfolded on Wednesday September 30