Coalition helicopter crashes in Afghanistan, 5 dead
A coalition helicopter crashed in the Afghan capital of Kabul Sunday, killing five and injuring five in the latest mass casualty event in the country in recent weeks. Two American troops were among the dead.
Two British servicemembers and a French civilian contractor also died in what the NATO-led military mission described as a "non-hostile incident." The crash involving a British Puma Mk 2 helicopter happened at 4:15 p.m. local time at Camp Resolute Support in Kabul and an investigation is underway. .
"We're deeply saddened by the loss of our teammates," said U.S. Brig. Gen. Wilson Shoffner, military communications chief in Afghanistan. "Our heartfelt condolences go out to the families and friends of those affected in this tragic incident and we pray for the full recovery of the injured."
An Afghan security guard who witnessed Sunday's crash told the Associated Press the helicopter appeared to strike a monitoring balloon as it was landing. "It seemed like the cable was turned around the helicopter rotor," the security guard, Najibullah, said. Like many in Afghanistan, he goes by one name. He said the helicopter went down and then black smoke rose from the area.
A second helicopter circled the area three or four times and then landed at a nearby airport, he said.
U..S. Army Col. Brian Tribus, a spokesman in Afghanistan for U.S. and NATO forces, confirmed the accident involved a NATO aircraft and an observation balloon, according to the Military Times. The monitoring balloon was severed from its mooring in the incident, he said, without providing further details.
Elsewhere, a suicide bomber targeted a convoy of foreign troops attached to the Resolute Support mission in Kabul on Sunday, according to The Associated Press. There were no reports of casualties, but three Afghans were wounded in the attack, according to Kabul city police chief Gen. Abdul Rahman Rahimi.
Sunday's violence follows an Oct. 1 crash of a C-130 transport plane near Jalalabad. Six U.S. servicemembers and five civilian contractors were killed, as well as several Afghan civilians on the ground. At the time, President Obama said the deaths served as a reminder "... of the sacrifice brave Americans and our Afghan partners make each and every day in the name of freedom and security."
Another crash in a remote region in southern Afghanistan in August killed 17 Afghan soldiers. That helicopter crash was initially blamed on technical problems and was among the deadliest events for the Afghan military since U.S. and NATO forces concluded their combat missions last year, shifting to a support and training role.