ISIS Stirs Fears of Military Conscription in Raqqa
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has ordered all boys and men above the age of 14 in their de facto Syrian capital to register their names and addresses with local police, stirring fears the group plans to expand military conscription as anti-ISIL coalition forces set their sights on reclaiming Raqqa, activists told Al Jazeera.
The order, posted on buildings across the city and its northern suburbs over the weekend, says that boys and men who fail to register with local police by Thursday — one week after the order was released — will face some undetermined "legal" consequences. Though conscription is not specifically mentioned, the order comes amid reports that a coalition of Arab and Kurdish forces, backed by the United States, are preparing to launch an ambitious operation to uproot ISIL from Raqqa, which the group has held since 2013.
"There is a fear men of the city will be dragged into this grinding war they have no hand in, with the primary goal of protecting Daesh," said Hamoud al-Mousa, an activist from Raqqa now living in Southern Turkey, using an Arabic acronym for ISIL.
Some families are considering sneaking their sons out of the area for fear they could be forced to take up arms under the group's black flag, or even used as cannon fodder, al-Mousa said. But leaving the area comes with its own risks: In ISIL’s self-declared caliphate, punishment for crimes like defection by military age men is severe — ranging from fines and lashings to public execution in Raqqa's Al-Baghdadi square.
Al Jazeera was not able to independently confirm the order, an apparent copy of which was posted online by the activist group, Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently. But it was not the first time residents in ISIL's vast territory across Syria and Iraq have raised concerns about military conscription. In Raqqa, locals have previously reported that ISIL authorities were telling men between the ages of 15 and 25 — the group's definition of military age — to register their names with the nearest mosque, ostensibly to ensure they were attending weekly prayers. The same demographic has also been barred from leaving ISIL territory to travel to Syrian government-held areas, reportedly to prevent a pool of potential recruits from either escaping or taking up arms on the other side.
It is unclear whether possible efforts to take stock of men of military age is tied to any shortage of troops in Raqqa. ISIL's military positions come under daily airstrikes from U.S. fighter jets and drones as part of the international anti-ISIL coalition effort, and at least one recent report found that ISIL is suffering a higher rate of defections in recent months, with ex-fighters complaining about the group's brutality, corruption, terrible living conditions and violence against fellow Sunni Muslims.