Al Shabaab militants detonate bombs, storm popular hotel in Somalia, killing at least 12
At least 12 people have been killed in Somalia's capital Mogadishu after Al Shabaab gunmen stormed a hotel following two explosions, police and witnesses say.
The Al Qaeda-linked Al Shabaab, which has frequently launched attacks in Mogadishu in its bid to topple the Western-backed government, said it was behind the assault on the Sahafi hotel where government officials and lawmakers stay.
The incident mirrored tactics used before by Al Shabaab, in which it detonates bombs to break through security at targets and then sends in fighters.
Like other international hotels in Mogadishu, the Sahafi is heavily fortified.
Major Ahmed Nur, a police officer, said that a car bomb rammed the entrance to the hotel and was followed by second blast, which a security guard said was a second vehicle bomb.
Police said at least 12 people were killed, including the hotel owner, officials, guards and civilians.
Among the fatalities was a Somali freelance journalist, the Somali Association of Journalists said, adding that a photographer with the Reuters news agency had been slightly hurt.
The pair were hit when they arrived at the hotel to report on the first explosion. It was then that the second car bomb detonated.
A former senior army commander was also among the dead.
"Fighters with machines guns [were] firing at us from the rooftop of the hotel," said police officer Major Osman Ali.
Somalia's National and Intelligence Agency declared the attack over several hours after shooting began, although special forces appeared to be carrying out mopping up operations with Al Shabaab still claiming to have fighters alive inside.
African Union soldiers, battling alongside government troops, also said they had taken control of the building.
"It's now completely secured," the security agency said in a statement, without giving further details of casualties.
The hotel lies near a busy area in Mogadishu known as K-4.
Plumes of smoke rose above the capital on the Indian Ocean coast. A witness saw wrecked cars and destroyed motorbikes in the area, as well as two dead civilians lying outside.
"There was a huge explosion and people around the entrance were killed," said Mohamed Ismael, a witness, who was nearby when the attack began.
At least three others were injured. Some parts of the hotel were damaged.
UN envoy to Somalia, Nick Kay, condemned the "bloody attack", saying it underlined the need to help support Somalia's security forces in stopping such attacks.