15 butchered bodies recovered near U.S. retiree communities on Lake Chapala
Police on Wednesday morning recovered the bodies, some of them dismembered, of at least 10 people stuffed into two small SUVs near the highway connected Guadalajara with the American and Canadian expatriot havens on the shores of Lake Chapala.
The gruesome discovery, about 10 miles from the town of Chapala, came as local media reported that 10 other people escaped from suspected Zetas captors in a nearby town. Police said the Zetas had intended to slaughter the hostages and them in a public place as a message to Sinaloa crime lord Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman.
The murder of the kidnapped people supposedly was to be in response to Chapo’s claimed responsibility for the beheadings of nearly three dozen alleged Zetas since mid-April in Nuevo Laredo.
Guzman’s gunmen, now allied with the Gulf Cartel, reportedly have returned to the South Texas border to claim control of Nuevo Laredo from the Zetas. The Sinaloans failed to take the city seven years ago from the Gulf Cartel and its then-allies, the Zetas, in battles that kicked off the underworld hyper-violence that continues today.
The Zetas and other gangs have been warring with Guzman and his allies across much of Mexico. Guzman’s killers dumped the bodies of 35 alleged Zetas last fall on a busy interchange in Boca de Rio, a wealthy beachfront suburb of the port of Veracruz. Zetas responded by leaving 26 bodies on a street in downtown Guadalajara.
Though not always easy to decipher, much of the recent bloodshed in the western Mexico states of Durango, Zacatecas, Jalisco and Sinaloa are linked to the rivalry, as is turmoil in Guatemala. The shore of Lake Chapala, a 30-minute drive from Guadalajara’s airport, has become a minor front in the war, with sporadic gunbattles and executions in the towns of Chapala, Ajijic, Cosolá and Jocotepec. Three local men were gunned down in the center of Ajijic, home to thousands of American and Canadian retirees, on Easter Sunday night.
The Guadalajara area has become a major production center of methamphetamine, sold both to Mexican consumers and exported to the United States.