Boko Haram kill at least nine people in Cameroon  suicide bombing
At least nine people have been killed and dozens more injured in a suicide bomb attack in northern Cameroon.
Terrorist group Boko Haram, who pledged their allegiance to ISIS in Syria and Iraq earlier this year, are believed to be responsible for the bombing.
It took place in the Nigerian border town of Fotokol - which has been the target of multiple suicide bomb attacks this year. 
Earlier this month a teenage girl blew herself up during afternoon prayers at a mosque, killing four people and wounding dozens more.
Governor of Cameroon's Far North region, Midjiyawa Bakary, confirmed that at least nine people had died in the latest attack by suspected African Islamist militants from Boko Haram.
He was unable to provide further details but said a crisis meeting with military officials had been convened.
Cameroon is contributing troops to an 8,700-strong regional force to fight Boko Haram, whose six-year insurgency has left an estimated 20,000 people dead, according to Amnesty International. 
The regional forced is expected to be operational by the end of the year, while the United States is sending military supplies and troops to the central African country to aid the fight. 
Boko Haram has waged a six-year campaign for an Islamist state in northeastern Nigeria.
On Wednesday, two female suicide bombers, one thought to be as young as 11, blew themselves up at a busy market in the Nigerian city of Kano. 
Neighbouring countries joined an offensive against the group this year and the conflict spilled across their borders, displacing tens of thousands of people.
Boko Haram used Cameroon's impoverished Far North to stockpile supplies and recruits until the government cracked down last year.
Earlier this month a new report on global terrorism by the Institute of Economics and Peace revealed that Boko Haram killed more people last year than ISIS.
Figures show that the former murdered 6,664 people last year in comparison to the latter's 6,073 victims.
Boko Haram militants target the country along with Chad, Niger and Nigeria.
The report also reveals that Boko Haram appear to have changed their targets, with an 11 per cent decrease in the number of deaths of religious figure and a 172 per cent increase in the deaths of private citizens.
Boko Haram, who pledged their allegiance to ISIS in Syria and Iraq earlier this year, have frequently used child suicide bombers and mass kidnappings to stamp their authority in north-eastern Nigeria.
They changed their name to Islamic State in West Africa after declaring their allegiance to ISIS in Syria and Iraq in March 2015.