Shooting targets, GoPro packaging and hammer found in Syed Farook's mother's car
FBI agents found an empty GoPro package, shooting targets and tools inside a car belonging to the mother of San Bernardino mass shooter Syed Farook, Daily Mail Online can reveal.
Authorities have repeatedly denied rumors that Farook, 28, and his wife Tashfeen Malik, 27, strapped recording devices to their body armor as they stormed the Inland Regional Center, slaughtering 14 people and wounding 21.
However Daily Mail Online has a discovered that an empty GoPro box was one of dozens of items seized from a black Lexus IS300 in the wake of last Wednesday's massacre.
Documents confirm the car was insured by Farook's 62-year-old mother Rafia, who lived in the same home in Redlands, California, where he and Malik built pipe bombs and stored thousands of rounds of ammunition.
The discovery adds a chilling new dimension to the ongoing FBI investigation as helmet-mounted GoPros have been used by ISIS fanatics before to capture dramatic footage for online recruitment videos.
One such clip circulated by the terror network in June revealed the final moments of a Jihadi 'martyr' before he was shot dead by an Iraqi soldier.
The four-door sedan was located just a few minutes’ walk from the Farooks' apartment as FBI agents stormed the property last Wednesday afternoon to search for guns and explosives.
They smashed the driver's window to gain access before carrying out a pain-staking forensic examination and seizing a trove of potential evidence including paperwork, targets and tools.
An inventory left behind on the front seat read: 'Apple iPhone, multi-tool, key, business card, miscellaneous indicia, bank receipt, shooting targets, hammer, vice grips, U-Haul receipt, tire receipt, notebook, garment, GoPro packaging, vacuumings, legal documents'.
Syed Farook is also listed on insurance documents as a named driver but it is now known whether he or his mother drove the 2005 vehicle more, or who the GoPro and the items found inside belonged to.
Before embarking on last week’s mass shooting, he and Malik left their six-month-old daughter at home with Rafia, saying they had to go to a doctor's appointment.
Hours after the ensuing slaughter, cops pulled Rafia her over in her other son's SUV and held her for questioning.
She was released early the next day without charge and has not been spotted by the media since, while the vehicle was kept for further investigation.
Speaking on NBC's Meet the Press Sunday, Attorney General Loretta Lynch said the FBI was examining what Rafia knew about her son's plans and his massive weapons hoard.
'Obviously it's something that we're looking at very, very closely,' Lynch confirmed.
The family's lawyer David Chesley told CNN last night that Mrs Farook did not know her son was planning a massacre. 
Rafi Farook divorced Syed Farook's father, also named Syed Farook, 67, in 2006 claiming in court papers that her husband of 24 years had been physically and verbally abusive.
Lawyers representing her and her three other children, Syed Raheel, Eba, 24, and Saira, 32, insist they had no inkling that two of their loved-ones were about to launch the worst terror attack on US soil since the 2009 Fort Hood shooting.
However the older Syed Farook later told the Italian newspaper La Stampa that he was aware of his son’s extremist leanings, his hatred of Israel and his declaration that ‘Islam will rule the world’.
Mr Farook despaired at the choice his son had made and questioned why with a stable income, a new baby daughter and a seemingly happy marriage and life he appears to have become radicalized into following ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.
'He said he shared the ideology of Al Baghdadi to create an Islamic state, and it was fixed with Israel,' said Mr Farook.
GoPro footage was also a chilling feature of the fatal shooting live on air of two journalists in Roanoke, Virginia, in August.
TV reporter Vester Lee Flanagan attached a camera to himself before gunning down 24-year-old Alison Parker and her cameraman Adam Ward, 27, at close range.
Flanagan posted the first-person footage onto social media as a blood-curdling final dispatch before escaping the scene and killing himself.
Authorities said his murderous bid for attention was sparked by a workplace grudge rather than terrorism.