Boko Haram Killed At Least 67 Villagers In Daring Assault Near Maiduguri
At least 100 people were killed and over hundred others injured when the  Boko Haram terrorists attacked Dalori Village some 4 kilometers from Maiduguri yesterday evening.
Residents of the community told our correspondent that the operation started around 6:20 pm and lasted for several hours.
The militants who operated unchallenged were said to have stormed the town in 10  Hilux vans and motorcycles dressed in army uniforms as they took their time to raze down houses in Dalori village also livestock were burnt after they had looted and carted away foodstuffs. Several civilians were burnt beyond recognition.
Rescue workers who participated in evacuated the victims disclosed to Saharareporters that they brought out 45 dead bodies to state specialist hospital and deposited 23 corpses at the University of Maiduguri Teaching Hospital but several burnt victims remain without help in the beleaguered village.
A resident of the village, Mallam Buka Dalori told our correspondent that ''we were helpless, could you believe that there was no military presence in Dalori, the government didn't provide security to protect us. I lost 11 people, and 5 of children are nowhere to be found. ''
Another resident Ibrahim Muhammad said that Boko Haram fighters dressed like military personnel and started opening fire on everybody, "all our wives and children were brutally killed while they looted and destroyed our livestock  as well as ."
Vice Chairman of civilians JTF in Dalori village Modu Kaka said that at least 100 dead bodies were evacuated last night and also stated that hundreds are still missing.
Saharareporters correspondent later visited Dalori village and saw that the village was completely razed down and every home seen people wailing also several people burnt including children.
Dalori village is about 4 kilometers away from Maiduguri, the Borno State capital where Boko Haram terrorists started a deadly islamic insurgency since 2009.