ISIS expert involved in attack that killed a US marine has died in drone strike
News comes as it's reported ISIS has executed 15 of its own members
An Islamic State rocket expert believed to have been responsible for an attack that killed a US marine has died in a drone strike in Iraq.
Staff Sergeant Louis Cardin, 27, was killed last month by an ISIS rocket attack that also wounded eight marines at an artillery position in the Makhmur area of northern Iraq. 
On Sunday, Colonel Steve Warren, the spokesman for the US-led operation against the jihadists, said: 'Several hours ago, we killed an ISIL (ISIS) member believed responsible for the rocket attack that resulted in the death of Sergeant Cardin.'
The news comes as the terror group killed 15 of its own members, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.
Staff Sergeant Cardin, from Temecula, California, died from wounds suffered when his unit was attacked with rocket fire in March. 
The attack was reportedly 'indirect fire attack' and was described as a 'lucky strike by ISIS'.
Colonel Warren said they had killed Jasim Khadijah, an 'ISIL (ISIS) member and former Iraqi officer'.
He was 'a rocket expert, apparently... he controlled those attacks,' Warren said.
He added that the strike also killed five other ISIS fighters in addition to Khadijah and destroyed a drone and two vehicles.
The terror group overran large parts of Iraq in 2014, but the country's forces have since regained significant ground with the backing of US-led air strikes and training.
US President Barack Obama repeatedly pledged that there would be no 'boots on the ground' to fight ISIS, but has deployed special forces to Iraq who are carrying out raids targeting the jihadists.
The last time a US service member killed in Iraq was in October 2015. Army Master Sergeant Joshua L. Wheeler, a special operations soldier, was killed in a firefight in during a raid on an ISIS prison.
On Sunday, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said ISIS had killed 15 of its own members following the arrest of 35 members on Saturday in Raqqa.
The members were killed in connection with the assassination of senior ISIS figure Abu Hija al-Tunisi, who died on Wednesday in an air strike, the Britain-based Observatory, which monitors the five-year-old Syrian conflict through a network of sources on the ground, said.