Aleppo battles cast shadow over Syria peace talks
Syria's conflict began in 2011 as a peaceful revolt, with protests across the country that spread in 2012 to Aleppo province, which borders Turkey
Fierce fighting raged Friday around Syria's Aleppo as a surge in violence forced tens of thousands more to flee their homes, overshadowing the latest round of peace talks in Geneva.
The clashes on several fronts have put a strain on a fragile ceasefire in place since February 27, and left more than 200 fighters on all sides of the civil war dead in the past week.
"We cannot accept the participation of the parties who committed crimes against the Syrian people in the transitional governing body," HNC spokesman Salem al-Meslet said on the sidelines of the talks.
UN envoy Staffan de Mistura met the government delegation, with a second session set for Monday, and the HNC was holding its second meeting with him on Friday.
Assad's role in a future transitional government, which de Mistura has said would be the focus of the talks, remains the key sticking point.
Damascus says that even discussing Assad's departure is off limits, while the opposition insists he can have no role in a future transition.
The fighting around Syria's second city Aleppo has cast a shadow over international efforts to end the five-year war, which has left more than 270,000 people dead and forced millions to flee their homes.
They also battled jihadists from the Al-Qaeda-affiliated Al-Nusra Front and allied rebels in the flashpoint Handarat area, north of Aleppo city, it said.
"A big battle is being fought in Aleppo, and it will lead to a major disaster should the regime succeed" in severing the route linking rebel-held parts of Aleppo to the northern countryside, he said.
Kerry called Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov to say Washington "expected Russia to urge the regime to comply with the cessation and that we would work with the opposition to do the same", US spokesman John Kirby said.
"As civilians flee ISIS fighters, Turkey is responding with live ammunition instead of compassion," said HRW researcher Gerry Simpson, using another acronym for the jihadists.
Among them were 82 soldiers and pro-regime militiamen, 94 members of Al-Nusra Front and allied rebel groups, and 34 IS jihadists, the Observatory said.
Even though IS and Al-Nusra are excluded from the truce, violence around Aleppo has sparked concerns that the ceasefire may collapse, partly because rebels are involved there too.
The fighting around the city is the fiercest in Syria since the truce began nearly seven weeks ago, and is especially significant because all sides in the war are present in the province.
Syria's conflict began in 2011 as a peaceful revolt but later morphed into a multi-front civil war.