Falluja offensive: Iraqi troops retake key town of Karma from ISIS
(CNN)Iraqi security forces and supporting militias have retaken the key town of Karma from ISIS, the government's first significant victory in its push to reclaim Falluja, a spokesman for Iraq's Joint Operations Command said Thursday.
The recapture of Karma, about 16 kilometers (10 miles) northeast of Falluja, brings most of the territory east of Falluja under government control.
Iraqi government forces drive their armored vehicle through a street in Falluja, Iraq, on Monday, June 27, after retaking the city from ISIS. A senior Iraqi general announced on state TV that the battle for Falluja is over as Iraqi troops retook the final ISIS holdout in the city.
Supplies are lined up at a camp for displaced civilians on Saturday, June 25.
Iraqi security forces evacuate an injured soldier during fighting with ISIS militants on Wednesday, June 15.
Iraqis who have been displaced from their homes peer out of a tent at a camp outside Falluja on Tuesday, June 14.
A boy sleeps in his mother's arms after fleeing from their home in Falluja on Monday, June 6.
Smoke rises on the front line of fighting between ISIS militants and pro-government Iraqi fighters on Sunday, June 5.
Pro-government forces and Shiite militia fighters fire rockets toward ISIS fighters in Falluja on Saturday, June 4.
Iraqi soldiers help civilians from a vehicle outside a camp near Falluja on Friday, June 3.
Internally displaced civilians flee their homes after crossing the Euphrates River outside Falluja on Thursday, June 2.
Iraqi counterterrorism forces face off with ISIS militants in Falluja's Nuaimiya neighborhood on Wednesday, June 1.
Blindfolded men get led to a bus after being detained during the fighting on June 1.
A member of pro-government forces fires at a front line in the Albu Huwa area south of Falluja on June 1.
Grenades and shells lie on the ground in Falluja during fighting between Iraqi forces and ISIS on June 1.
Smoke rises as Iraqi forces face off with ISIS militants on the southern edge of Falluja on Tuesday, May 31.
Iraqi forces gather ahead of an operation to retake Falluja on Sunday, May 29.
Pro-Iraqi government fighters carry ammunition in the village of Harariyat on Saturday, May 28.
A police officer places an Iraqi federal police flag next to a Shiite militia flag outside Falluja on May 28.
Iraqi government forces engage with ISIS fighters near the village of al-Sejar on Thursday, May 26.
A pro-government fighter rests after battling ISIS near al-Sejar on May 26.
Iraqi security forces surround an ISIS drone that was shot down outside Falluja on May 26.
Iraqi government forces take position east of Falluja on Wednesday, May 25.
A pro-government fighter holds position in the village of al-Shahabi, east of Falluja, on Tuesday, May 24.
Iraqi government forces join an operation in al-Shahabi on May 24.
A fighter with the Badr Brigades, a Shiite militia, takes an ISIS flag down outside Falluja on May 23.
A fighter from a Shiite militia takes a combat position outside Falluja on May 23.
Iraqi government troops, backed by Shiite militias known as the Popular Mobilization Units and an air campaign by the U.S.-led anti-ISIS coalition, launched an offensive Monday to retake Falluja, about 65 kilometers (40 miles) west of Baghdad.
It remains, along with Mosul, one of the last two Iraqi cities under the Sunni terror group's control.
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi posted a statement on Facebook congratulating the people of Iraq on the "liberation of al-Karma" and ordered security forces to protect civilians there.
"We are all united to liberate Falluja and save its people from the terror of ISIS," he later tweeted.
The United Nations said it fears an estimated 50,000 civilians trapped in Falluja ahead of the government advance are at extreme risk.
"We are receiving distressing reports of civilians trapped inside Falluja who are desperate to escape to safety, but can't," Lise Grande, the U.N.'s humanitarian coordinator for Iraq, warned in a statement Wednesday.
Iraq's government has airdropped leaflets and broadcast advisories to residents to flee through "safe corridors" established by the military to camps outside the city, or wave white flags over their homes if they are trapped.
But activists said ISIS is preventing residents from leaving, and U.N. officials have said some have died trying to escape.
About 800 people had been able to flee to safety since Sunday, with most hailing from outlying areas, the U.N. statement said.
Some walked for hours in dangerous conditions to reach camps set up in Amiriyat al-Falluja, a city about 30 kilometers (19 miles) to the south.
"The U.N. and its partners have humanitarian teams and supplies on the ground," Grande said. "We've already begun providing people with food, water and shelter as they arrive and we'll be there as more people arrive."
Those who made it out described dire humanitarian conditions in Falluja, which has had supply routes cut off since government forces retook nearby Ramadi in December.
"Food supplies are limited and tightly controlled. Medicines are exhausted and many families have no choice but to rely on dirty and unsafe water sources," Grande said.
A statement from a Sistani representative said the cleric urged troops to follow the teachings of the Prophet Mohammed and not to kill an old man or a young boy or a woman, and not even to cut a tree, unless they had to.
Falluja, which once had a population of 300,000, was the scene of two major battles during the Iraq War, witnessing some of the fiercest fighting between U.S. forces and insurgents.
The new offensive on the city comes as an alliance of U.S.-backed Kurdish and Arab forces pushes to retake areas to the north of the de facto ISIS capital of Raqqa in neighboring Syria.