Thailand Bombings Kill 4 and Wound Dozens, Most at Tourist Sites
Police officials said several of the bombs were detonated by cellphone.
Bombings are not uncommon in Thailand’s deep south, where a separatist insurgency has raged, but they are rare in areas frequented by tourists, like Hua Hin and Phuket. These were the first such attacks since a bombing last August at a famous shrine in the heart of Bangkok that killed 20 people.
A spokesman for the national police, Maj. Gen. Piyapan Pingmuang, said there was no evidence of a connection to international terrorism. “This is different from the terrorism that has taken place in many countries,” he said. “This is local sabotage.”
Zachary Abuza, a professor at the National War College in Washington who researches politics and security in Southeast Asia, doubted that southern insurgents were behind the blasts. “It’s been years since they have been able to pull off coordinated attacks across multiple cities and provinces, and when they have, it’s always been confined to the deep south,” he said in an email.
He said the bombings were likelier to be the work of dissidents opposed to the military government that has ruled Thailand since a coup in 2014. He noted that the blasts came days after voters approved a new constitution expanding the power of the junta, which had barred opponents of the proposal from campaigning against it.
“The restrictions on campaigning ahead of the referendum must convince some that only extralegal means can be effective,” Mr. Abuza said. While many of the bombings were in tourist areas, he said, they did not seem intended to kill large numbers of people, suggesting that the intent was to hurt the tourist-dependent economy.
Friday is the birthday of the queen, Sirikit, a national holiday, and some of the bombs were reported to have gone off after the national anthem, which is customarily played at 8 a.m. Many people had gone to Hua Hin, a coastal resort on the Gulf of Thailand, in anticipation of the holiday. Queen Sirikit and King Bhumibol Adulyadej have a palace there, though they are both ill and hospitalized in Bangkok.
Col. Sansern Kaewkamnerd, a spokesman for the prime minister’s office, urged Thais to celebrate the holiday as usual. “They don’t want people to go out, travel or spend money,” he said in a televised interview, referring to the bombers. “They want to scare off investors. They don’t want tourists to come to Thailand.”
The explosions Thursday night in Hua Hin, which occurred about a half-hour apart, were in an area of bars and nightclubs popular with foreign tourists. At least nine foreigners were wounded in the second explosion, which went off at a crowded intersection, according to Suthipong Klai-udom, a district official.
Mr. Suthipong said that Germans, Swiss and Italians were among the wounded, and that the woman who died was a Thai street vendor whose cart was near one of the explosions. He said the bombs had been hidden in plant pots and detonated by cellphone.