Aleppo: Strikes target site of alleged chlorine attack
This story contains graphic images, including some of child victims.
(CNN)Fresh airstrikes rained down Wednesday on a rebel-held neighborhood in Syria's east Aleppo, killing two people at a market where an alleged chlorine gas attack injured more than 100 people a day earlier, an activist told CNN.
The two at the market were among at least seven people killed and 40 injured in the latest strikes on the Sukkari neighborhood, the activist with the Aleppo Media Center said. The center is a group of opposition-affiliated activists documenting the conflict in the city.
In Tuesday's alleged chemical attack, more than 100 people -- including dozens of children -- were admitted to the hospital after barrels suspected of containing chlorine gas were dropped, medical group activists say.
Wednesday's airstrikes struck the market, a mosque, a street and a roundabout in the rebel-occupied neighborhood, the activist said.
He described scenes of terror at the market as he arrived in the aftermath.
Chlorine gas allegedly was dropped about 1 p.m. local time Tuesday in barrel bombs from a helicopter, according to another Aleppo Media Center activist who attended the aftermath of the blast. The drop was followed by four rockets fired by military jets, he said.
He said the Syrian conflict has seen a resurgence in chemical weapons, which had not been widely used since the Iran-Iraq War and Saddam Hussein's campaign against the Kurds in the late 1980s.
Since the Ghouta attack, he estimated that chemical weapons had been used more than 100 times in the conflict, and their effectiveness when deployed by the regime against ISIS had encouraged the terror group to use them in turn.
"Nothing happened after Ghouta. He used chemical weapons, he didn't fall and he's still there," he said, referring to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. "The fact the international community did nothing has encouraged him and encouraged Islamic State to do the same."
Syria and its ally Russia have accused Islamist militants of using chlorine in the past. UN investigators also said last month it had found that ISIS had used mustard gas in the battlefield.
Aleppo, prewar Syria's largest city and commercial hub, has been divided for years into areas under rebel and regime control. The city has been heavily hit by intensifying violence in recent months following the failure of an American- and Russian-brokered "cessation of hostilities."