Yemen Backtracks on Suspending U.S. Raids After Civilian Casualties
WASHINGTON — Yemen’s government said on Wednesday that it had requested a “reassessment” of an American commando raid last month that killed several women and children and closer coordination on future operations, but said that it had not suspended future raids by United States Special Operations forces.
Citing American officials, The New York Times had reported on Tuesday that Yemeni authorities, angry about the civilian casualties incurred last month in the first counterterrorism operation authorized by President Trump, had withdrawn permission for the United States to run Special Operations ground missions against suspected terrorist groups in the country.
But on Wednesday, Yemeni officials publicly backtracked somewhat from what they had told White House officials, caught between the public outrage at home over civilian deaths and fear of losing American counterterrorism assistance. When asked about The Times report on Wednesday, the White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, did not deny that American commando missions had been suspended. Referring to the Yemenis, Mr. Spicer said that “we’re going to continue to work with them to strengthen our diplomatic relationship, to understand our fight against terrorism.”
In Cairo, however, Yemen’s foreign minister, Abdul Malik al-Mekhlafi, called for the review of the operation, in which one American commando and some 14 fighters of Al Qaeda died, adding that “Yemen continues to cooperate with the United States and continues to abide by all the agreements.”
Yemen’s embassy in Washington said in a statement that it had not suspended any counterterrorism programs with the United States. But hinting that Yemeni leaders were not fully informed in advance about the mission, the embassy also said that “any counterterrorism operations carried out in Yemen should continue to be in consultation with Yemeni authorities and have precautionary measures to prevent civilian casualties.”
The raid, which suffered a number of failings and faced unexpected resistance, was an early test of Mr. Trump’s national security decision-making — and his willingness to rely on the assurances of his military advisers. His aides say that even though the decision was made over a dinner, it had been fully vetted and had the required legal approvals.