Syrian forces, rebels fight to control Aleppo broadcast center
"The General Assembly demanded once more that the first step in the cessation of violence be made by the Assad regime," she said. "Importantly, the resolution also welcomes the Arab League's July 22 decision, which calls for Assad to step down and for a transitional government to be formed. The United States is pleased that the General Assembly has made it abundantly clear that Syria's chemical weapons must remain secure and that members of the regime will be held accountable in the event such weapons are used."
Frank Gaffney, founder of the Center for Security Policy, said the United Nations sometimes builds unreasonable expectations by "creating the impression that somebody is going to do something about a problem. ... In the end, it almost never can do anything."
As they have every Friday since the uprising began nearly 17 months ago, protesters marched across the country with a theme for the week. Deir Ezzor, the restive province in the east, was the focus of anti-government demonstrators this week: "heroic Deir Ezzor, the coming victory from the east."
"Despite the big battle in Aleppo, we feel that Deir Ezzor is also leading the fight against the Assad regime and most of the cities and villages in the province have been liberated," said Mohammed Sarmini, a spokesman for the opposition Syrian National Council, the anti-al-Assad political movement based in Turkey.
"Our main mission is to form local neighborhood councils in order to avoid the cities slipping into chaos once the regime falls," Sarmini said. "We had to wait until we had more liberated areas, and now we feel more confident after the latest developments in Aleppo."
"When I left recently, the embassy had plenty of funds available to continue for some time, but the banks will no longer do business with the embassy." British authorities, the official said, had been keen to keep the embassy open to maintain channels of diplomatic communication, but that communication now looks set to become much harder.
CNN has been unable to contact al-Ayoubi. The Foreign Office said it would not comment on private meetings and had no information about the possible closure of the embassy.