U.S. vows to hunt down perpetrators of Benghazi attack
A senior U.S. official told CNN that American surveillance drones are expected to join the hunt for jihadists who may be tied to the attack. The drones are expected to gather intelligence that will be turned over to Libyan officials for strikes, the official said.
The security officer managed to get out and brought others back to retrieve Smith and Stevens, the officials said, but they found Smith dead and Stevens missing. The ambassador's body was handed over to U.S. personnel at the airport after dawn, the officials said.
"There are reports out there that I cannot confirm that he was brought to the hospital by Libyans who found him," one of the officials said. "Obviously, he had to get there somehow. No Americans were responsible for that."
Two U.S. security guards were killed and two more wounded in the next hour, as they attempted to re-establish control of the consulate compound. Libyan security forces helped retake the complex about 2:30 a.m., the officials said.
"He believed in the Libyan people," said Aujali, who said Stevens was a personal friend. "He believed that America should support the Libyan people to get their country back. We need to practice democracy like other nations in the world."
"This was an attack by a small and savage group, not the people or government of Libya. Everywhere Chris and his team went in Libya, in a country scarred by war and tyranny, they were hailed as friends and partners. And when the attack came yesterday, Libyans stood and fought to defend our post."
Meanwhile, the protests over the video resumed Wednesday night in Egypt, where several men scaled the walls of the U.S. Embassy and tore down its American flag on Tuesday. Police used tear gas on protesters outside Cairo embassy and in Tahrir Square, the epicenter of the revolt that toppled former President Hosni Mubarak in 2011.
Stevens spoke Arabic and French and was among the first U.S. diplomats sent to Libya in 2007, when Washington and Tripoli resumed ties. He was the sixth U.S. ambassador to be killed in the line of service, while two others have died in plane crashes.