Three people found shot dead in car in Corsica
The triple murder came just days after three members of a British family were shot dead in their car near Annecy, although there was no suggestion of a link between the two crimes.
The murders in Corsica may have been part of a mafia-style vendetta, with at least one of the victims known to the police.
The victims, all believed to be from Corsica, were named as Jean-Pierre Colombani, Jean Gandolfi and Sébastien Mattéi.
They were aged between 24 and 34 and had prior criminal convictions, according to the Corse Matin newspaper.
The bodies were found in a car in the village of Pont-de-Castirla, a hamlet near the town of Corte, in the north of the island.
They had been shot dead with Kalashnikovs or similar automatic weapons, according to Corse Matin, a local newspaper.
The alarm was raised after a motorist stopped to give aid at what he initially thought was a road accident.
Corsica has suffered from organised crime feuds and separatist violence for decades.
Since the start of the year, there have been 13 murders and nine attempted murders.
Last year there were 22 murders on the island, while in 2010 there were 40.
In 1998 nationalists killed Claude Erignac, who as the prefect of Corsica was the most senior government representative on the island.
The large number of killings makes the island, which has a population of just 306,000, the most violent region in Western Europe, according to L’Express, a French weekly.
Police say many of the killings are the result of score-settling in ongoing feuds.
Six supermarkets were hit by explosions overnight on Monday in a series of attacks for which there was no claim of responsibility.
The deaths come less than a week after a British-Iraqi family was gunned down in the French Alps.
Saad al-Hilli, his wife Iqbal and her mother were found dead in their car in a forest car park near the village of Chevaline last Wednesday.
The Hillis’s daughter Zainab, aged seven, was seriously wounded. Her four-year-old sister Zeena escaped by hiding under her dead mother’s skirt.