Syria agrees to cease-fire, sort of
"What we are hoping and expecting is that they will not just talk the talk of cease-fire, but they will walk the walk -- beginning with the regime," said U.S. State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland.
"Obviously, the world is now watching to see what will happen on Friday morning," he said. "We cannot be sure yet what will transpire, but the hope is that the guns will fall silent for the people of Syria so that they will have peace and quiet during this holy holiday."
Rebels expressed skepticism over the truce. "They have betrayed us many times and they do not care if it is Eid or anything else, they will continue to kill," said Abdualla Yasin, the rebel Free Syrian Army spokesman in Aleppo.
The rebel spokesman singled out Aleppo's Kurdish community for permitting the presence of rebels in their neighborhoods. Much of the opposition is Sunni Arab, and rebels said they were heartened to receive support from all groups in the diverse society.
"We were welcomed by the Kurds because people believe the FSA will liberate Syria," Yasin said. "Every small gain brings us closer to victory. The FSA was also happy to unite another facet of Syrian society under the FSA umbrella."
Previous truces have failed to take hold in Syria, which has been wracked by civil war since March 2011. In April, a cease-fire lasted barely a day before the killing resumed. In total, more than 32,000 Syrians have died since the conflict began, opposition activists say.
"The whole world knows that the Syrian regime cannot be trusted and doesn't have any credibility in fulfilling any promise that they make to anyone," said George Sabra, a Paris-based spokesman for the Syrian National Council, which speaks for rebels fighting al-Assad. "The Assad regime is trying a diversion."
It's foolish to expect a total cease-fire, said Aram Nerguizian, a Middle East expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. A cease-fire in this context is about a larger goal of getting most rebel brigades and al-Assad forces to halt or reduce the killing.
The rebels themselves are partly to blame for the failure of this spring's cease-fire, Nerguizian said. They have been just as vicious in their killing as al-Assad's forces, he said.
Carla del Ponte, who once served as prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, is part of the commission. Noted for her investigation of war crimes in the Balkans in the 1990s, she cited similarities with past probes.
In Jedda, Saudi authorities announced the deportation of three staff members of the Syrian Consulate General, the official Saudi Press Agency said Thursday. The move was taken because "authorities have concluded that their behaviors are incompatible with their consular duties and assignments," it said.