Yala bomb attack kills one
A woman was killed and more than 20 people injured in a motorcycle bomb attack in Muang district of Yala province on Saturday.
Police rushed to the scene of the explosion in front of a store on Siroros Road to find the building on fire. It took emergency workers more than an hour to contain the flames.
The injured were carried out and taken to nearby hospitals.
About 20 metres from the building was a smashed military pickup truck. On its hood was the body of an unidentified woman lying on top of a motorcycle. She was identified later as Pannee Sirinworawet, 49, a resident of Muang district.
Investigators believe the woman was hit and killed by the truck after it was sent flying by the blast.
The twisted frame of another motorcycle was also found across the street. Police suspect that it was used in the bomb attack. It was later learned that the motorcycle had been reported stolen two months ago.
It is believed that the explosives were detonated by radio based on circuit components recovered at the scene.
The initial investigation indicated that the bomb went off as the military patrol pickup truck was passing by. As a result, five soldiers in the truck were wounded and two are in critical condition.
Altogether 33 people were injured but 10 have already been discharged from the hospital. Five commercial building units and a number of cars were damaged.
Pol Lt-Gen Paitoon Chuchaiya, chief of the Southern Border Police Operation Centre, told reporters that a suspect was caught by a nearby closed-circuit TV camera and the image was being reviewed.
Pornsak Leelakriengsak, the owner of Chai Charoen spare parts shop, asked the government to provide compensation to businesses damaged by the violence in the province and to strengthen safety measures.
Boonyiem Tanchatchawal, owner of Saeng Thai Lohakit, which was also damaged by the bomb, urged the government to provide speedy assistance through a one-stop service for people affected by the violence.
Pol Maj-Gen Prakarn Chonlayuth, chief of Yala ad hoc unit, said government agencies as well as financial institutions should take measures to offer remedies to affected local people because they will not relocate other other provinces.