Journalists die amid Syrian clashes
A longtime globe-trotting war reporter and "battlefield junkie" who once had been a mercenary fighter in Africa has been killed in the conflict-ravaged city of Aleppo, the French presidential palace confirmed Friday.
The 33-year-old Syrian journalist, who used the pseudonym Mohamed Al-Hoorani, was struck by three bullets while covering fighting at the front lines in the town of Busra Al-Harir in the countryside of Daraa, the network said in a statement.
"He was known for his courage and accuracy of the news he provided from Daraa and the surrounding areas," Al Jazeera said.
"The President of the Republic, speaking on behalf of France, expresses his deep emotion at the death of Yves Debay, French journalist killed in Aleppo, Syria while he was reporting," the palace said.
"France condemns this heinous act and expresses its condolences, sympathy and solidarity to the family and friends of Yves Debay. France pays tribute to Yves Debay and other journalists in Syria, who are paying with their lives for their commitment to freedom of information."
He is the latest journalist to die in the Syrian warfare, a conflict that morphed into a civil war after the government cracked down on peaceful protesters. More than 60,000 people have died in the fighting, including several dozen professional and citizen journalists.
He was in the Belgian army and had been a mercenary for the army of Rhodesia, the white-ruled precursor to Zimbabwe, and fought Marxist guerrillas, the newspaper said. He covered conflicts across the world, in Afghanistan, Lebanon, Yugoslavia, Iraq, Libya and, most recently, Syria.
"He adopted their lifestyle, dressed like them, ate like them, shared the same risks, and could not conceive of covering a war otherwise," the paper said.
"My impression when with him on the front lines in eastern Libya was that he understood warfare far better than the young Libyan rebels, of whose skill he was dismissive," Wedeman said. "He often laughed heartily at their tendency to run at the first sign of danger."
Another activist reads a brief statement, saying: "This is the body of the French journalist Yves who was killed by Assad gangs while covering the war in Aleppo." The LeMonde report said he was killed by a sniper Thursday.
As the war continued, so, too, did defections. Turkey's state-run TRT news service reported that 12 Syrian army officers defected Friday to Turkey. The five colonels, one major, four captains and two lieutenants and their relatives formed a group of 71 people who crossed into Hatay province through Reyhanlı town, it said. They settled in a tent city in Apaydin, the news service said.
Meanwhile, 27 Syrians who were wounded in clashes, were taken to Turkey for treatment. They were hospitalized in regional hospitals.
At least 183 people were killed Friday in Syria, the opposition Local Coordination Committees of Syria said. Of those, 48 deaths occurred in Aleppo, most in aerial shelling on the Mohafaza neighborhood.