9 killed as protesters, army clash in Iraq
At least seven protesters and two soldiers were killed Friday in clashes that started after Iraqi army forces opened fire on demonstrators who had pelted them with rocks on the outskirts of Fallujah, west of Baghdad, officials said. It was the first deadly confrontation in more than a month of antigovernment protests by mostly Sunni opponents of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, a Shiite. A security official said one clash started when protesters began throwing rocks at government forces at a checkpoint. The forces opened fire, and demonstrators responded by burning army vehicles and the cars of two politicians. Seven civilians were killed and 44 people were wounded, according to medical sources. Later, unidentified gunmen killed two soldiers and wounded one at an army checkpoint south of Fallujah, in apparent retaliation, and gunmen kidnapped three soldiers, a police official said.
Sen. Saxby Chambliss, R-Ga., one of the Republicans most vulnerable to a conservative primary challenge, said Friday that he will retire in 2014 rather than seek a third term. Chambliss said in a statement that he was confident he would have won re-election and cited the deteriorating state of Washington politics as his main reason for retiring.
Reince Priebus was re-elected chairman of the Republican National Committee on Friday, overcoming divisions and tensions in the party as he pledged to remake and restore the GOP brand before the congressional elections next year and the 2016 presidential race. He was elected with near unanimity to serve a second term.
North Korea turned its anger on South Korea on Friday, warning the South Koreans they could suffer "physical countermeasures" for any enforcement of the tightened international sanctions meant to stop its ballistic missile and nuclear weapons activities. The warning came a day after North Korea warned the United States, saying it would forge ahead with its missile and weapons development with the goal of attaining the capability to hit U.S. territory.
Mali: French and Malian soldiers appeared to push farther north into militant-held territory Friday, closing in on the eastern city of Gao.
Britain: Prime Minister David Cameron's government Friday offered a bill to legalize same-sex marriage. It is expected to become law by midsummer.
New York: A wayward dolphin that meandered into a polluted canal in Brooklyn, riveting onlookers as it splashed around in the filthy water, died Friday evening, marine experts said.