N.Korea warns South over live-fire drill
NORTH Korea has threatened to launch "merciless" strikes if South Korea goes through with planned live-fire drills near their disputed sea border.
North Korea doesn't want a war, but its people are always ready to "dedicate their blood to defend their inviolable territory", Sin Chol Ung from the North"s Korean People's Security Forces told The Associated Press yesterday, as South Korean troops prepared to hold the drills in an area that was the target of a deadly artillery attack in 2010. South Korea is scheduled to stage regular one-day artillery drills today from front-line islands in waters off the western coast that North Korea claims as its territory. South Korea informed Pyongyang of the training plan on Sunday, South Korea's Joint Chiefs of Staff said in Seoul. Soon after, Pyongyang's military called the drills a "premeditated military provocation" and warned the South it would retaliate for an attack on its territory. North Korea urged civilians living or working on the islands to evacuate before the drills begin, the western military command said in a statement carried by the North's official Korean Central News Agency. The threat of an artillery attack like the one that killed four South Koreans in November 2010 after a similar exchange between the two Koreas comes two months after the death of leader Kim Jong-Il and as his son Kim Jong-Un takes the helm of the nation of 24 million. Earlier today, the powerful Political Bureau of the Central Committee of North Korea's ruling Workers' Party announced it would convene a special political conference in mid-April to "glorify" the late leader and to rally around his son. The last time such a conference was held was in September 2010, when Kim Jong Un was named to a high-ranking party military post in the first public confirmation that he was being groomed to succeed his father. Kim Jong Un has been declared "supreme leader" of North Korea's people, party and military, but was expected to gain new top titles and positions as part of the process to solidify his role as the third-generation Kim to lead North Korea. His grandfather, Kim Il-Sung, remains "eternal president" while Kim Jong-Il ruled as chairman of the National Defence Commission. The tension on the Korean peninsula, which has remained in a technical state of war since the three-year Korean War ended in a truce in 1953, comes as North Korea prepares to celebrate a major milestone in its history: the 100th anniversary of the birth of late President Kim Il-Sung, the nation's founder.