Deadly clash breaks out at Sunni protest in Iraq
In northern Iraq, at least 28 people were killed and more than 70 wounded in clashes between security forces and gunmen in Hawija, in Kirkuk province, according to a senior Iraqi army officer who spoke on condition of anonymity because he is not authorized to speak to the media.
Iraqi House Speaker Osama al-Najafi issued a strong condemnation, saying the army fired on peaceful protesters and calling the military "a tool to suppress the people and not to defend them."
"We condemn in the strongest words of condemnation and denunciation the unfortunate crime committed by the army against the demonstrators in Hawija," he said.
Two Sunni Cabinet members -- Minister of Education Mohammed Tameem and Minister of Science and Technology Abdul Karim al-Samarrai -- have submitted their resignations in protest over the actions by security forces, their offices said.
The U.S. Embassy in Baghdad said it is working to "help defuse political and sectarian tensions" and it regrets that civilian and security force casualties "took place before ongoing efforts to reach a peaceful resolution of this situation were given sufficient time to succeed."
"All sides should immediately refrain from further violence or provocative actions," it said. "We call for a transparent investigation with the broadest possible participation."
The situation is now very tense in provinces with large Sunni populations -- such as Anbar, Salaheddin, Nineveh and Diyala, according to the senior Interior Ministry official in Baghdad who also spoke under condition of anonymity.
Near the Anbar province city of Falluja, police said, citizens who were angered by the Hawija events set two army vehicles on fire in an attack on an army convoy. One person was killed and another was kidnapped, police said.
In Tuz Khurmato, in Kirkuk province, at least four Iraqi soldiers were killed and four others wounded when gunmen attacked a security checkpoint. It is not clear if this attack related to the Hawija clashes or sectarian strife.
And at least nine people were killed and more than 25 were wounded when three mortar rounds landed on a Sunni mosque in Muqdadiya, a city in Diyala province.
Sunnis, who comprise a minority of Iraqis, had clout during the Saddam Hussein era, but have been politically marginalized since his overthrow. Shiites, who make up a majority of Iraqis, dominate the government.
Since December, tens of thousands of demonstrators have taken to the streets of predominately Sunni provinces -- including Anbar, Nineveh, Salaheddin and Diyala -- demanding that the Shiite-led government stop what they call second-class treatment of Iraq's Sunni community.