Syrian troops escalate effort to 'cleanse' Homs – USATODAY.com
BEIRUT – Civilians cowered in homes and activists recorded what they believed may be their final testaments as Syrian troops and tanks intensified their efforts to "cleanse" Homs on Wednesday.
Elite Syrian troops accompanied by tanks began a ground offensive on four fronts to crush the stronghold of a movement opposed to Syrian President Bashar Assad. The city has endured 26 days of intense bombardment that an unnamed Syrian government official told the Associated Press was meant to "cleanse" Homs of opposition.
Activists reported "fierce fighting" between regime forces and the Free Syrian Army, but because power and communications were cut they were unsure exactly what was going on.
"Today has been the heaviest attacks against Baba Amr," said Sami Ibrahim of the Syrian Network for Human Rights, speaking from Homs about one of its districts. "We are speaking about rockets, about helicopter gunfire against civilians. Today, the whole of Homs has no electricity at all. There is also no water in the whole city."
Activists estimate that almost 500 people have killed and more than 2,000 wounded in Baba Amr alone. Meanwhile, tens of thousands are stuck with no way out of the neighborhood.
"It is very, very bad," said Waleed, an activist in Homs, who asked that his last name not be used because of fear for his safety. "A lot of people are writing their wills. They are waiting to die."
On Tuesday, 13 Syrians died in an ambush trying to smuggle four Western journalists out of the district when their secret route, a mile-long tunnel, was discovered, according to human rights group Avaaz. British photographer Paul Conroy escaped Tuesday and Spanish journalist Javier Espinosa escaped Wednesday, both to Lebanon.
Since the uprising began in Syria on March 15, 2011, more than 7,500 have been killed, according to the U.N.'s latest estimates. Assad says the uprising is being led by terrorists and thugs; the opponents say they only want to be out from under Assad's dictatorship. Meanwhile, family members outside Homs waited, frantic with worry.
"Sometimes I just keep crying all the time, thinking, 'Are they still alive?' " said Layal Mohammad Haitham, 24, from Homs, who now lives in the United Arab Emirates with her husband.
"They have killed most of my family members," she said. "What thing should I be afraid of? Damn them all."
The Obama administration summoned Syria's senior envoy in the U.S. to express outrage over the offensive. Opposition leaders say they need military assistance to survive, but Obama and other state leaders that provided aid to Libyan revolutionaries last year have thus far refused do so in Syria.
"We can't believe this silence. No one cares for us," Haitham said.