Police: 5 dead in California shooting, including gunman
(CNN) -- The gunman who went on a shooting rampage in Santa Monica, California, killed four people, police spokesman St. Richard Lewis said. Authorities said earlier that six had died, but revised the number to four. The gunman was also killed, bringing the total number of deaths to five.
The shooter began his rampage at a residence near the campus of Santa Monica College, opening fire in a house, where police later found two bodies. He then shot at a passing car before carjacking another vehicle, Lewis said. He forced the driver, a woman, to drive onto the college campus. There he shot two people in a passing vehicle. One died at the scene. The gunman also fatally shot someone outside the campus library, where he engaged police in a gunfight, Lewis said. Officers fatally wounded him.
The gunman has not been identified by authorities, Seabrooks said. She described him as a white male between the age of 25 and 35, clad in black and wearing what appeared to be a ballistic vest.He carried a semi-automatic assault rifle, she said.
As he was holding the female motorist at gunpoint, the gunman waved another car by, Cunningham said. That driver, also a woman, hesitated for just a moment, and the gunman "fired three shots directly into her and the car," Cunningham said. The motorist was wounded in the shoulder, she said.
It was not immediately clear whether a woman who died from wounds at Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center was counted among the six deaths. Another woman wounded in the shooting remains in critical condition, Dr. Marshall Morgan, chief of emergency medicine at the medical center, said Friday evening.
"He was standing there. He looked over at me, and I looked at him. He just panned his gun and trained it on me, and I just jumped behind the building and he shot at me," Orcutt said.
She and her friends grabbed their books and belongings to leave the study room. "As we open the door, we hear three gunshots," she said.