Opposition: 39 killed in Syria as regime attacks escape route to Lebanon
Eight wounded Syrian men crossed into the Lebanese village of El Qaa from Syria on Tuesday, according to a Lebanese Red Cross official. They were taken to hospitals in northern Lebanon by the Red Cross; one of the Syrians died, said the official, who did not want to be named because he is not authorized to speak to the media.
Also Tuesday, preliminary discussions began among the five permanent members of the Security Council plus Morocco "about whether there is any possibility of reaching agreement around a potential text that would demand an end to the violence in Syria and demand immediate humanitarian access," said Susan Rice, U.S. ambassador to the world body. "These discussions are just beginning and will continue. If and when it seems there is a basis for a meaningful and viable text, we will propose one to the full Security Council."
Western diplomats said the goal is to bring the Russians and Chinese into the fold by creating a less harsh version of the last resolution, which the two countries vetoed, that would emphasize the humanitarian situation. They said they want the Russians and Chinese to join the call for a "permissive environment" for humanitarian access.
However, the United States and its allies insist the resolution puts the onus on the regime to stop the violence and will not give up on that issue. This is a nonstarter for the Russians and Chinese, who want any resolution to reflect that armed opposition rebels also bear responsibility.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan called Tuesday for the opening of a humanitarian aid corridor to Syria. In his televised weekly party parliamentary group meeting, he also called for the implementation of an Arab League plan that calls for al-Assad to step down and demands an immediate end to human rights violations and attacks against civilians. The U.N. General Assembly passed a nonbinding resolution last month endorsing the plan.
"It took Assad's well-equipped army 27 days of full-scale assault on the Baba Amr district of Homs, which indicates the effectiveness of the FSA and the exhaustion of the Syrian Army," Khattab said in a statement. "Providing military support for the army defectors will further weaken Assad's forces and help topple the regime."
Valerie Amos, U.N. under-secretary-general for humanitarian affairs and emergency relief coordinator, is slated to arrive Wednesday in Damascus for a two-day visit. "My aim is to urge all parties to allow unhindered access for humanitarian relief workers so that they can evacuate the wounded and deliver essential supplies," Amos said in a statement.
And Kofi Annan, the former U.N. secretary-general who is now special joint envoy to Syria for the United Nations and the Arab League, will fly Saturday to Damascus, an Arab League official said. He will be accompanied by his deputy, former Palestinian Foreign Minister Nasser al-Kidwa. Their goal will be to persuade al-Assad to stop the killing, the official said.
Meanwhile, almost two weeks after she was killed by a rocket attack in the Baba Amr neighborhood of Homs, the body of American journalist Marie Colvin is expected to arrive Tuesday in the United States, the U.S. Embassy in Paris said.