Muzaffarnagar violence: Over 10,000 displaced; 10,000 arrested
LUCKNOW: Five days after communal violence broke out in Muzaffarnagar , the western UP district and the adjoining areas remained on the edge. Although no fresh violence was reported on Wednesday, more than 10,000 people have been displaced after the violence that claimed 38 lives since Saturday. Based on feedback received from the local administrations, however, the administration lifted curfew in the riot-affected areas from 12 noon to 5 pm on Wednesday. "A staggering 10,000 — mostly poor villagers — have been displaced in the communal flare-up, some of who have found their way to ten state relief camps," said UP home secretary Kamal Saxena. The official number of the injured is 93, with at least three serious cases. A missing persons' cell is being run from IG Meerut Zone's office, on helpline number: 9454402574, where families can register complaints. Though things appear calm, it'll be a while before the communal flames fanned in Muzaffarnagar are doused. A person who had hid 41 cartridges of AK-47 was arrested from a place of worship, said ADG Arun Kumar. Despite Army presence, skirmishes were reported from Baghpat — where stone-pelters were restrained said IG, STF, Ashish Gupta — and from Unnao, Bulandshahr, Bahraich and Bijnor. Police had made 10,000 preventive arrests till Wednesday, confiscated 2,000 arms and lodged 7 cases under the National Security Act. Police said DVDs and CDs of the maha-panchayat remain in circulation and have surfaced in east and central UP as well. The hunt for BJP MLA Sangeet Som and 228 others for distributing the malicious morphed video of the Sialkot riots continues. The police plan bulk SMSes to counter rumour-mongering. Gupta said fly-by-night computer centres making the CDs are on their radar as well. On Wednesday, chief minister Akhilesh Yadav ordered free medical aid to riot-affected persons and directed administrative officials to ready a list of affected persons. The government also , handed out ex gratia payments of Rs 10 lakh and Rs 50,000 respectively to families of the deceased and injured.