Omar Hammami, US-born Islamist $5m bounty on his head, shot dead in Somalia
An American Islamist with a $5 million dollar bounty on his head from the US government has been killed in a shootout with his former al-Shabaab colleagues in Somalia.
Residents of the village of al Baate in southern Somalia said the Alabama-born Omar Hammami, commonly known as Abu Mansoor al-Amriki or 'the American', and a British national known as Usama al-Britani were shot dead in a dawn raid on their hideout.
Hammami had been recruiting trainees in Somalia with rap music and English language videos for the past seven years.
The 29-year-old was named on the US State Department's Most Wanted Terrorist list.
"This morning al-Amriki and his comrades were attacked by well armed fighters," village resident Hussein Nur said.
"After a brief fight al-Amriki and his two colleagues were killed. Several of their guards escaped."
A shopkeeper from the rebel-controlled village heard al-Shabaab fighters confirm the deaths and said the militants had closed off the area where Hammami was shot dead.
In recent months Hammami had claimed to have been the target of assassination attempts, while Al-Shabaab leadership had accused him of spreading disunity and pursuing fame.
His killing exposed the rifts in al-Shabaab's top ranks as the group affiliated to Al Qaeda grapples with an African Union-led military offensive that has captured key cities from the militants, depriving them of revenues.
Hammami was among senior-ranking commanders who viewed al-Shabaab leader Ahmed Godane as veering from the group's goal of imposing their strict interpretation of Islamic Sharia law over the country.
In June, al-Shabaab's firebrand spiritual leader Sheikh Hassan Dahir Aweys, also caught up in the rift, fled.
"Godane has consolidated power by removing rivals from the group, including ideological and religious leaders," said Emma Gordon, east Africa analyst at IHS Country Risk, adding it made a more cohesive group capable of launching fresh attacks.
Hammami is believed to have arrived in Somalia in late 2006, and swiftly gained influence among rebel foreign jihadists fighting to topple a government seen as a Western puppet.
In a growing campaign to challenge al Shabaab, more than 150 clerics signed a government-supported fatwa, or Islamic ruling, against the group on Wednesday, saying its ideology was a threat to Islam.
The Somali government has tried to undermine ideological support for the militants, who formed an alliance with Al Qaeda in 2012.
Somalia's embattled central administration is struggling to restore law and order across the country as it emerges from two decades of civil conflict.