Bomb blast on bus kills at least 19 in Pakistan
The bomb went off on a government bus in Peshawar, the provincial capital of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, located next to the tribal belt, the home of the Pakistani Taliban and their affiliated terrorist groups.
“The bomb with at least five kilos of explosives was placed inside an oil container which was planted in the bus. It was a timed device,” Ismail Karak said, who is the Superintendent Police for Security in Peshawar.
According to Mr Karak, the government buses sometimes carry private passengers too. “We have suspicion that someone got in the bus at one of the stops and got off one the next. Also, it seems the terrorists were planning this attack for a while, because of the sophisticated way it has been carried out. We have a few leads right now and will announce the developments soon,” he added.
The injured were taken to the Lady Reading Hospital, where senior government officials and members of the opposition visited the victims.
“We need to have a clear policy on how to deal with the terrorists otherwise these attacks will continue. One day the government says something, the other day they change their stance,” Iftikhar Hussain, the former provincial information minister told reporters outside the hospital, whose party governed the province in the last tenure.
Mr Hussain criticised the government for still pressing for a peace dialogue with the Pakistani Taliban, who are also thought to be behind the attack just four days ago in which 81 worshipers lost their lives when two suicide bombers attacked a church in Peshawar city.
Despite their continued attacks, Imran Khan, the cricketer-turned-politician whose government rules the province where the attack happened had called for the central government to allow the Pakistani Taliban to open an office in the country.
Shortly after the attack, a faction of the Pakistani Taliban also announced opposition to the peace dialogue since the government was not accepting its conditions, local media reported.
In a letter issued by Khalid Khurasani, the chief of Mohmand Agency’s faction of Pakistani Taliban he said that the government believes in the constitution while they believe in Shariah.
“We want to replace the constitution and will never backtrack from our demands. Peace negotiations with the government would never be successful as the Taliban demand enforcement of ‘Shariah’ while the government talks about the constitution,” the statement said.