Syria hammers Homs; Security Council backs Annan mission
The LCC said at least 25 people slain in Homs were killed in the Khaldiya district, which had become a refuge in the devastated city for people fleeing other war-torn neighborhoods, such as Karm al Zaytoun, Bab Sbaa, Jib Jandali and Baba Amr.
The LCC said shelling and sniper gunfire rang out in Khaldiya as people pulled corpses from the streets. Dwellings there have been burned and destroyed, and there have been deaths and injuries. One man was killed by sniper fire, activists said. "Schools and mosques are also full of dozens of displaced residents from other neighborhoods. The trouble is, any small falling rocket can result in a real massacre," activist Abu Abdallah said.
"The majority of the remaining people there are women and children who were fleeing Baba Amr. The regime is now targeting ordinary civilians. FSA presence is no longer a pretext," she said, referring to the Free Syrian Army resistance.
In its statement, the council cited "its gravest concern at the deteriorating situation in Syria, which has resulted in a serious human rights crisis and a deplorable humanitarian situation" and expressed "profound regret at the death of many thousands of people in Syria."
"The Syrian government should immediately cease troop movements towards, and end the use of heavy weapons in, population centers, and begin pullback of military concentrations in and around population centers," the statement said.
"As these actions are being taken on the ground, the Syrian government should work with the envoy to bring about a sustained cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties with an effective United Nations supervision mechanism."
Annan, a former U.N. secretary-general, would seek "similar commitments" from the opposition and all relevant elements to stop the fighting and work with him to bring about a "sustained cessation of armed violence," the statement said.
The council called for a "daily two-hour humanitarian pause" for relief efforts and intensifying "the pace and scale of release of arbitrarily detained persons." It wants freedom of movement for journalists and "a nondiscriminatory visa policy for them."
Russian Ambassador to the U.N. Vitaly Churkin said Russia "will support a Syrian-led political process, this is the aim of Kofi Annan's effort, and we will support whatever the outcome of that process might be."
"The members of the Security Council reaffirmed that terrorism in all its forms and manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to international peace and security, and that any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed," the statement said.
Two U.N. missions are under way in Syria. One comprises a team of experts discussing ways to implement the proposals laid out by Annan, and the other is a humanitarian team that -- along with the Organization of Islamic Cooperation -- is assessing the humanitarian needs in the country.