Kremlin Announces Ukraine Pullback, but NATO Doesn’t See It
The Kremlin’s call for an end to the Ukrainian government’s campaign against the separatists was reiterated by the Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov at a news conference in Moscow on Monday. “We still insist on the first unconditional step: a halt of the so-called antiterrorism operation, which is turning into actions aimed at terrorizing citizens of Ukraine just for their political convictions,” Mr. Lavrov said.
The Kremlin statement offered some praise for the round-table negotiations, which involve discussions of two alternate plans to give more authority to local officials.
The Kiev government is pushing a decentralization plan that would give more budget authority to municipal officials, while turning governors into regional representatives of a strong national government. Russia, meanwhile, has advocated a federalization plan that would weaken the central government in Kiev in favor of empowering regional governors.
“President Vladimir Putin welcomes the first contacts between Kiev and supporters of federalization, seeking to establish direct dialogue in which all parties concerned should take part” the Kremlin said.
In a sign of the continuing mistrust, Mr. Lavrov warned against any effort by Kiev to use the round-table talks as public window dressing while secretly pursuing other changes in government structure behind the scenes in Parliament.
“If the idea is to use the round tables simply as a folding screen, as a means of letting off steam, while holding the actual reform in a close manner, it will not add trust,” Mr. Lavrov said.
In addition to the decentralization plan, the Kiev government has been working on broader constitutional changes. Mr. Lavrov said some proposed constitutional amendments had been shown to officials in Europe for a consultative review, and he demanded that those changes also be addressed during the public talks. The next round of negotiations has not been scheduled.
“We are calling for the national dialogue to be closely linked to the constitutional reform process,” Mr. Lavrov said.
Mr. Rasmussen, the NATO secretary general, described the continued presence of Russian troops along the Ukrainian border as worrisome and problematic. “So far we haven’t seen any withdrawal at all, and I strongly regret that because withdrawal of Russian troops would be a first important contribution to de-escalating the crisis,” he said.
“There is no reason whatsoever why the Russians should mass military forces to that scale along Ukrainian borders,” he said. “If we one day see clear evidence of a meaningful Russian withdrawal of troops from Ukrainian borders, I will be the very first to welcome it.”
Mr. Rasmussen also denounced Russia for undertaking what he called “illegal military actions in Crimea” and the “illegal annexation” of the peninsula. “What we have seen in Ukraine is outrageous,” he said.
The result, he said, is a “completely different security situation in Europe. It is less predictable and more dangerous.”
He warned that Russia would likely add further uncertainty by stepping up pressure on Moldova and Georgia, neither of which belongs to NATO, to back away from signing of a trade and political pact with the European Union this summer.
He called on Russia to support a May 25 election in Ukraine to choose a new president to replace the country’s last elected leader, Viktor F. Yanukovych, who fled Kiev on Feb. 21 and is now sheltering in Russia. “This is the vote that counts for Ukraine and for the international community. Any effort to delay or disrupt the elections would be an attempt to deny the Ukrainian people a choice,” Mr. Rasmussen said.
NATO, Mr. Rasmussen added, is now reviewing its troop deployments and other measures to boost the security of its 28 member countries. NATO on Friday began military exercises in the Baltic state of Estonia involving 6,000 troops from the United States and eight other countries.