2 nephews of Venezuelan first lady indicted on U.S. drug smuggling charges
A link has been posted to your Facebook feed.
Two nephews of the first lady of Venezuela, who were arrested in Haiti and flown to New York, have been indicted in New York on federal drug smuggling charges, according to court papers unsealed on Thursday.
Efraín Antonio Campo Flores, 29, and Francisco Flores de Freitas, 30, are accused of conspiring to smuggle cocaine into the United States, according to the four-page indictment.
The alleged conspiracy involved 800 kilograms of the illegal drug, according to The Wall Street Journal. The charges brings a maximum of life in prison.
The pair were picked up in Port-au-Prince, Haiti on Tuesday, after arriving from Venezuela aboard a private plane, and turned over to U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration agents.
They were flown in a DEA jet to New York the same day, the Journalreports. The newspaper, citing two sources familiar with the case, says the pair were filmed and taped after allegedly bringing a kilo of cocaine to a meeting with an informant.
Both are nephews of Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro's wife, Cilia Flores, according to two sources linked to the Flores family. The Journalsaid Flores identified himself on the DEA plane as a stepson of the president, according to the people familiar with the matter, having been raised by his aunt, the first lady. A U.S. document said the other man identified himself as Flores nephew, the newspaper reports.
As word of the arrests surfaced overnight, Maduro, who was in Saudi Arabia with his wife,  posted a message on Twitter that appeared to be a passing reference to the case, saying “neither attacks, nor imperial ambushes, will effect the People of the Liberators, we have only one destiny ... Victory ...”
“The fatherland will follow its course,” Maduro added.
Michael Vigil, a former head of the DEA's international operations who was briefed by U.S. authorities on the lengthy undercover operation, said both men were carrying diplomatic passports when they arrived in Haiti even though they do not have diplomatic immunity, the AP reports.
Venezuela's Communications Ministry and Foreign Ministry declined to comment on the reported arrests. Maduro and the first lady were in Saudi Arabia this week for meetings with Middle East leaders.
Flores, 62, whom the president refers to as the "First Combatant," is highly influential in his government. She also worked on the legal team of late socialist leader Hugo Chavez, working to secure his 1994 release from prison after a failed coup attempt, Reuters notes.
In 2006, Flores became the first woman elected to lead the legislature, taking over that role from her husband, and is a candidate in next month's legislative elections.
The arrests follow mounting efforts by the U.S. to pursue investigations of alleged drug-trafficking and money-laundering links to top military, police and government officials in Venezuela.
In March, the U.S. State Department issued a report outlining alleged drug-related corruption in the country and implicating high-ranking Venezuelan government officials in the trade.
"Venezuela remained a major drug-transit country in 2014. Venezuela is one of the preferred trafficking routes for illegal drugs from South America to the Caribbean region, Central America, the United States, Western Africa, and Europe, due to its porous western border with Colombia, weak judicial system, sporadic international counternarcotics cooperation, and permissive and corrupt environment," the report says.
The arrests come as Maduro's government is struggling with an economic crisis that includes inflation as high as 800% and widespread shortages, raising prospects for a major electoral defeat for the ruling socialist party in the Dec. 6 elections.
In Venezuela, hardline opposition leader Maria Corina Machado called for Maduro’s resignation, saying important parts of his government “have become criminal organizations.”
Venezuela’s more moderate opposition coalition called on Venezuela’s National Assembly to immediately investigate the situation, the AP reports. Opposition spokesman Jesus Torrealba said Thursday the case has shocked the entire nation.