Luka Rocco Magnotta: 'Cannibal' porn star arrested in Berlin internet cafe
The international manhunt for the gay porn star and suspected murderer dubbed the Canadian Psycho has ended with his arrest in the German capital Berlin.
Luka Rocco Magnotta, 29, was seized in Helin Tele and Internet Cafe  on Karl-Marx-Strasse in the working class Neukoelln district of the city this morning.
The café was raided by armed police shortly after 11.30am after he was recognised by Kadir Anlayisli 
Magnotta was pinned to the floor and handcuffed without offering any resistance.
It is understood he was searching the internet for articles about himself and his alleged crimes when he was caught.
Eyewitnesses said armed officers asked the suspect ‘Are you the wanted man?’ and he responded ‘Yes, that’s me,’ he said.
The arrest brought to an end an international trawl spanning thousands of miles and hundreds of police officers across two continents.
A man at the internet cafe who described himself as the ‘boss’ but who would not give his name , confirmed Magnotta had been there.
‘Then the cops came and it was all over for him,’ he said.
‘It all happened very quickly, in a blur. Everyone is beating a path to my door. But the police have told me not to say too much.’
The arrest – which took place in an area known for its gay bars and sordid sex joints – brought an end to an international trawl spanning thousands of miles and two continents.
It began after Magnotta, branded the 'Canadian Psycho', allegedly murdered and dismembered his former gay lover Jun Lin, 33 in his flat in Montreal on the night of May 24.
The university student’s torso was found in the apartment while parts of his body were posted to political offices in Ottawa, including the prime minister’s party headquarters.
A ten minute videotape purporting to record the horrific crime was posted online, showing a man stabbing his naked and bound victim with an ice pick.
The attacker then hacks him to pieces and eats part of his flesh. He is also seen performing sexual acts on the corpse.
One member of the investigative team said the murderer ‘tears the victim apart like a doll’.
The video, entitled One Lunatic, One Ice Pick, was set to the soundtrack from American Psycho, earning the suspect his nickname.
Magnotta, who has worked as a bisexual porn star and a gay prostitute called Angel and often dresses as a woman, apparently fled to France on May 26.
Police have reluctantly admitted their suspect, who has also used aliases Eric Clinton Newman (his birth name) and Vladimir Romanov, should have been stopped on arrival at Charles de Gaulle airport.
But instead he passed through customs unchallenged and was able to spend several day at large in the French capital.
Witnesses came, claiming to have spotted him in the trendy Bastille district in the east of Paris, an area of the city highly popular with young British expats.
Parisian officers said the suspected killer stayed for two nights with a gay man he met in a nightclub before his terrified host spotted his photo on the internet.
Magnotta, who has worked as a bisexual porn star and a gay prostitute called Angel and often dresses as a woman,, apparently fled to France on May 26.
Police have reluctantly admitted their suspect, who has also used aliases Eric Clinton Newman (his birth name) and Vladimir Romanov, should have been stopped on arrival at Charles de Gaulle airport.
But instead he passed through customs unchallenged and was able to spend several day at large in the French capital.
Witnesses came, claiming to have spotted him in the trendy Bastille district in the east of Paris, an area of the city highly popular with young British expats.
CCTV: Interpol issued this undated photo of Magnotta passing through an unnamed airport security checkpoint
Parisian officers said the suspected killer stayed for two nights with a gay man he met in a nightclub before his terrified host spotted his photo on the internet.
One bar owner told police: 'He came into my bar and sat drinking and chatting. He seemed very excited.'
A police source said another man had put Magnotta up in his flat for two nights early last week after meeting him in a gay nightclub.
The police source said: 'After he left, the man realised who he had had staying and contacted us.
'It is then thought he went out in the evenings drinking in the Bastille district and staying in a cheaper hotel in the east of the city.'
A receptionist at a four-star hotel near the Champs-Elysees also said she believed Magnotta had stayed there the same night.
The Paris police source said: 'She later identified him from a photo.'
Police eventually traced Magnotta, who had had plastic surgery to look more like James Dean - through mobile phone calls and closed in on the hotel where he was stayed. But he had left before officers arrived.
Some of his belongings – including pornographic magazines and air sickness bags - were recovered from the room and are undergoing DNA testing.
It is unclear how Magnotta managed to slip through the net, despite Interpol having issued a Red Notice wanted-persons alert to its 190 member countries last Thursday.
But he was next seen calmly boarding a Eurolines bus at Bagnolet coach station in the eastern suburbs of the French capital at 7.30pm on Friday night.
Despite Magnotta buying a £100 ticket for the journey – and the fact the station is covered by 20 CCTV cameras – police did not trace his escape route until three days on.
He arrived in Berlin 14 hours after boarding the service at 9.15am on Saturday and has managed to avoid detection until today. The one-time porn star is likely to go before a judge tomorrow.
He will face a range of charges, including murder, defiling a corpse, threatening the Canadian prime minister and using the mail system for delivering 'obscene, indecent, immoral or scurrilous' material.
During Magnotta’s time on the run, he spent time on the computer playing war games and also made a number of disturbing postings.
Once included a short animation that involved a bloody hand print and the phrase 'It was Luka Magnotta'. Police say he was enjoying his notoriety.
Six months ago, Magnotta was living in a £40-a-night room above the Fusilier Inn in Wembley, north London, while sightseeing in the capital.
He was confronted by journalists after posting an Internet film showing a live kitten being fed to a snake.
In an email to The Sun in December, he supposedly said: ‘You will be hearing from me again. This time, however, the victims won’t be small animals.’ He sent a similar warning to the BBC.
At the same time, he appears to be denying that he is the person in the kitten-killing videos, writing on his own website: ‘Once and for all, I will set the record straight. Many hoax websites are created using my image and name, posing as me to seem more believable...
'I feel I don't need to list them specifically but people need not be told, not to believe what they read and to take it as fact.’
Magnotta is said to have once dated Karla Homolka, a notorious Canadian sex killer who slaughtered schoolgirls
FROM THE ANGEL TO CANADIAN PSYCHO, HOW LUKA MAGNOTTA BECAME THE WORLD'S MOST WANTED
The murder suspect dubbed the 'Canadian Psycho' has worked as a bisexual porn star, as a gay prostitute called 'Angel,' and is an alleged kitten killer with a string of fraud convictions.
Luka Rocco Magnotta, accused of chopping up his lover and filming the attack before mailing body parts to a series of addresses in Canada, was arrested on Monday in Berlin after initially fleeing to Paris and setting off an international manhunt.
In addition to having had plastic surgery on his face -- apparently to look more like James Dean -- he often wears lipstick and make-up, has dyed his hair and worn wigs, and sometimes dresses up as a woman.
The Fusilier Pub in Wembley, North London, where Luka Manotta has previously stayed At the same time, profiles he reputedly posted on online dating services conveyed an altogether different persona -- on one website he listed beach volleyball as a hobby and stated that finding a long-term relationship was his priority. He was granted a license to work as a stripper in Toronto in 2005 and also worked as a male escort. Pierre Bonhomme, a Canadian filmmaker who recalled a meeting with Magnotta in Toronto in 2007 or 2008, told the Ottawa Citizen it was a 'creepy' experience that he quickly decided to escape from. 'I left within about five minutes. It was a really uncomfortable, awkward situation. He was in the shady, druggy, gay-sex prostitution world. He was on a lot of the gay hookup sites,' Bonhomme said. Magnotta used Russian names, including the alias Vladimir Romanov, on such sites, according to Bonhomme, who also attested to the suspect's willingness to use fraud and deception. 'He was a hustler,' Bonhomme said. 'He was definitely not a gay village kind of guy. He was more of a suburban guy on the Internet, scamming married guys, that kind of thing.' Psychologist Gilles Chamberland told Radio Canada that Magnotta exudes 'narcissistic, anti-social,' behaviour, having described himself as being 'incredibly beautiful.' In 2009, he ironically posted advice on the Internet about how to vanish and never be found. 'A minimum of four months is really necessary to carry out the heroic actions necessary to leave your old life behind,' he reportedly wrote. He said a person must withdraw from all social circles, possess two sets of false identification papers, convert all assets to cash and then take a bus to a chosen destination, after selling a car somewhere else to mislead police. Magnotta did not do such a good job of staging his own disappearance: investigators believe he boarded a France-bound plane on May 26 in Montreal and police traced his cell phone signal to the suburb of Bagnolet, Paris on Saturday. He was eventually tracked down by German police on Monday in an Internet cafe in Neukoelln, a working-class district of Berlin.
Sickening: The thug places both of the cats inside a plastic bag and films them suffocating