Bali Nine: Indonesian court rejects Andrew Chan, Myuran Sukumaran's last-ditch appeal against execution
An Indonesian court has rejected Bali Nine pair Andrew Chan and Myuran Sukumaran's appeals against president Joko Widodo's refusal to grant them clemency.
Mr Widodo had controversially ruled out granting mercy to the two Australians, who are due to face the firing squad on the Nusakambangan prison island.
On Monday, three judges from Indonesia's state administrative court said clemency fell under the constitution but not under administrative law, and so was not in their jurisdiction.
The court said it could only hear matters to do with regulations created by parliament or government.
Chan and Sukumaran had argued that Mr Widodo did not give proper consideration to their pleas for clemency.
The pair were convicted in 2005 of being the ringleaders in a plot to smuggle heroin out of Indonesia.
During the case an expert witness was used to try to convince the court Mr Widodo's refusal to grant pardons could be challenged and the administrative court was the right jurisdiction.
However, the president's legal team argued his clemency power could not be contested and the court did not have the authority.
In their verdict, the judges dismissed expert witness testimony provided by Mr Widodo's lawyers because they did not appear in person.
"There is no more legal recourse," Novarida, head of the state lawyers team, told reporters after the decision.
Lawyers for the pair said they were disappointed in the verdict and vowed to continue to pursue all legal options to save Chan and Sukumaran.
"They have the right to live, and the state attorney knows that [the law] allows them to defend their lives," the pair's lawyer Leonard Arpan told reporters.
Peter Morrissey SC, who is part of the team of lawyers that has been exploring every legal avenue to spare the two Australians, told Lateline the pair may not hear the result until Tuesday, citing their location on Nusakambangan island as the reason for the delay.
He said the pair would be disappointed with the result, but were resilient and in good spirits.
"Of course it's a pretty stressful situation. They will be disappointed when they're told of the result," he said.
"They're resilient. They take blows like this all the time and they remain lovely people ... they are good, strong people.
"They know that there was a chance of winning and a chance of losing ... they're also aware that we're going to keep fighting," he said.
Another of the pair's lawyers, Michael O'Connell, said in the next few days the pair's Indonesian legal team would lodge an application in Indonesia's constitutional court.
"That application is essentially directed to the way in which the clemency law should be interpreted," he told the ABC.
"It argues that there should be an obligation on the president to genuinely consider the clemency application."
Mr O'Connell said the judges' decision, however, came as a surprise.
"Whilst there's a constitutional power for the president to grant clemency, that power is regulated by statute," he said.
"The application [in the administrative court] was really directed to the law that regulates clemency rather than the constitutional power."
In a statement, Foreign Affairs Minister Julie Bishop said the Australian Government was disappointed with the decision.
"Both men have undergone extensive rehabilitation and I will continue to make representations to my counterpart, just as Australia will continue to use all diplomatic options to seek a stay of execution," she said.
Opposition Leader Bill Shorten and Opposition spokeswoman for foreign affairs Tanya Plibersek said all legal processes should be allowed to run their course.
"While there's life, there's hope," they said in a joint statement.
"We will not give up. We continue to offer every support to the Australian Government in relation to this matter."
The court's ruling against Chan and Sukumaran does not mean they will face a firing squad straight away.
The two are among 10 drug convicts awaiting execution on Nusakambangan island prison, but the Indonesian government is waiting for all of those listed for execution alongside them to exhaust all legal avenues of appeal.
How long that could take is still unclear.
Jakarta has said it will wait for all legal appeals to be resolved before putting the group to death at the same time. Some other convicts have lodged Supreme Court appeals, which could take weeks to resolve.
Indonesia originally planned to carry out the executions in February, but, following an international outcry, agreed to let legal appeals run their course.
Indonesia resumed executions in 2013 after a five-year hiatus. It did not put anyone to death in 2014 but executed six drug convicts in January this year.