Freddie Gray: Judge tells deadlocked jurors to keep deliberating
Baltimore (CNN)Jurors who've said they're deadlocked in the trial of Baltimore police Officer William Porter will have a night to sleep on it before they return to court.
The judge sent the jury back to the deliberation room Tuesday afternoon after jurors said they'd been unable to reach a unanimous verdict. Deliberations continued for about two hours and are set to resume on Wednesday morning.
Porter is the first of six police officers to be tried in Freddie Gray's death from a neck injury sustained while in police custody.
The jury began deliberating Monday, 12 days after testimony began. They've deliberated for nearly 11 hours so far.
If the trial ends with a hung jury, prosecutors would have the opportunity to try the case again.
A hung jury may result in a decision to change the venue of the trial, she said, and could affect the cases of the other five officers who have yet to be tried.
Prosecutors say Porter, one of three black officers charged in the case, was summoned by the van's driver to check on Gray during stops on the way to a police station. They say he should have called a medic for Gray sooner than one was eventually called, and also should have ensured that Gray was wearing a seat belt.
For convictions on some or all of the first three charges, he would face no more than 10 years in prison combined. There is no statutory maximum sentence for the fourth charge, misconduct.
"Whatever the jury decides, we must all respect the process," the mayor said last week. "If some choose to demonstrate to express their opinion, that is their right, and we respect that right, and we will fight to protect it. But all of us today agree that the unrest from last spring is not acceptable."
Davis sent a letter to the police force on Monday, saying, "Regardless of the outcome of this trial or any future trial, we refuse to surrender to the low expectations of those who wish to see us fail. ... We serve because we know so many good and decent Baltimoreans need us to stand in between them and crime, disorder, and chaos."
All six officers are being tried separately and consecutively. Next up is the van driver, Caesar Goodson, whose trial is set to begin next month. Goodson, a black officer who is the lead defendant in the indictment, is charged with the most serious offense -- second-degree murder with a depraved heart.
Officers caught up to him, and they found a knife in his pants. Gray was arrested on a weapons charge, though prosecutors say the knife was a type allowed by Maryland law and police had no reason to detain him.
Porter was not involved until, authorities say, he arrived to look for a possible second suspect and help with crowd control while Gray was put into the van. Gray was unresponsive by the time the van arrived at a police station after making several stops in between.
Authorities say Porter was present at five of the six stops. Among the main issues in the trial: Porter says Gray asked to be taken to a hospital during the fourth stop, but the prosecution and the defense disagree about whether Gray was injured at that point, and about the appropriateness of Porter's decision to not call a medic then.
But two physicians testifying for the defense said Gray's death likely happened after the fourth stop. The reason, they said, is that Gray would have been unable to speak at that stop had the injury happened earlier.
Porter conceded that Gray asked for medical help during stop four, but said he did not call a medic because Gray didn't appear to be injured and didn't articulate what was wrong. Porter said he helped Gray sit up on a van bench, with Gray "supporting his own head."
"'I need a medic.' How long does that take?" the prosecutor asked. "How long does it take to click a seat belt and ask for a medic? Is two, three, maybe four seconds worth a life? That's all it would have taken."
Prisoners were never secured with seat belts during field training, and though cadets were instructed to secure prisoners with seat belts, they were not shown how, Porter said.