Boston's 'Baby Doe' identified; mother and man face charges
(CNN)Her name was Bella, a child whose very name means beauty, Suffolk County District Attorney Daniel Conley said Friday.
For 85 days -- since her remains were found, wrapped in a trash bag on a rocky shoreline in Boston Harbor -- the young girl had been known only as "Baby Doe."
The mystery of her death captivated the nation.
On Friday, her mother, Rachelle Bond, 40, was charged as an accessory to murder after the fact, Conley told reporters.
The mother's boyfriend, Michael McCarthy, 35, was charged with murder, according to Conley. McCarthy is not Bella's biological father, according to a law enforcement source.
The couple will be arraigned on Monday. Neither of them, or lawyers representing them, had commented on the case as of Friday.
Bella Amoroso Bond, just shy of 3 years old, was a "true innocent" whose short life ended "not by illness or accident but, we believe, by an act of violence in the very place where she should have felt safest -- in her home," said the Massachusetts prosecutor, declining to comment on the motive or manner of death.
rendered by forensic artist Christi Andrews The case of the mysterious girl, whose adorable brown eyes and cherubic face -- as rendered by forensic artist Christi Andrews and distributed by authorities -- caught the attention of millions after the discovery in late June of the body.
"It appears as though it was a situation of a boyfriend who was involved and that apparently, I think, mother and boyfriend sort of blaming each other in terms of who harmed the child."
The state Department of Children and Families was briefly involved with Bella as an infant, but have not had a case with the girl's family in more than two years, according to department spokeswoman Rhonda Mann.
"Since June, the department has been working closely with law enforcement on exploring dozens of leads in hopes to identify the little girl found on Deer Island," Mann said in a statement. "Now that we know her name, the story is no less tragic ... Our thoughts are with Bella's extended family as the investigation into her death continues."
Between 2001 and 2006, child welfare authorities terminated Bond's parental rights over two other children, an agency official said. One child remains in the custody of the maternal grandmother; the other was adopted by an unrelated family, according to the official.
The official said the agency provided services for Bella in August and December of 2012 and again in June and September of 2013 following neglect complaints regarding the child.
"She said she didn't want anybody taking her away from her, that she is trying her best to be the best parent that she can be," Torres told the station.
"It looked exactly like her," she told the station. "It's shocking and sad. She's so young... I feel sorry for that little girl. She should have been in better hands."
It's unclear how long she had been dead but there was some decomposition when her remains were removed from the trash bag.
Authorities analyzed pollen found on the girl's pants and blanket and determined that it "came from trees and plants around Boston," Jake Wark, a spokesman for the Suffolk County District Attorney's Office, said last month.
"This pollen analysis also suggests that 'Baby Doe' may have been placed on the shoreline, rather than washed ashore from a great distance," Wark said.