Jundal deported from Saudi Arabia?
MUMBAI: Did the 26/11 conspirator Sayed Zabiuddin alias Abu Jindal came on his own or force to leave Pakistan? If sources are to be believed the international pressure from the US actually forced the ISI to push Jundal to Saudi Arabia from where he was deported to India. Jindal was arrested by the Delhi special cell on Monday early morning soon after he landed at the Indira Gandhi International airport in Delhi from Saudi Arab. Though he has been deported to India in a well calculated move the police have shown him arrested outside the Delhi airport. Police have booked him under the passport act. "Its an IB operation. The IB officials have worked hard and with the help of the Suadi government and have deported him to India.'' said an official on condition of anonymity. A another sources said that its an IB operation and that is the reason why they handed over Jindal's custody to special cell of Delhi police instead he is wanted by Mumbai police as well Maharashtra Anti Terrorism Squad.(ATS). ``The IB had a very bad exprience with the Maharashtra ATS while handling 13/7 case when they arrested their informer Naqi Ahmed in triple Mumbai blasts. '' said an officer. The Mumbai crime branch have now moved the Esplanade court to seek Jindal's custody as he is wanted in 26/11terror attack in which 166 persons were killed and more than 600 were injured. Joint commissioner of police (crime) Himanshu Roy said that Jindal is among the four LeT men who had come to send off Ajmal Kasab and 9 others terrorist from Karachi a week prior they sail for Mumbai. Abu Kafa, Abu Jindal , Abu Hamza and Zaki Ur Rahman were among the four who were cordinating with Kasab group when they attack Mumbai on 26/11. And it was Jindal who taught Kasab hindi language. India had also secured an Interpol Red Corner notice against him in which he was accused of crimes involving the use of weapons, explosives and terrorism. Jindal is also a prime accused in the Aurangabad arms haul case. Jindal who hails from Gevrai Taluka in Beed district was a student of Indian Technical Institute in Beed, had a sudden rise in the ranks of Lashker-e-Taiba after he was indoctrinate by banned SIMI post Gujarat riots in 2002.