USF community mourns former Bull killed in Ybor stabbing
TAMPA, FL (WFLA) - Former USF football player was killed and another football player was wounded in an early morning stabbing outside Club Orpheum in Ybor City Sunday. Detectives identified the victims of the stabbing. One of them was a former USF football player Elkino Watson, 23. The other football player was Desmond Horne, 22.
According to Tampa Police, the stabbing incident happened Sunday morning, just before 3 a.m.
A group of people was involved in an argument near the front doors of the club and that's when the two men were stabbed. The suspects fled the scene on foot, while the victims stumbled to the parking lot behind the club. One of those men tried to leave the scene in a car. The other victim was found bleeding profusely. Both men were transported to Tampa General Hospital. Watson later died at the hospital and Horne was treated for non-life threatening injuries.
The USF football family suffered a tragic loss early Sunday morning when former defensive tackle Elkino Watson passed away due to injuries suffered in a late-night incident in Tampa. Desmond Horne, who competed for a spot on the Bulls' football team during 2015 spring practices, was also seriously injured in the incident. Horne's affiliation with the USF Football program ended in May. Law enforcement is investigating the incident. "We are deeply saddened and stunned by the tragic loss of Elkino Watson and the injuries suffered by Desmond Horne," USF Head Coach Willie Taggart said. "Kino was a tremendous young man with a great smile and a big heart who was very much loved by our USF football family and will be sorely missed. Our hearts hurt for his daughter and his family. The thoughts and prayers of our team and our University are with the Watson family as they deal with this terrible loss and with Desmond Horne to make a full recovery." Watson, a native of Miami, was a four-year letterman for the Bulls (2011-2014) who played in 45 career games and started 19. He was one of the Bulls leaders on the defensive line last season posting 36 tackles, 7.5 tackles for loss and two sacks in his final campaign in 2014. Watson, who was in the Chicago Bears camp logged 74 tackles, 32.5 tackles for loss and six sacks on his career, finishing ninth all-time on the Bulls career tackles for loss chart. "There is nothing more profoundly tragic and sad than when a member of our student-athlete family, current or past, passes away or is seriously injured," USF Director of Athletics Mark Harlan said. "Our thoughts and prayers are with the family of Elkino Watson and with Desmond Horne and his family as he makes his recovery.  We will work closely with Coach Taggart and his staff to provide our football team and all of our USF student-athletes with the support they need during this very difficult period."
Detectives continue to investigate. They haven't made any arrests yet. If you have any information about this stabbing, you can call Crime Stoppers, you may be eligible to a $3,000 reward.
Anyone with any information regarding this case and who wants to be eligible for a cash reward is asked to call Crime Stoppers at 1-800-873-TIPS (8477), report anonymously online at www.crimestopperstb.com or send a mobile tip using our TipSubmit Mobile application, which is a free download for iPhones, iPads, and Droids.