 1954 births Living people Alumni of the University of Bolton Blackpool F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players British association football commentators British expatriate sportspeople in the United States Coventry City F.C. players English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Ireland English expatriates in the United States English football managers English footballers Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football central defenders League of Ireland managers League of Ireland players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Limerick F.C. managers Limerick F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Notts County F.C. managers People from Dudley Premier League managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League managers The Football League players Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93) players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1970 births Living people Sportspeople from Watford English footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Crystal Palace F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English football managers Middlesbrough F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Alumni of Croydon College England national under-21 football team managers 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway UEFA Euro 2016 2015–16 in UEFA football 2015–16 in French football UEFA European Championship tournaments Scheduled association football competitions International association football competitions hosted by France Publications established in 1855 National newspapers published in the United Kingdom Telegraph Media Group 1855 establishments in the United Kingdom Newspapers published in London England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories European national association football teams Football in Slovakia Slovakia national football team National sports teams of Slovakia 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match Asian national association football teams China national football team National sports teams of China France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries Legal terms Property Ownership 1975 births Living people People from Bury English footballers English football managers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football fullbacks Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Salford City F.C. Daily Telegraph journalists British association football commentators English Football Hall of Fame inductees English expatriates in Spain La Liga managers Valencia CF managers Expatriate football managers in Spain British chief executives Year of birth missing (living people) Place of birth missing (living people) Living people BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom Blackpool F.C. Football clubs in England Sport in Blackpool Association football clubs established in 1887 The Football League clubs Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners 1887 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire Notts County F.C. Association football clubs established in 1862 Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Sport in Nottingham FA Cup winners Football clubs in Nottinghamshire 1862 establishments in England Bolton Wanderers F.C. 1877 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1877 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bolton Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Football League Trophy winners Premier League clubs Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League Parliamentary constituencies in North West England (historic) United Kingdom Parliamentary constituencies established in 1950 United Kingdom Parliamentary constituencies disestablished in 1955 History of Blackburn Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Terminology used in multiple sports Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs 1988 births Living people People from St Albans People from Bournemouth English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Spanish descent Association football midfielders Association football wingers Southampton F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Liverpool F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) 2016–17 in UEFA football Malta Archipelagoes of the Mediterranean Sea Countries in Europe Collective recipients of the George Cross Commonwealth republics English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies Island countries Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Mediterranean islands Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Phoenician colonies Republics Southern Europe States and territories established in 1974 Slovenia Central Europe Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Slavic countries and territories Southeastern Europe States and territories established in 1991 Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football friendly trophies Association football terminology A.F.C. Bournemouth Association football clubs established in 1899 Sport in Bournemouth Football League Trophy winners 1899 establishments in England Football clubs in Dorset Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs 1977 births Living people People from Amersham English footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders A.F.C. Bournemouth players Portsmouth F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players The Football League players English football managers A.F.C. Bournemouth managers Burnley F.C. managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Association football clubs established in 1905 Crystal Palace F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1905 establishments in England 1961 births Living people People from Wimbledon, London English footballers Association football midfielders The Football League players Whyteleafe F.C. players Corinthian-Casuals F.C. players Dulwich Hamlet F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Barnet F.C. players English football managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Reading F.C. managers West Ham United F.C. managers Charlton Athletic F.C. managers Southampton F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers UEFA Pro Licence holders British association football commentators Epsom & Ewell F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. managers Hull City A.F.C. Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in England Sport in Kingston upon Hull Football clubs in the East Riding of Yorkshire Premier League clubs The Football League clubs 1904 establishments in England Association football terminology Slavery Crimes against humanity Labor Slave trade Racism Abuse Social classes 1955 births 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players AS Nancy players AS Saint-Étienne players Association football midfielders Dual internationalists (football) English Football Hall of Fame inductees European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Italy FIFA 100 Footballers at the 1976 Summer Olympics France international footballers France national football team managers France under-21 international footballers French expatriate footballers French footballers French football managers French people of Italian descent French sports executives and administrators Juventus F.C. players Kuwait international footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Living people Officiers of the Légion d'honneur Officiers of the Ordre national du Mérite Olympic footballers of France Olympic cauldron lighters People from Meurthe-et-Moselle People of Piedmontese descent Presidents of UEFA Recipients of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin Serie A players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA Euro 1984 players UEFA Euro 1992 managers World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe FIFA Association football governing bodies International sports federations IOC-recognised international federations International sports bodies based in Switzerland Organisations based in Zürich Sports organisations established in 1904 2010 FIFA World Cup 2010 in association football 2009–10 in South African soccer FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by South Africa Sting (musician) 1951 births People from Wallsend People from Cramlington People educated at St. Cuthbert's School Alumni of Northumbria University Alumni of the University of Warwick Annie Award winners A&M Records artists Deutsche Grammophon artists Primetime Emmy Award winners English activists English agnostics English double-bassists Rock double-bassists Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees English male film actors English rock bass guitarists English rock singers English tenors English singer-songwriters English new wave musicians Chevaliers of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres English schoolteachers Grammy Award winners Brit Award winners Living people Indigenous rights activists Musicians from Newcastle upon Tyne The Police members Songwriters Hall of Fame inductees English lutenists Universal Music Group artists 20th-century English male actors 20th-century English singers Ivor Novello Award winners Yogis Transcendental Meditation practitioners 21st-century English singers English expatriates in Italy English expatriates in the United States