 S.S.C. Napoli Association football clubs established in 1926 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Campania Football clubs in Italy Italian football First Division clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Naples 1926 establishments in Italy 1977 births Living people Italian footballers F.C. Casertana players Ternana Calcio players U.S. Catanzaro 1929 players S.S.C. Napoli players Serie A players Serie B players 1976 births Living people People from Bovolone Italian footballers A.C. Chievo Verona players Hellas Verona F.C. players U.C. Sampdoria players A.C. Siena players S.S.C. Napoli players Serie A players Serie B players 1981 births Living people Sportspeople from Naples Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Serie A players Serie B players S.S.C. Napoli players Parma F.C. players Hellas Verona F.C. players U.S. Sassuolo Calcio players Association football central defenders Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy Operas by George Frideric Handel 1730 operas Operas Italian-language operas UEFA member associations Football governing bodies in Italy Sports governing bodies in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy Sports organisations established in 1898 The Football Association 1863 establishments in England Football governing bodies in England Futsal in England Sports organisations established in 1863 Sports governing bodies in England UEFA member associations Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology U.C. Sampdoria 1946 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1946 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Liguria Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Sport in Genoa Judgment (law) Crime prevention Law enforcement Legal professions National security Public safety Security Surveillance Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin Naples Colonies of Magna Graecia Capitals of former nations Cities and towns in Campania Cumaean colonies Mediterranean port cities and towns in Italy Populated places established in the 7th century BC World Heritage Sites in Italy Burial sites of the House of Dampierre