 Serie A Football leagues in Italy Top level football leagues in Europe Professional sports leagues in Italy 1898 establishments in Italy A.C. Siena Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Tuscany Association football clubs established in 1904 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs 1904 establishments in Italy Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin Siena Populated places established in the 1st millennium BC Roman sites of Tuscany World Heritage Sites in Italy 1964 births Living people People from Ascoli Piceno Italian footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1988 Summer Olympics Association football midfielders Italian football managers Serie A players Serie B players U.S. Città di Palermo players ACF Fiorentina players Ascoli Calcio 1898 players Hellas Verona F.C. players Ravenna Calcio players U.S. Alessandria Calcio 1912 players F.B.C. Unione Venezia players F.B.C. Unione Venezia managers A.C. Cesena managers Vicenza Calcio managers Piacenza Calcio 1919 managers A.C. Chievo Verona managers Brescia Calcio managers U.C. Sampdoria managers UEFA Pro Licence holders A.C. Siena managers Serie A managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers U.C. Sampdoria 1946 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1946 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Liguria Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Sport in Genoa 1958 births Living people People from Perugia Italian footballers Italian football managers A.C. Perugia Calcio managers Genoa C.F.C. managers Udinese Calcio managers U.S. Arezzo managers Brescia Calcio managers A.S. Livorno Calcio managers U.S. Città di Palermo managers U.S. Lecce managers A.C. Siena managers Delfino Pescara 1936 managers Serie A managers Sportspeople from Umbria Tuscany NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union Regions of Italy Wine regions of Italy ACF Fiorentina Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Tuscany Association football clubs established in 1926 Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Lega Pro Seconda Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners 1926 establishments in Italy 1971 births Living people People from the Province of Frosinone Italian footballers Italian football managers Serie A players Ternana Calcio players A.C. Perugia Calcio players Reggina Calcio players Ravenna Calcio players Empoli F.C. players U.S. Città di Palermo players Ravenna Calcio managers Calcio Catania managers Reggina Calcio managers U.C. Sampdoria managers Serie A managers Ligures 1967 births Living people Sportspeople from Naples Association football central defenders Italian footballers Italy international footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1988 Summer Olympics Juventus F.C. players S.S.C. Napoli players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players Italian football managers Juventus F.C. managers U.C. Sampdoria managers Serie A managers Florence Former capitals of Italy Former national capitals 50s BC establishments 59 BC Religious terminology Salvation Theology S.S.C. Napoli Association football clubs established in 1926 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Campania Football clubs in Italy Italian football First Division clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Naples 1926 establishments in Italy Football venues in Italy 1934 FIFA World Cup stadiums 1990 FIFA World Cup stadiums 1960 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues ACF Fiorentina Rugby union stadiums in Italy UEFA Euro 1968 stadiums Sports venues in Florence Populated coastal places in Italy Mediterranean port cities and towns in Italy Municipalities of the Province of Palermo Palermo Phoenician colonies in Sicily Populated places established in the 8th century BC Capitals of former nations