 Scottish Football League Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1890 establishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Recurring sporting events established in 1890 Sports leagues established in 1890 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Scottish Football Association Football governing bodies in Scotland UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1873 1873 establishments in Scotland Organisations based in Glasgow 1903 establishments in Scotland 2012 Summer Olympic venues 2014 Commonwealth Games venues American football venues in Scotland Athletics (track and field) venues in Scotland Sports venues completed in 1903 Buildings and structures in Glasgow Defunct speedway venues in Scotland Football venues in Scotland Music venues in Glasgow National stadiums Olympic football venues Queen's Park F.C. Rugby World Cup stadiums Rugby union in Glasgow Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Scotland national football team venues Scottish Football League venues Sports venues in Glasgow Scottish Professional Football League venues UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Football clubs in England Doncaster Rovers F.C. Sport in Doncaster Association football clubs established in 1879 Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1879 establishments in England Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners 1970 births Living people Alumni of the University of East Anglia British businesspeople Association football executives Norwich City F.C. non-playing staff People from Devon Scottish Premier League Scottish Professional Football League Dundee United F.C. Sport in Dundee Irish diaspora in Scotland Football clubs in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1909 Diaspora sports clubs United Soccer Association imported teams Scottish Premier League teams 1909 establishments in Scotland Scottish Football League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Dallas Tornado 1978 births Living people Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Association football forwards Dundee United F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Burnley F.C. players St Mirren F.C. players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Premier League players Sportspeople from Paisley Scottish Professional Football League players Doncaster Railway towns in England Towns in South Yorkshire Govan BBC Scotland Television channels and stations established in 1952 Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Bankruptcy Corporate law Insolvency Football League Third Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct third level football leagues in Europe Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe Southern Football League 1894 establishments in England Football leagues in England Sports leagues established in 1894 Acoustics Sound Sound measurements Physical quantities