 Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England Association football terminology Netherlands Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Kingdom of the Netherlands Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Western Europe Swedish footballers Footballers from Skåne County Association football forwards Malmö FF players AFC Ajax players Juventus F.C. players Inter Milan players FC Barcelona players A.C. Milan players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Allsvenskan players Eredivisie players Serie A players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Sweden international footballers Sweden youth international footballers Sweden under-21 international footballers 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Swedish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in the Netherlands Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Italy Swedish expatriate sportspeople in Spain Swedish expatriate sportspeople in France Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in France Swedish people of Croatian descent Swedish people of Bosniak descent Swedish people of Bosnia and Herzegovina descent Swedish Roman Catholics Sportspeople from Malmö Swedish taekwondo practitioners 1981 births Living people Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football friendly trophies Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1987 births Living people 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Argentina international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Argentine footballers Argentine people of Catalan descent Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine people of Spanish descent Argentine Roman Catholics Association football forwards European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Spain FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona C players FC Barcelona players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics La Liga players Naturalised citizens of Spain Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Olympic medalists in football Sportspeople from Rosario, Santa Fe Pichichi Trophy winners Segunda División B players Tercera División players UNICEF people Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers People of Marchesan descent FIFA Century Club Millionaires Saudi Arabia Arabian Peninsula Arabic-speaking countries and territories G20 nations Muslim-majority countries Islamic states Member states of OPEC Member states of the Arab League Member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Middle Eastern countries Saudi Arabia articles needing attention Western Asian countries States and territories established in 1932 Western Asia Member states of the United Nations Kingdoms Sweden national football team European national association football teams Football in Sweden National sports teams of Sweden 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders English autobiographers English footballers English expatriate footballers England international footballers English Roman Catholics England under-21 international footballers FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. players LA Galaxy players Members of the Order of the British Empire People from Whiston, Merseyside Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Designated Players (MLS) Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps Cricket terminology Bowling (cricket) Association football terminology Ice hockey terminology 1991 births Living people Footballers from Feltham People from Hounslow (London borough) Footballers from Hounslow (London borough) English people of Scottish descent English footballers Black English sportspeople England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Association football defenders The Football League players Premier League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Hounslow Borough F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology 1985 births Living people People from La Seyne-sur-Mer French people of Senegalese descent French footballers French expatriate footballers France international footballers Association football forwards AS Saint-Étienne players Troyes AC players Olympique Lyonnais players Swansea City A.F.C. players UEFA Euro 2008 players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players French expatriates in Wales Expatriate footballers in Wales France youth international footballers Italian footballers Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Association football forwards Serie A players Serie B players People from Savona Genoa C.F.C. players Calcio Padova players A.C. Milan players AS Monaco FC players A.S. Roma players Italian people of Egyptian descent 1992 births Living people 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Italian Muslims Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Monaco Italian expatriates in Monaco Luxembourg national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Luxembourg Football in Luxembourg 1948 establishments in Portugal Media in Lisbon Newspapers published in Portugal Publications established in 1948 Portuguese-language newspapers Sports media in Portugal Sports newspapers 1962 births Living people People from Amsterdam Footballers from Amsterdam Dutch people of Surinamese descent Dutch expatriate footballers Dutch footballers Netherlands international footballers AFC DWS players AFC Ajax players Sporting Clube de Portugal footballers Real Zaragoza players A.C. Milan players Serie A players La Liga players Eredivisie players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Spain UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players 1994 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA European Championship-winning players Association football central defenders Dutch football managers Netherlands national football team managers UEFA Euro 2000 managers Sparta Rotterdam managers FC Barcelona managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Eredivisie managers La Liga managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Süper Lig managers Expatriate football managers in Turkey Saudi Arabia national football team managers UEFA Champions League winning managers FIFA 100 Dutch expatriates in Italy Dutch expatriates in Turkey Argentina national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries National sports teams of Argentina South American national association football teams Football teams in Argentina 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification 2010 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup qualification Stockholm Capitals in Europe Coastal cities and towns in Sweden County seats in Sweden Metropolitan Stockholm Municipal seats of Stockholm County Populated places in Stockholm County Port cities and towns of the Baltic Sea Port cities in Sweden Stockholm urban area Swedish municipal seats Members of the Hanseatic League 1939 births Living people 1962 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.C. Milan players ACF Fiorentina managers A.S. Varese 1910 players Association football defenders Cagliari Calcio managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Inter Milan managers FC Bayern Munich managers Expatriate football managers in Austria FC Red Bull Salzburg managers Footballers at the 1960 Summer Olympics Bundesliga managers Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers Italy national football team managers Juventus F.C. managers Olympic footballers of Italy People from the Province of Milan Expatriate football managers in Portugal S.L. Benfica managers Primeira Liga managers Expatriate football managers in the Republic of Ireland Republic of Ireland national football team managers Serie A players Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 2004 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers VfB Stuttgart managers Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in Ireland UEFA Cup winning managers Italian Roman Catholics Sweden Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Nordic countries Northern Europe Scandinavia Year of establishment unknown Swedish-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories UEFA Euro 2012 Republic of Ireland at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Croatian football Paris Saint-Germain F.C. Association football clubs established in 1970 Football clubs in France G-14 clubs 16th arrondissement of Paris Ligue 1 clubs Football clubs in Paris 1970 establishments in France Unrelegated association football clubs Association football tactics and skills European retractable-roof stadiums Football venues in Sweden Bandy venues in Sweden Multi-purpose stadiums in Sweden Buildings and structures in Stockholm County UEFA Women's Euro 2013 venues Sports venues completed in 2012 Football venues in Stockholm Swedish Bandy Final venues 2007 establishments in England 2012 Summer Olympic venues American football venues in the United Kingdom Buildings and structures in Brent England national football team FA Cup Final venues Football venues in London Music venues completed in 2007 Music venues in London National stadiums National Football League venues Olympic football venues European retractable-roof stadiums Rugby league stadiums in London Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues completed in 2007 Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Retractable-roof stadiums UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Neo-futurism architecture 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Shrewsbury English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football goalkeepers Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Tranmere Rovers F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players National League (English football) players The Football League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Association football in South America Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology The Football League on television English football trophies and awards Football media in the United Kingdom Association football terminology Premier League on television 1990 births Living people People from Longsight Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players British people of Ghanaian descent Black British sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1981 births Living people People from Higher End English footballers People from Billinge, Merseyside British people of Somali descent England youth international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Everton F.C. players Carlisle United F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players British people of Turkish Cypriot descent People from Skelmersdale 1994 births Living people Sportspeople from Kingston, Jamaica People from Wembley England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English footballers Association football wingers Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople English people of Jamaican descent Jamaican emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People acquitted of assault 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Chester English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Welsh descent Expatriate footballers in Belgium Association football defenders Manchester United F.C. players Royal Antwerp F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Belgian Second Division players The Football League players Premier League players 1992 births Living people People from Harlow English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Finnish footballers Finland youth international footballers Finland under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Charlton Athletic F.C. players Welling United F.C. players Eastbourne Borough F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players English people of Finnish descent 1992 births Living people People from Abidjan British people of Ivorian descent Ivorian footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Crystal Palace F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 1947 births English footballers English football managers England national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Denmark Expatriate football managers in Norway Expatriate football managers in Sweden Expatriate football managers in Switzerland Expatriate football managers in the United Arab Emirates Crystal Palace F.C. players Tonbridge Angels F.C. players Ebbsfleet United F.C. players Maidstone United F.C. (1897) players Ashford Town F.C. (Kent) players Bristol City F.C. managers Carshalton Athletic F.C. players Carshalton Athletic F.C. managers Halmstads BK managers IK Oddevold managers Malmö FF managers Neuchâtel Xamax managers Örebro SK managers Switzerland national football team managers Inter Milan managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Grasshopper Club Zürich managers F.C. Copenhagen managers Udinese Calcio managers Viking FK managers Finland national football team managers Fulham F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Living people People educated at John Ruskin Grammar School People from Croydon Premier League managers Serie A managers The Football League managers United Arab Emirates national football team managers 1994 FIFA World Cup managers Knights First Class of the Order of the Lion of Finland UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers English expatriate football managers British expatriate sportspeople in Norway 2010 FIFA World Cup England at the 2010 FIFA World Cup United States at the 2010 FIFA World Cup 2009–10 in Slovenian football 2009–10 in Algerian football Amsterdam Capitals in Europe Cities in the Netherlands Municipalities of North Holland Olympic cycling venues Populated places established in the 13th century Populated places in North Holland Port cities and towns in the Netherlands Port cities and towns of the North Sea 1928 Summer Olympic venues 1983 births Living people Dutch footballers Dutch people of Indonesian descent Eredivisie players Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands international footballers AFC Ajax players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Indo people People from Alphen aan den Rijn Atlético Madrid footballers La Liga players Everton F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Premier League players Hertha BSC players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Germany Dutch expatriates in Spain Dutch expatriate footballers Association football defenders 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Dortmund German footballers Germany international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Association football forwards Association football midfielders Association football wingers Borussia Dortmund players Rot Weiss Ahlen players Borussia Mönchengladbach players UEFA Euro 2012 players Germany Central Europe Countries in Europe Federal republics G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations German-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1871 Western Europe Articles containing video clips 1989 births Living people People from Leidschendam Dutch footballers Association football defenders Eredivisie players Eerste Divisie players ADO Den Haag players SC Heerenveen players Feyenoord players Newcastle United F.C. players Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players Premier League players Dutch expatriate footballers Dutch expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Gelsenkirchen German footballers German Roman Catholics Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers Association football goalkeepers FC Schalke 04 players FC Schalke 04 II players FC Bayern Munich footballers Bundesliga players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in North Rhine-Westphalia FC Schalke 04 1904 establishments in Germany Multi-sport clubs in Germany 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Utrecht (city) Dutch people of Riffian descent Dutch people of Moroccan descent Dutch footballers Moroccan footballers Riffian people Eredivisie players La Liga players Bundesliga players Superleague Greece players Premier League players PSV Eindhoven players FC Barcelona players FC Schalke 04 players Olympiacos F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Netherlands international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players USV Elinkwijk players Dutch Muslims Dutch expatriate footballers Dutch expatriates in Spain Dutch expatriates in Germany Dutch expatriates in Greece Dutch expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Greece Expatriate footballers in England 1978 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players African Footballer of the Year winners Ivory Coast international footballers Ivorian Roman Catholics EA Guingamp players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in China Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate soccer players in Canada Association football forwards French people of Ivorian descent Ivorian expatriates in France Ivorian expatriates in England Ivorian expatriates in China Ivorian expatriate footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players Chinese Super League players Süper Lig players Major League Soccer players Designated Players (MLS) Living people Naturalized citizens of France Levallois SC players Le Mans FC players Olympique de Marseille players Chelsea F.C. players Shanghai Shenhua F.C. players Galatasaray S.K. footballers Montreal Impact players People from Abidjan First Division/Premier League top scorers 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players Ivorian expatriates in Turkey Ivorian footballers Austrian musical groups Linz Austrian state capitals Cities and towns in Upper Austria Populated places on the Danube Oil Campaign of World War II University towns in Austria 1984 births Living people Ivorian footballers Ivory Coast international footballers Ittihad FC players Hannover 96 players Rosenborg BK players ASEC Mimosas players Ivorian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Norway Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Saudi Arabia Tippeligaen players Ivorian expatriates in Germany Bundesliga players Ivorian expatriates in Norway 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players People from Abidjan 1990 births Living people People from Abidjan Ivorian footballers Ivorian expatriate footballers Ivory Coast international footballers Association football forwards Ivorian expatriates in Romania Ivorian expatriates in Russia Expatriate footballers in Romania Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Monaco ASEC Mimosas players Stade d'Abidjan players FC CFR Cluj players FC Kuban Krasnodar players FC Anzhi Makhachkala players AS Monaco FC players Everton F.C. players Liga I players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players Ligue 1 players Championnat de France Amateur players 2011 CAF U-23 Championship players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Africa Cup of Nations-winning players Ivorian Muslims UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations  Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1957 births Living people People from the Province of Brescia Italian footballers Italian football managers Atalanta B.C. players Juventus F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Lega Pro players Atalanta B.C. managers Hellas Verona F.C. managers Parma F.C. managers A.S. Roma managers ACF Fiorentina managers Serie A managers U.S. Cremonese players Italy national football team managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers 1985 births Living people People from Caravaggio, Lombardy Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Atalanta B.C. players ACF Fiorentina players A.C. Milan players Serie A players Serie B players Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Association football midfielders Italian people of German descent Italian atheists Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Nice French footballers French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England French people of Catalan descent France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers Association football goalkeepers OGC Nice players Olympique Lyonnais players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners 1968 births Living people People from Bayonne 1998 FIFA World Cup players Basque footballers Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur Chelsea F.C. players FC Girondins de Bordeaux players FC Nantes players FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club FIFA World Cup-winning captains FIFA World Cup-winning players French-Basque people Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Italy French expatriate footballers French football managers French footballers France international footballers AS Monaco FC managers Juventus F.C. managers Juventus F.C. players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Serie A players Olympique de Marseille managers Olympique de Marseille players Premier League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning captains Valencia CF players Ligue 1 managers France national football team managers French expatriates in Italy French expatriates in England French expatriates in Spain 2014 FIFA World Cup managers France Countries in Europe French-speaking countries and territories G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Western Europe 1984 births Living people French people of Spanish descent French footballers France international footballers FC Libourne-Saint-Seurin players Olympique Lyonnais players Olympique de Marseille players Ligue 1 players FC Dynamo Moscow players French expatriate footballers French expatriates in Russia Expatriate footballers in Russia Russian Football Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Association football midfielders People from Bruges, Gironde 1992 births Living people People from Pescara Italian footballers Italian expatriate footballers Delfino Pescara 1936 players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Serie B players Ligue 1 players Expatriate footballers in France Italian expatriates in France Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1981 births Living people People from Fiesole Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Olympic footballers of Italy Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2006 FIFA World Cup players Serie A players A.C. Chievo Verona players U.S. Città di Palermo players FIFA World Cup-winning players A.C. Pistoiese players Ascoli Calcio 1898 players VfL Wolfsburg players Juventus F.C. players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players Italian expatriate footballers Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in Germany Italian expatriate sportspeople in Germany Serie B players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries 1987 births Living people French footballers France international footballers French people of Breton descent France under-21 international footballers FC Sochaux-Montbéliard players AS Monaco FC players A.S. Roma players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players A.C. Milan players Ligue 1 players Serie A players French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy French expatriates in Italy France youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players People from Longjumeau 1981 births Sportspeople from Dakar Living people French people of Cape Verdean descent French people of Guinean descent French footballers French expatriate footballers France international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Association football fullbacks A.C. Monza Brianza 1912 players OGC Nice players AS Monaco FC players Manchester United F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Serie A players Serie B players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Naturalized citizens of France Running Man (TV series) contestants French expatriates in England French expatriates in Italy Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams 1990 births Living people People from Oldham English footballers Footballers from Oldham Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland international footballers Association football forwards Barnsley F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Rochdale A.F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Middlesbrough F.C. players Association football terminology Association football records and statistics 1964 births 1990 FIFA World Cup players Cowdenbeath F.C. managers Cowdenbeath F.C. players Dundee United F.C. managers Association football defenders Heart of Midlothian F.C. managers Heart of Midlothian F.C. players Leicester City F.C. managers Livingston F.C. non-playing staff Living people Sportspeople from Dunfermline Raith Rovers F.C. managers Scotland international footballers Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish footballers People educated at Inverkeithing High School Scotland national football team managers Scotland under-21 international footballers Lochore Welfare F.C. players Heart of Midlothian F.C. non-playing staff European national under-21 association football teams Scotland national football team National sports teams of Scotland Football venues in Luxembourg Athletics (track and field) venues in Luxembourg National stadiums Sports venues in Luxembourg (city) Sports venues completed in 1931 Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom Riyadh Capitals in Asia Populated places in Riyadh Province Provincial capitals of Saudi Arabia Burial sites of the House of Saud Living people 1986 births Saudi Arabian footballers Saudi Arabia international footballers Association football goalkeepers People from Riyadh Al Shabab FC (Riyadh) players 2007 AFC Asian Cup players 2011 AFC Asian Cup players 2015 AFC Asian Cup players 1986 births Living people People from Pergamino Argentine people of Spanish descent Argentine footballers Association football midfielders Argentine Primera División players River Plate footballers Club Atlético Vélez Sarsfield footballers Ligue 1 players AS Saint-Étienne players La Liga players Celta de Vigo players Atlético Madrid footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players Argentina international footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in France Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Spain 1969 births Living people People from Reconquista, Santa Fe Argentine footballers Argentine male actors Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine Roman Catholics Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriates in Qatar Association football forwards Newell's Old Boys footballers Boca Juniors footballers River Plate footballers Serie A players Serie B players ACF Fiorentina players A.S. Roma players Inter Milan players Expatriate footballers in Italy FIFA 100 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 1992 King Fahd Cup players 1995 King Fahd Cup players 1991 Copa América players 1993 Copa América players 1995 Copa América players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Argentina international footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentine Primera División players Al-Arabi SC (Qatar) players Qatar Stars League players Copa América-winning players People from Santa Fe Province Male actors of Italian descent UEFA Association football rankings FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain 1987 births Living people People from Misiones Province Argentine footballers Association football goalkeepers Racing Club de Avellaneda footballers AZ Alkmaar players U.C. Sampdoria players AS Monaco FC players Manchester United F.C. players Argentine Primera División players Eredivisie players Serie A players Serie B players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Argentina international footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Monaco Expatriate footballers in England Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the Netherlands Argentine expatriates in England 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Laws of association football Association football terminology