 Germany national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries National sports teams of Germany Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf 1981 births Living people People from Waterford (city) Sportspeople from County Waterford Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Royal Antwerp F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Belgian Pro League players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Belgium Irish expatriates in England Irish expatriates in Belgium UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe 1990 births Living people Association football midfielders People from Greifswald German footballers German expatriate footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players Bayer 04 Leverkusen players Real Madrid C.F. players Bundesliga players 3. Liga players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in Spain German expatriates in Spain 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1952 births 1982 FIFA World Cup players Alumni of Queen's University Belfast Association footballers from Northern Ireland Aston Villa F.C. managers Celtic F.C. managers Derry Gaelic footballers Expatriate football managers from Northern Ireland Football managers from Northern Ireland Gaelic footballers who switched code Grantham Town F.C. managers NIFL Premiership players Kilrea Gaelic footballers Leicester City F.C. managers Lisburn Distillery F.C. players Living people Manchester City F.C. players Northern Ireland international footballers Norwich City F.C. captains Norwich City F.C. managers Norwich City F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Notts County F.C. players Officers of the Order of the British Empire People educated at St Columb's College People educated at St Malachy's College Premier League managers Republic of Ireland national football team managers Scottish Premier League managers Shamrock Rovers F.C. guest players Sportspeople from County Londonderry Sunderland A.F.C. managers The Football League players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. managers 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Ireland Celtic nations Divided regions International islands Northern Europe Western Europe UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying 2014–15 in UEFA football 2015–16 in UEFA football UEFA European Championship qualifying UEFA Euro 2016 Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams 1992 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Derby County F.C. players The Football League players 1982 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Shelbourne F.C. players Livingston F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players League of Ireland players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Premier League players Belvedere F.C. players 1988 births Living people People from Bergisch Gladbach German footballers Association football defenders Bundesliga players FC Bayern Munich II players FC Bayern Munich footballers Borussia Dortmund players Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Predation Biological pest control Nigeria national football team African national association football teams National sports teams of Nigeria Oil Campaign of World War II Gelsenkirchen Cities in North Rhine-Westphalia 2006 FIFA World Cup FIFA World Cup finals France national football team matches Italy national football team matches Sport in Berlin Association football penalty shootouts France at the 2006 FIFA World Cup 21st century in Berlin Italy at the 2006 FIFA World Cup France–Italy relations Argentina Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1816 Georgia (country) Caucasus Eastern Europe Countries in Europe Western Asian countries Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Republics States and territories established in 1991 Gibraltar British Overseas Territories Capitals in Europe Headlands of Europe Peninsulas of Europe English-speaking countries and territories European Union Former British colonies Jewish Spanish history Umayyad Caliphate Southwestern Europe Western Europe Territorial disputes of Spain 1704 establishments in the British Empire France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries Association football positions 1988 births Association football defenders Blackpool F.C. players Everton F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Gaelic football backs Gaelic footballers who switched code Killybegs Gaelic footballers League of Ireland players Living people Premier League players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Sligo Rovers F.C. players Sportspeople from County Donegal The Football League players Lasers American inventions Articles containing video clips Directed-energy weapons Photonics Quantum optics Russian inventions Soviet inventions 1992 births Living people People from Pirmasens German footballers 1. FSV Mainz 05 II players Borussia Dortmund II players Borussia Dortmund players 3. Liga players Bundesliga players Germany under-21 international footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Exercise physiology Symptoms Mental processes 1986 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders St Patrick's Athletic F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Rotherham United F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Reading F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain Belgian dance music groups Belgian industrial music groups Electronic body music Musical groups established in 1986 Musical groups disestablished in 1991 1986 establishments in Belgium Wax Trax! Records artists 1979 births Living people People from Galway (city) Association football players from County Galway Association football goalkeepers Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Galway United F.C. (1937–2011) players Barry Town F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Derry City F.C. players Barnet F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Luton Town F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Millwall F.C. players League of Ireland players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Belvedere F.C. players Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods 1992 births Living people People from Memmingen German footballers German Christians Association football midfielders Footballers from Bavaria Bundesliga players Borussia Dortmund players FC Bayern Munich footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams Association football tactics and skills 1993 births Living people Sportspeople from Berlin German people of Sierra Leonean descent German footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Association football defenders VfB Stuttgart II players VfB Stuttgart players A.S. Roma players 3. Liga players Bundesliga players Germany international footballers Labour law Court of Justice of the European Union case law Association football terminology Sports law 1995 in case law Association football transfers 1993–94 in Belgian football 1994–95 in Belgian football 1993–94 in European football 1994–95 in European football Association football terminology Football positions 1960 births Living people People from Lörrach (district) Sportspeople from Baden-Württemberg Fenerbahçe football managers German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers German football managers Expatriate football managers in Austria Germany national football team managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers UEFA Euro 2008 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers SC Freiburg players VfB Stuttgart players Eintracht Frankfurt players Karlsruher SC players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Süper Lig managers VfB Stuttgart managers Karlsruher SC managers FK Austria Wien managers Bundesliga managers 2. Bundesliga managers Recipients of the Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Expatriate football managers in Turkey German expatriates in Turkey FC Tirol Innsbruck managers FIFA World Cup-winning managers FC Frauenfeld players Germany's Sports Hall of Fame inductees American people of German descent German American German diaspora by country European-American society 2011 singles Flo Rida songs Song recordings produced by Cirkut (record producer) Song recordings produced by Dr. Luke Songs written by Dr. Luke UK R&B Singles Chart number-one singles UK Singles Chart number-one singles Irish Singles Chart number-one singles Number-one singles in Germany Number-one singles in Austria Billboard Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs) number-one singles WrestleMania themes Songs written by Breyan Isaac Songs written by Arash Pournouri