 Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata Inter Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1908 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1908 establishments in Italy Unrelegated association football clubs 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Lomé Yoruba sportspeople 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players African Footballer of the Year winners Arsenal F.C. players AS Monaco FC players Association football forwards Crystal Palace F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Monaco Expatriate footballers in Spain FC Metz players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Manchester City F.C. players Premier League players Real Madrid C.F. players Togo international footballers Togolese expatriate footballers Togolese expatriates in France Togolese footballers Togolese Christians Togolese people of Nigerian descent Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1982 births Living people People from Bari Italian footballers Association football forwards Serie A players F.C. Bari 1908 players A.S. Roma players U.C. Sampdoria players A.C. Milan players Inter Milan players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Parma F.C. players Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe 1982 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Association football forwards Huracán de Tres Arroyos footballers Boca Juniors footballers Banfield footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players People from Bahía Blanca Argentine Primera División players Serie A players Genoa C.F.C. players Inter Milan players Expatriate footballers in Italy Argentine people of Spanish descent Argentine emigrants to Spain Naturalised citizens of Spain Argentine expatriates in Italy Bella Vista de Bahía Blanca footballers 1977 births French footballers Living people People from Asnières-sur-Seine 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players France international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate soccer players in Australia French expatriate footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Olympique de Marseille players Premier League players SM Caen players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Perth Glory FC players A-League players UEFA Euro 2004 players INF Clairefontaine players UEFA Euro 2008 players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players French people of Guadeloupean descent 2010 FIFA World Cup players France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers French expatriates in England French expatriates in Australia Sports terminology Tournament systems Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports Tournament systems Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 1980 births Living people Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina international footballers Association football midfielders Argentinos Juniors footballers Club Atlético Independiente footballers Olympiacos F.C. players Inter Milan players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C.F. players River Plate footballers Leicester City F.C. players La Liga players Serie A players Premier League players Sportspeople from Buenos Aires Superleague Greece players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2011 Copa América players Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Greece Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Argentine people of Ligurian descent UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Association football terminology Tournament systems English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports Association football terminology 1989 births Living people Footballers from Cardiff Welsh expatriate footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers Wales international footballers Association football defenders Association football wingers Association football utility players Southampton F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Premier League players The Football League players La Liga players BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year People educated at Whitchurch High School Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills 1988 births Living people Footballers from Sheffield English people of Irish descent English footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football defenders Sheffield United F.C. players Gretna F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Swansea City A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scottish Premier League players Black English sportspeople 1971 births 1993 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 1993 Copa América players 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1995 Copa América players 1996 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 1998 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 1999 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2000 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players American expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom American people of German descent American soccer players Association football goalkeepers Association football goalkeepers who have scored Aston Villa F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Brøndby IF players Columbus Crew SC players Footballers at the 1992 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Galatasaray S.K. footballers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Major League Soccer players Newcastle United F.C. players Olympic soccer players of the United States People from Lakewood, Ohio Premier League players Soccer players from Ohio Sportspeople from Cuyahoga County, Ohio Süper Lig players The Football League players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players UCLA Bruins men's soccer players United States men's international soccer players United States men's under-23 international soccer players Major League Soccer broadcasters 1982 births Living people People educated at St Bonaventure's Catholic Comprehensive School Association football forwards English Christians English Roman Catholics English footballers Black English sportspeople English expatriate footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers English people of Dominica descent English people of Saint Lucian descent Senrab F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Toronto FC players Sunderland A.F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Expatriate soccer players in Canada 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Footballers from Newham (London borough)  Living people 1988 births Argentine footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Association football midfielders Club Atlético Vélez Sarsfield footballers Inter Milan players Sunderland A.F.C. players U.C. Sampdoria players Argentine Primera División players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in England Argentina international footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom 2014 FIFA World Cup players Football League Fourth Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe The Football League on television English football trophies and awards Football media in the United Kingdom Association football terminology Premier League on television Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1996 births Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England French footballers France youth international footballers Fulham F.C. players Living people People from Pontoise Premier League players The Football League players Belgium national football team 1904 establishments in Belgium Articles containing video clips European national association football teams Football in Belgium National sports teams of Belgium Belgium at the Olympics Association football clubs established in 1899 Football clubs in France Football clubs in Lyon Olympique Lyonnais G-14 clubs Companies listed on the Euronext exchanges 1899 establishments in France Multi-sport clubs in France A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Ljubljana Slovenian footballers NK Domžale players Slovenian people of Bosniak descent Slovenian people of Bosnia and Herzegovina descent Slovenian expatriate footballers Slovenian expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Italy F.C. Treviso players S.S. Lazio players A.C. Rimini 1912 players Udinese Calcio players Inter Milan players Slovenian PrvaLiga players Serie A players Serie B players Association football goalkeepers Slovenia under-21 international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players Slovenia international footballers 2010–11 in European football UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying UEFA European Championship qualifying La Liga seasons 2012–13 in Spanish football leagues 1977 births Living people Sportspeople from Porto Portuguese football managers FC Porto managers Chelsea F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Russia Primeira Liga managers Premier League managers UEFA Cup winning managers Portuguese people of British descent Portuguese expatriate football managers FC Zenit Saint Petersburg managers Russian Football Premier League managers Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Russia European quarter of Brussels History of Brussels 1989 births Living people Icelandic footballers Icelandic expatriate footballers Association football midfielders Breiðablik UBK players Reading F.C. players Shrewsbury Town F.C. players Crewe Alexandra F.C. players TSG 1899 Hoffenheim players Swansea City A.F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Wales Iceland international footballers Iceland under-21 international footballers Sportspeople from Reykjavík Fimleikafélag Hafnarfjarðar players Icelandic expatriates in the United Kingdom 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from County Tipperary Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football forwards Cork City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Southampton F.C. players League of Ireland players Premier League players The Football League players Tipperary hurlers Gortnahoe-Glengoole hurlers UEFA Euro 2012 players Association football terminology Argentina Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1816 1987 births Living people Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium under-21 international footballers Belgium international footballers AFC Ajax players RKC Waalwijk players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Eredivisie players Premier League players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Belgium Belgian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in England Belgian expatriates in the Netherlands Flemish people Flemish sportspeople 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1973 births Living people Argentine footballers Association football utility players Argentina international footballers Argentine Roman Catholics Association football fullbacks Talleres de Remedios de Escalada footballers Banfield footballers Inter Milan players FIFA 100 Serie A players Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic silver medalists for Argentina Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2004 Copa América players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1995 King Fahd Cup players 1995 Copa América players 1999 Copa América players 2007 Copa América players 2011 Copa América players People from Buenos Aires Province FIFA Century Club Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Argentine Primera División players Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine people of Friulan descent Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Olympic medalists in football 1990 births Living people Footballers from Sheffield English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Sheffield United F.C. players Northampton Town F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black British sportspeople People educated at High Storrs School British people of Barbadian descent