 Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe S.L. Benfica 1904 establishments in Portugal Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in Portugal Taça de Portugal winners Primeira Liga clubs Sports clubs established in 1904 Multi-sport clubs in Portugal Sport in Lisbon Golf clubs and courses in Portugal Companies listed on the Euronext exchanges Publicly traded sports companies Unrelegated association football clubs Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1922 Football clubs in Russia FC Spartak Moscow 1922 establishments in Russia Football clubs in Moscow Spartak Moscow Barcelona 10s BC establishments in Spain Historic Jewish communities Mediterranean port cities and towns in Spain Municipalities in Barcelonès Phoenician colonies in Spain Populated places in Barcelonès Recipients of the Royal Gold Medal Roman sites in Spain University towns in Spain 1971 births Armagh Gaelic footballers Association football midfielders Association footballers from Northern Ireland Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Celtic F.C. players Clan na Gael CLG Gaelic footballers Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Football managers from Northern Ireland Gaelic footballers who switched code Glenavon F.C. players NIFL Premiership players Leicester City F.C. players Living people Manchester City F.C. players Northern Ireland B international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Nottingham Forest F.C. players People educated at St Michael's Grammar School, Lurgan People from Lurgan Premier League players Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League managers The Football League players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers The Football League managers Association football positions UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying 2010–11 in English football England at UEFA Euro 2012 2010–11 in Welsh football 2011–12 in Welsh football 2010–11 in Bulgarian football 2011–12 in Bulgarian football 2010–11 in Swiss football 2011–12 in Swiss football 2010–11 in Montenegrin football 2011–12 in Montenegrin football Celtic F.C. Visitor attractions in Glasgow Sports venues in Glasgow Football venues in Scotland 2014 Commonwealth Games venues Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Defunct speedway venues in Scotland Scottish Professional Football League venues Sports venues completed in 1892 1892 establishments in Scotland Scotland national football team venues English-speaking countries and territories History of Ireland Home rule in the United Kingdom Island countries Northern Ireland NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom NUTS 2 statistical regions of the United Kingdom States and territories established in 1921 United Kingdom 1948 establishments in Portugal Media in Lisbon Newspapers published in Portugal Publications established in 1948 Portuguese-language newspapers Sports media in Portugal Sports newspapers 1991 births Kenyan Luhya people A.F.C. Leopards players Association football midfielders Beerschot AC players Belgian Pro League players Celtic F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in Sweden Expatriate footballers in England Helsingborgs IF players Living people Kenya international footballers Kenyan expatriate footballers Kenyan expatriates in Belgium Kenyan expatriates in Sweden Kenyan expatriates in the United Kingdom Kenyan footballers Sportspeople from Nairobi Scottish Premier League players Premier League players 1993 births Airdrieonians F.C. players Association football forwards Celtic F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Belgium K. Lierse S.K. players Living people People from Coatbridge Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland youth international footballers Scottish expatriate footballers Scottish Football League players Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players Belgian Pro League players Standard Liège players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players 1987 births Living people 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Argentina international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Argentine footballers Argentine people of Catalan descent Argentine people of Italian descent Argentine people of Spanish descent Argentine Roman Catholics Association football forwards European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Spain FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona C players FC Barcelona players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics La Liga players Naturalised citizens of Spain Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Olympic medalists in football Sportspeople from Rosario, Santa Fe Pichichi Trophy winners Segunda División B players Tercera División players UNICEF people Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers People of Marchesan descent FIFA Century Club Millionaires Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 2010–11 UEFA Champions League 2010–11 in European football UEFA Champions League seasons 2010–11 in Spanish football 2010–11 in English football 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Leeds English footballers English people of Jamaican descent English people of Irish descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Everton F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 2003–04 in English football