 1988 births Living people Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers Club Atlético Independiente footballers People from Quilmes La Liga players Premier League players Atlético Madrid footballers Manchester City F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers Argentine expatriate footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Olympic medalists in football 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentine expatriates in England 1986 births Living people People from Wortley, Leeds Association football midfielders Association football wingers Association football utility players Footballers from Leeds English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1964 births Living people People from Iesi Italian Roman Catholics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Bologna F.C. 1909 players U.C. Sampdoria players S.S. Lazio players Leicester City F.C. players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers S.S. Lazio managers ACF Fiorentina managers Inter Milan managers Serie A managers Premier League players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Manchester City F.C. managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers 1987 births Living people Sportspeople from Marseille French Muslims French people of Algerian descent French footballers Association football midfielders Association football wingers France youth international footballers France under-21 international footballers France international footballers French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Olympique de Marseille players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players French expatriates in England Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues 1984 births Living people People from Buenos Aires Province Argentine footballers Argentina international footballers 2004 Copa América players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2007 Copa América players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players 2015 Copa América players Olympic footballers of Argentina Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Argentina Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina youth international footballers Argentine Primera División players Boca Juniors footballers Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Brazil Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Serie A players Sport Club Corinthians Paulista players Expatriate footballers in England Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers West Ham United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Juventus F.C. players Association football forwards Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Brazil Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom South American Footballer of the Year winners Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics Expatriate footballers in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriates in England 1986 births Living people People from Mogán, Las Palmas Spanish footballers Canarian footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players Valencia CF Mestalla footballers Valencia CF players SD Eibar footballers Celta de Vigo players Premier League players Manchester City F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Spanish people of Japanese descent Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Spanish expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Spanish expatriates in England 1985 births Living people Association football forwards England international footballers England youth international footballers English autobiographers English footballers English people of Irish descent English Roman Catholics Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players Footballers from Liverpool UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Association football goalkeepers La Liga players Segunda División B players Atlético Madrid B players Atlético Madrid footballers Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Association football terminology Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports 1986 births Living people People from Uccle Belgian people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgian expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Association football central defenders Association football utility players R.S.C. Anderlecht players Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Bundesliga players Premier League players Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Belgium Belgian expatriates in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players Derby County F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in England The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1884 Football clubs in Derbyshire FA Cup winners Football League Championship clubs Sport in Derby 1884 establishments in England Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861  Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham 2009 films American films English-language films 2000s comedy films American comedy films American sex comedy films American teen comedy films Cheerleading films Directorial debut films Teen comedy films 1990 births Living people People from Longsight Sportspeople from Manchester English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Association football utility players Manchester United F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players British people of Ghanaian descent Black British sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1992 births Living people Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers Footballers from Greater Manchester Manchester United F.C. players People from Chorley People from Clayton-le-Woods Sportspeople from Preston, Lancashire Premier League players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1978 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Association football central defenders Black English sportspeople Doping cases in association football English autobiographers English film producers English footballers England international footballers English people of Irish descent English people of Saint Lucian descent English sportspeople in doping cases English television personalities England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players People from Peckham Premier League players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Sportspeople from London The Football League players West Ham United F.C. players Laws of association football Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1968 births Living people English football referees People from Heswall FA Cup Final referees The Football League referees Premier League referees 1985 births Living people People from Stevenage English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Association football utility players Watford F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players English people of Jamaican descent Black English sportspeople UEFA Euro 2012 players 1973 births Living people Association football wingers BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Welsh people of Sierra Leonean descent English Football Hall of Fame inductees Manchester United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Officers of the Order of the British Empire Footballers from Cardiff Premier League players The Football League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Wales international footballers Wales youth international footballers Wales under-21 international footballers People educated at Moorside High School Welsh football managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers Salford City F.C. Living people 1981 births People from Hastings English footballers England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Everton F.C. players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2000 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams 1983 births Living people Footballers from Rotterdam Dutch footballers Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Association football forwards SBV Excelsior players Feyenoord players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Fenerbahçe footballers Eredivisie players Premier League players Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in England First Division/Premier League top scorers UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Dutch expatriates in England Dutch expatriates in Turkey Expatriate footballers in Turkey FIFA Century Club Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills Manchester United F.C. Argentina Countries in South America Federal constitutional republics Former Spanish colonies G15 nations G20 nations Liberal democracies Member states of Mercosur Member states of the Union of South American Nations Member states of the United Nations Spanish-speaking countries and territories States and territories established in 1816 1985 births Living people Sportspeople from Buenos Aires Argentine footballers Association football fullbacks Expatriate footballers in England San Lorenzo footballers RCD Espanyol footballers Manchester City F.C. players La Liga players Premier League players Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic gold medalists for Argentina 2011 Copa América players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Argentine Primera División players Naturalised citizens of Spain Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Argentine expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Olympic medalists in football Argentine people of Basque descent Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina international footballers Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Argentine expatriates in England