 Italy national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team 1922 establishments in Ireland Countries in Europe English-speaking countries and territories Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the United Nations Northern Europe NUTS 1 statistical regions of the European Union Republic of Ireland Republics States and territories established in 1922 Western Europe 1982 births Living people People from Bari Italian footballers Association football forwards Serie A players F.C. Bari 1908 players A.S. Roma players U.C. Sampdoria players A.C. Milan players Inter Milan players La Liga players Real Madrid C.F. players Italy youth international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Spain Italian expatriate sportspeople in Spain Parma F.C. players 1979 births Association football midfielders Brescia Calcio players Inter Milan players Footballers at the 2000 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Living people A.C. Milan players Juventus F.C. players New York City FC players Reggina Calcio players Olympic footballers of Italy Olympic bronze medalists for Italy Olympic medalists in football People from the Province of Brescia Serie A players Serie B players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Medalists at the 2004 Summer Olympics 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Century Club Officers of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Italian expatriates in the United States Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Association football equipment Balls Laws of association football Inflatable manufactured goods UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italian Roman Catholics Parma F.C. players Juventus F.C. players FIFA 100 Olympic footballers of Italy Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players Association football goalkeepers Serie A players Serie B players FIFA World Cup-winning players People from Carrara 1978 births Living people FIFA Century Club 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1939 births Living people 1962 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.C. Milan players ACF Fiorentina managers A.S. Varese 1910 players Association football defenders Cagliari Calcio managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Inter Milan managers FC Bayern Munich managers Expatriate football managers in Austria FC Red Bull Salzburg managers Footballers at the 1960 Summer Olympics Bundesliga managers Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers Italy national football team managers Juventus F.C. managers Olympic footballers of Italy People from the Province of Milan Expatriate football managers in Portugal S.L. Benfica managers Primeira Liga managers Expatriate football managers in the Republic of Ireland Republic of Ireland national football team managers Serie A players Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 2004 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers VfB Stuttgart managers Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in Ireland UEFA Cup winning managers Italian Roman Catholics 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Palermo Italian Buddhists Converts to Buddhism Italian footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers Association football forwards A.C. Lumezzane players Inter Milan players Manchester City F.C. players A.C. Milan players Liverpool F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian people of Ghanaian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Naturalised citizens of Italy UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy 1979 births Living people Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football wingers Irish expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in Australia Irish expatriates in Australia Melbourne City FC players Shamrock Rovers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players A-League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club Leicester Celtic A.F.C. players 1977 births Living people A.S. Varese 1910 players Empoli F.C. players Association football forwards Italian footballers Italy international footballers Sportspeople from Naples Serie A players Serie B players Udinese Calcio players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Scoring (sport) Association football equipment Association football terminology Bandy equipment American football terminology Australian rules football terminology Basketball terminology Gaelic football Hockey Hurling Laws of association football Bandy rules Rugby union terminology Rugby league terminology Sports equipment Terminology used in multiple sports 1980 births Living people Association football midfielders Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Walsall F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Milton Keynes Dons F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Watford F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Irish expatriates in England Stella Maris F.C. players 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA) 2012–13 in European football 2013–14 in European football Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams Croatia Balkans Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Croatian-speaking countries and territories Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Member states of NATO Republics Slavic countries and territories States and territories established in 1991 Southeastern Europe Central Europe UEFA Euro 2012 Republic of Ireland at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in Croatian football England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 2013 albums Basshunter albums 1976 births Living people People from Lifford Sportspeople from County Donegal Association football goalkeepers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland FIFA Century Club Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Celtic F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Swindon Town F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff 1980 births Living people 2002 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA Century Club Sportspeople from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2012 players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Inter Milan players Leeds United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players LA Galaxy players Aston Villa F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Serie A players Scottish Premier League players Major League Soccer players Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer MVPs Designated Players (MLS) Irish emigrants to the United States Crumlin United F.C. players 1979 births Living people People from South Dublin (county) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Home Farm F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1994 FIFA World Cup 1994 in association football FIFA World Cup tournaments International association football competitions hosted by the United States 1994 in American soccer Sports in Stanford, California 1984 births Living people Association football players from Dublin (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland youth international footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Bury F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2012 players Cherry Orchard F.C. players Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1984 births Living people People from Solihull English footballers English people of Irish descent Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football defenders Peterborough United F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Preston North End F.C. players Middlesbrough F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Ipswich Town F.C. players Orlando City SC players Colorado Rapids players The Football League players Major League Soccer players UEFA Euro 2012 players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Slang English-language idioms Laws of association football Association football terminology Misconduct Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills