 Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners 1986 births Association football forwards Kilmarnock F.C. players Living people People from East Ayrshire Rangers F.C. players Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish people of Welsh descent Scottish people of English descent Everton F.C. players Premier League players Norwich City F.C. players 1984 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Association football defenders Association football utility players Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Hibernian F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scottish Premier League players People educated at Lasswade High School Centre Norwich City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Lothian Thistle Hutchison Vale F.C. players Contract law Legal documents Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange 1983 establishments in the United States AT&T Bell System Companies based in Dallas, Texas Companies established in 1983 Internet service providers of the United States Multinational companies headquartered in the United States Tier 1 networks Telecommunications companies of the United States American brands Cactus League Companies that have filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy Sports clubs established in 1961 Texas Rangers (baseball) Professional baseball teams in Texas Sports in Arlington, Texas Major League Baseball teams 1961 establishments in Texas 1989 births Living people People from Hounslow Sportspeople from London English footballers England youth international footballers Nigerian footballers Nigeria international footballers Association football wingers Birmingham City F.C. players Aberdeen F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Premier League players English people of Nigerian descent Black English sportspeople Insolvency law of the United Kingdom Business law United Kingdom company law Employment Association football terminology Association football transfers 1992 births Living people Sportspeople from West Lothian Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Rangers F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players The Football League players Legal doctrines and principles Contract law Equitable defenses Intention Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Scottish Football Association Football governing bodies in Scotland UEFA member associations Sports organisations established in 1873 1873 establishments in Scotland Organisations based in Glasgow Scotland national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Scotland 1872 establishments in Scotland Living people People from Mexborough English footballers English businesspeople British venture capitalists English football chairmen and investors Scottish football chairmen and investors Doncaster Rovers F.C. players Alfreton Town F.C. players Barnsley F.C. players Frickley Athletic F.C. players Gainsborough Trinity F.C. players Goole A.F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. directors and chairmen Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Judicial remedies Contract law Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Credit Debt Agency law Business law Legal professions Negotiation Dispute resolution Marketing Personal selling Sales Consumer protection Consumer protection law State highways in Michigan M-28 (Michigan highway) Lake Superior Circle Tour Transportation in Gogebic County, Michigan Transportation in Ontonagon County, Michigan Transportation in Houghton County, Michigan Transportation in Baraga County, Michigan Transportation in Marquette County, Michigan Transportation in Alger County, Michigan Transportation in Schoolcraft County, Michigan Transportation in Luce County, Michigan Transportation in Chippewa County, Michigan Sports venues completed in 1899 Category B listed buildings in Glasgow Football venues in Scotland Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Govan Listed sports venues in Scotland Rangers F.C. Sports venues in Glasgow 1899 establishments in Scotland 2014 Commonwealth Games venues Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Scottish Professional Football League venues Scotland national football team venues Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Sports museums in Scotland 1962 births 1990 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Kilmarnock F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Rangers F.C. dispute articles Rangers F.C. managers Rangers F.C. non-playing staff Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish association football commentators Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Professional Football League managers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Bellshill St Johnstone F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players Scottish league football top scorers Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Nigeria national football team African national association football teams National sports teams of Nigeria Management occupations Management Business Administration Taxation Basic financial concepts Finance Public finance Accounting source documents Business terms Enterprise modelling Process management Business process Bankruptcy Corporate law Insolvency