 Association football clubs established in 1925 Olympiacos Olympiacos F.C. 1925 establishments in Greece Football clubs in Piraeus Unrelegated association football clubs Association football culture Distress signals Emergency communication Incendiary weapons Lighting Maritime safety Missile countermeasures Pyrotechnics Wildland fire suppression Athens Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Greece Archaeological sites in Attica Capitals in Europe City-states Greek prefectural capitals Greek regional capitals Populated coastal places in Greece Populated places established in the 5th century BC Populated places in Ancient Greece Populated places in Central Athens (regional unit) Requests for audio pronunciation (Greek) Roman sites in Greece Tourism in Greece Association football clubs established in 1908 Panathinaikos A.O. Panathinaikos F.C. Football clubs in Athens 1908 establishments in Greece Unrelegated association football clubs Derby County F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in England The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1884 Football clubs in Derbyshire FA Cup winners Football League Championship clubs Sport in Derby 1884 establishments in England Laws of association football Sports rules and regulations Sports venues by type Crowd control and riot control techniques Law enforcement units Icelandic footballers Living people 1989 births Sportspeople from Reykjavík Iceland international footballers Icelandic expatriate footballers Olympiacos F.C. players Breiðablik UBK players Helsingborgs IF players SC Heerenveen players Belgian Pro League players Eredivisie players La Liga players Real Sociedad footballers K.S.C. Lokeren Oost-Vlaanderen players FC Augsburg players Allsvenskan players Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in Belgium Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Spain Icelandic expatriates in the Netherlands Icelandic expatriates in Spain Association football forwards Icelandic expatriates in Germany Association football culture Australian rules football culture Baseball culture Basketball culture Cricket culture Gaelic games culture Rugby football culture Association football terminology Sports culture Reuters Companies established in 1851 Media companies based in London Multilingual news services News agencies based in the United Kingdom Financial news agencies 1851 establishments in the United Kingdom Webby Award winners Brazil national football team FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of Brazil South American national association football teams 1896 births 1980 deaths Athletes (track and field) at the 1920 Summer Olympics Footballers at the 1920 Summer Olympics Robert College alumni Greek decathletes Greek footballers Greek basketball players Greek Basket League players Greek volleyball players Olympic athletes of Greece Olympic footballers of Greece Fenerbahçe footballers Panathinaikos F.C. players People from Plovdiv Panathinaikos A.O. Panathinaikos F.C. presidents Panathinaikos F.C. managers Panathinaikos F.C. non-playing staff Panathinaikos Athletics Greek male athletes Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology Sports officiating Chemical safety Chemical weapons Lachrymatory agents Non-lethal weapons Articles containing video clips  1976 births Living people Italian footballers Association football defenders Bologna F.C. 1909 players Italian football managers Inter Milan managers Udinese Calcio managers Serie A managers Panathinaikos F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in Greece