 Rangers F.C. 1872 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1873 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Football clubs in Glasgow Football clubs in Scotland Govan Rangers F.C. dispute articles Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Cup winners Scottish Professional Football League teams Scottish League Cup winners Celtic F.C. 1888 establishments in Scotland Association football clubs established in 1888 Companies based in Glasgow Culture in Glasgow Diaspora sports clubs Football clubs in Scotland Publicly traded sports companies Irish diaspora in Scotland Scottish Cup winners Scottish Football League founder members Scottish Football League teams Scottish Premier League teams Scottish Professional Football League teams Football clubs in Glasgow Unrelegated association football clubs Scottish League Cup winners 1971 births Armagh Gaelic footballers Association football midfielders Association footballers from Northern Ireland Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. non-playing staff Celtic F.C. players Clan na Gael CLG Gaelic footballers Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Football managers from Northern Ireland Gaelic footballers who switched code Glenavon F.C. players NIFL Premiership players Leicester City F.C. players Living people Manchester City F.C. players Northern Ireland B international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Nottingham Forest F.C. players People educated at St Michael's Grammar School, Lurgan People from Lurgan Premier League players Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League managers The Football League players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers The Football League managers Scotland football derbies Celtic F.C. Rangers F.C. Politics of Glasgow Politics and sports Association football terminology Sectarianism Recurring sporting events established in 1888 Christianity in Glasgow Celts Historical ethnic groups of Europe N-Dubz songs 2010 singles Contemporary R&B songs Songs written by Tulisa (singer) Songs written by Richard Rawson Songs written by Dappy 2010 songs All Around the World Productions singles 1959 American television series debuts 1962 American television series endings 1950s American television series 1960s American television series 1950s American comedy television series 1960s American comedy television series American television sitcoms Black-and-white television programs CBS network shows English-language television programming Military comedy television series Television shows set in San Diego, California Television series by CBS Television Studios 1976 films 1970s crime drama films 1970s thriller films 1998 soundtracks American crime drama films American thriller films American films Psychological thriller films Arista Records soundtracks BAFTA winners (films) Bernard Herrmann albums Columbia Pictures films English-language films Film scores by Bernard Herrmann Film soundtracks Films about prostitution Films directed by Martin Scorsese Films produced by Julia Phillips Films produced by Michael Phillips (producer) Films set in New York City Films shot in New York City Neo-noir Palme d'Or winners Screenplays by Paul Schrader United States National Film Registry films Vigilante films Works about child prostitution Attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan Jamaica Countries in the Caribbean English-speaking countries and territories Former British colonies Former English colonies Former Spanish colonies G15 nations Greater Antilles Island countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Caribbean Community Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations Member states of the United Nations States and territories established in 1962 Small Island Developing States Pop art Avant-garde art Modern art Contemporary art Art movements Western art British art Leonardo da Vinci 1452 births 1519 deaths 15th-century scientists 16th-century scientists Age of Enlightenment Ambassadors of the Republic of Florence Ballistics experts Fabulists Giftedness History of anatomy Italian anatomists Italian civil engineers Italian inventors Italian military engineers Italian physiologists Italian Renaissance humanists Mathematical artists Members of the Guild of Saint Luke People from the Province of Florence People prosecuted under anti-homosexuality laws Physiognomists Renaissance architects Renaissance painters Renaissance scientists Tuscan painters 15th-century Italian sculptors Italian caricaturists Virgin Mary in art Christian art Eastern Orthodox icons Jesus in art Italian words and phrases  National symbols of the Republic of Ireland National flags Flags of the Republic of Ireland Pubs Bartending Types of drinking establishment Types of restaurants 1951 births 1974 FIFA World Cup players 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. players Cumbernauld United F.C. players English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players Scottish league football top scorers The Beatles 1960 establishments in England 1970 disestablishments in England Apple Corps Apple Records artists Atco Records artists Beat groups Best Original Music Score Academy Award winners Brit Award winners British Invasion artists British psychedelic rock music groups Capitol Records artists Counterculture of the 1960s English pop music groups English rock music groups George Harrison Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winners Grammy Award winners John Lennon Musical groups disestablished in 1970 Musical groups established in 1960 Musical quartets Parlophone artists Paul McCartney Pioneers of music genres Psychedelic pop music groups Ringo Starr Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees Swan Records artists United Artists Records artists Vee-Jay Records artists World Music Awards winners Scottish Premier League Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct football leagues in Scotland 1998 establishments in Scotland 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Football governing bodies in Scotland Sports leagues established in 1998 Ulster County Armagh Counties of Northern Ireland Lord-Lieutenants of Armagh Organisations based in Glasgow Defunct police forces of Scotland Argyll and Bute West Dunbartonshire East Dunbartonshire Glasgow Inverclyde Renfrewshire East Renfrewshire North Lanarkshire South Lanarkshire East Ayrshire North Ayrshire South Ayrshire 1975 establishments in Scotland Organizations established in 1975 2013 disestablishments in Scotland Government agencies disestablished in 2013  Sports venues completed in 1899 Category B listed buildings in Glasgow Football venues in Scotland Rugby union stadiums in Scotland Govan Listed sports venues in Scotland Rangers F.C. Sports venues in Glasgow 1899 establishments in Scotland 2014 Commonwealth Games venues Scottish Premier League venues Scottish Football League venues Scottish Professional Football League venues Scotland national football team venues Commonwealth Games rugby union venues Sports museums in Scotland Scottish National Party 1934 establishments in Scotland Constitution of the United Kingdom European Free Alliance Nationalist parties in the United Kingdom Organisations based in Edinburgh Political parties established in 1934 Political parties in Scotland Politics of Scotland Scottish independence Social democratic parties Social democratic parties in the United Kingdom Parties represented in the European Parliament Anti-austerity political parties in the United Kingdom 1954 births Alumni of the University of St Andrews First Ministers of Scotland Leaders of the Scottish National Party Living people Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom Members of the Scottish Parliament 1999–2003 Members of the Scottish Parliament 2007–11 Members of the Scottish Parliament 2011– People educated at Linlithgow Academy People from Linlithgow Royal Bank of Scotland people Scottish nationalists Scottish economists Scottish National Party MPs Scottish National Party MSPs Scottish Presbyterians UK MPs 1987–92 UK MPs 1992–97 UK MPs 1997–2001 UK MPs 2001–05 UK MPs 2005–10 UK MPs 2015–20 216 BC Barletta Battles involving the Roman Republic Battles of the Second Punic War 210s BC conflicts 2011 in the United Kingdom Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge House of Windsor British royal weddings Weddings at Westminster Abbey Prince William, Duke of Cambridge Parades in London British Empire Flags of the United Kingdom Flags of Northern Ireland National symbols of Canada National symbols of the United Kingdom Unionism in the United Kingdom 1801 introductions Jacks (flags) Charles, Prince of Wales 1948 births Alumni of Aberystwyth University Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge Architecture critics British Anglicans British businesspeople British children's writers British environmentalists British field marshals British garden writers British horticulturists British humanitarians British philanthropists British polo players British watercolourists British writers Cambridge Trusts Scholars Driehaus Architecture Prize winners Dukes of Cornwall Dukes of Rothesay Environmental writers Fellows of the Royal Society of Literature Graduates of the Royal Air Force College Cranwell Heirs to the British throne Helicopter pilots House of Windsor Living people Lords High Commissioner to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland Marshals of the Royal Air Force Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom Members of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada Great Masters of the Order of the Bath Modern painters Mountbatten-Windsor family Nautilus Book Award winners People associated with Swansea University People associated with the Royal Agricultural University People associated with the Royal National College for the Blind People associated with the University of Wales People educated at Cheam School People educated at Geelong Grammar School People educated at Gordonstoun People educated at Hill House School People from London People from Westminster Princes of the United Kingdom Princes of Wales Royal Navy admirals of the fleet Sustainability advocates Victoria Medal of Honour (Horticulture) recipients Vincent Scully Prize winners Welsh-speaking royals Writers from London Glasgow Council areas of Scotland Districts of Scotland Lieutenancy areas of Scotland Populated places established in the 6th century Port cities and towns in Scotland 1948 births Living people People from Lanark Scottish footballers Scottish Football League players Dundee United F.C. players Dundee United F.C. non-playing staff Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Football League managers Scottish football managers Rangers F.C. managers Rangers F.C. chairmen Premier League managers Everton F.C. managers Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Scotland national football team managers Officers of the Order of the British Empire Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Dumbarton F.C. players Ashfield F.C. players Sportspeople from South Lanarkshire Scottish expatriate footballers Dallas Tornado players United Soccer Association players Expatriate soccer players in the United States The Grass Roots albums Albums produced by Steve Barri Paul McCartney songs 1978 singles Wings (band) songs Songs written by Paul McCartney Capitol Records singles Parlophone singles Song recordings produced by Paul McCartney Music published by MPL Music Publishing 1978 songs Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Scottish football referees Scottish lawyers Sportspeople from Paisley 1972 births UEFA Champions League referees Living people  Association football terminology 1988 births Arsenal F.C. players Association football forwards Celtic F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Falkirk F.C. players Hibernian F.C. players Living people Premier League players Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland B international footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players Sheffield United F.C. players Shelbourne F.C. players Association football players from Dublin (city) Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League players Adoptees Irish expatriate association footballers Irish expatriates in England Irish expatriates in Scotland Cherry Orchard F.C. players 1985 births Living people People from Ballymena Association footballers from Northern Ireland Northern Ireland youth international footballers Northern Ireland under-21 international footballers Northern Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Aston Villa F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Premier League players Scottish Premier League players People educated at Ballymena Academy 1985 births 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards Celtic F.C. players Eredivisie players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Greece under-21 international footballers Greece international footballers Greek expatriate footballers Greek footballers Living people Manchester City F.C. players OFI Crete players Premier League players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Professional Football League players SC Heerenveen players People from Heraklion Sportspeople from Crete UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Al-Hilal FC players Expatriate footballers in Saudi Arabia Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Edinburgh Scottish footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scotland B international footballers Scotland international footballers Association football goalkeepers Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Hull City A.F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League players Süper Lig players Premier League players Scottish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Turkey Scottish expatriates in Turkey People educated at Forrester High School Copper Chemical elements Dietary minerals Electrical conductors Symbols of Utah Transition metals Biology and pharmacology of chemical elements Cubic minerals Supervillains Fictional concepts in superhero fiction Internal fipple flutes Whistles Blown percussion instruments English musical instruments Side-blown flutes Portuguese musical instruments Swiss musical instruments Military music Marching band instruments Blues Early musical instruments Football songs and chants Northern Irish songs Orange Order Rangers F.C. songs Year of song unknown