 1963 births Living people People from Setúbal Portuguese footballers Association football midfielders Primeira Liga players Rio Ave F.C. players C.F. Os Belenenses players Portuguese football managers Primeira Liga managers S.L. Benfica managers U.D. Leiria managers FC Porto managers Premier League managers Chelsea F.C. managers Serie A managers Inter Milan managers La Liga managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Golden Globes (Portugal) winners UEFA Cup winning managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Technical University of Lisbon alumni Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Spain Portuguese expatriate football managers Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Italy Portuguese expatriates in Spain Portuguese Roman Catholics Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England  Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Leicester City F.C. Football clubs in England Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Sport in Leicester Association football clubs established in 1884 Football League Cup winners Midland Football League (1889) Football League Championship clubs 1884 establishments in England Football clubs in Leicestershire UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons 1971 births Living people People from Bages Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players Serie A players Brescia Calcio players A.S. Roma players Qatar Stars League players Al Ahli SC (Doha) players Liga MX players Dorados de Sinaloa footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers Footballers at the 1992 Summer Olympics 1994 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players Olympic footballers of Spain Olympic gold medalists for Spain Olympic medalists in football Doping cases in association football Spanish sportspeople in doping cases Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Qatar Expatriate footballers in Mexico Spanish football managers Spanish expatriate football managers La Liga managers FC Barcelona B managers FC Barcelona managers Bundesliga managers FC Bayern Munich managers Expatriate football managers in Germany UEFA Champions League winning managers Catalonia international footballers Spanish expatriates in Qatar 1946 births Living people 1998 FIFA World Cup managers 2001 FIFA Confederations Cup managers 2002 FIFA World Cup managers 2006 FIFA World Cup managers Australia national soccer team managers Chelsea F.C. managers De Graafschap players Dutch expatriate footballers Dutch expatriate football managers Dutch expatriates in Australia Dutch expatriates in Russia Dutch expatriates in South Korea Dutch expatriates in Turkey Dutch expatriates in the United States Dutch footballers Dutch football managers Eredivisie managers Eredivisie players Eerste Divisie players Expatriate soccer players in the United States Expatriate soccer managers in Australia Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Russia Expatriate football managers in South Korea Expatriate football managers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Turkey Fenerbahçe football managers Association football midfielders La Liga managers NEC Nijmegen players Netherlands national football team managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players People from Oude IJsselstreek Premier League managers PSV Eindhoven managers PSV Eindhoven players Real Betis managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Russia national football team managers San Jose Earthquakes (1974–88) players South Korea national football team managers Süper Lig managers Turkey national football team managers Valencia CF managers UEFA Euro 1996 managers UEFA Euro 2008 managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Washington Diplomats (NASL) players FC Anzhi Makhachkala managers Honoured Coaches of Russia UEFA Cup winning managers 1954 births Living people Spanish footballers Elche CF footballers CD Eldense footballers Alicante CF footballers CD Alcoyano footballers Spanish football managers Elche CF Ilicitano managers CD Alcoyano managers Levante UD managers CD Logroñés managers FC Barcelona B managers Málaga CF managers Rayo Vallecano managers Real Betis managers RCD Espanyol managers Sevilla FC managers UE Lleida managers La Liga managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Premier League managers Real Madrid C.F. managers PFC CSKA Moscow managers Russian Football Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Russia FC Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk managers Ukrainian Premier League managers Linares CF players Spanish expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Ukraine 1966 births Living people Adoptees adopted by relations Chelsea F.C. chairmen and investors English football chairmen and investors Governors of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug Jewish Russian politicians Members of the State Duma (Russian Federation) People from Saratov Russian billionaires Russian businesspeople in the oil industry Russian capitalists Russian chief executives Russian emigrants to the United Kingdom Russian football chairmen and investors Russian investors Russian Jews Yukos British people of Russian-Jewish descent Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Paris Saint-Germain F.C. Association football clubs established in 1970 Football clubs in France G-14 clubs 16th arrondissement of Paris Ligue 1 clubs Football clubs in Paris 1970 establishments in France Unrelegated association football clubs Portugal Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Portuguese-speaking countries and territories Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe Western Europe Southwestern Europe Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology 1991 births Living people A.F.C. Tubize players Belgian expatriates in France Belgian expatriates in England Belgian footballers Belgium international footballers Belgian expatriate footballers Belgium youth international footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Chelsea F.C. players Ligue 1 players Lille OSC players People from La Louvière Premier League players Walloon sportspeople 2014 FIFA World Cup players Association football wingers FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners Current association football seasons La Liga seasons 2015–16 in European association football leagues 2015–16 in Spanish football leagues 2015–16 La Liga 1973 births Living people Sportspeople from County Antrim Association footballers from Northern Ireland Ballymena United F.C. players Reading F.C. players Reading F.C. non-playing staff Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff Expatriate football managers from Northern Ireland The Football League managers Watford F.C. managers Reading F.C. managers Premier League managers Swansea City A.F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. managers FA Community Shield National association football supercups Football competitions in England Recurring sporting events established in 1908 BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom 1964 British television programme debuts BBC Sport BBC Television programmes British sports television series The Football League on television Premier League on television Football media in the United Kingdom 1960s British television series 1970s British television series 1980s British television series 1990s British television series 2000s British television series 2010s British television series Political pundits Political occupations 1970 births Living people People from Gosforth Sportspeople from Newcastle upon Tyne Officers of the Order of the British Empire Deputy Lieutenants of Northumberland English footballers Association football forwards England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers Wallsend Boys Club players Southampton F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players First Division/Premier League top scorers FIFA 100 UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players English Football Hall of Fame inductees British association football commentators English football managers Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers People educated at Gosforth Academy Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Sunderland A.F.C. 1879 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1879 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Tyne and Wear Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs United Soccer Association imported teams 1954 births Living people Alumni of the University of Bolton Blackpool F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. players British association football commentators British expatriate sportspeople in the United States Coventry City F.C. players English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Ireland English expatriates in the United States English football managers English footballers Expatriate association footballers in the Republic of Ireland Expatriate soccer players in the United States Association football central defenders League of Ireland managers League of Ireland players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Limerick F.C. managers Limerick F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. managers North American Soccer League (1968–84) players Notts County F.C. managers People from Dudley Premier League managers Preston North End F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. non-playing staff Sunderland A.F.C. players The Football League managers The Football League players Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93) players UEFA Pro Licence holders West Bromwich Albion F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. non-playing staff West Ham United F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Arsenal F.C. non-playing staff Arsenal F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players British association football commentators England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers English footballers English people of Irish descent Everton F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Sportspeople from Oxford Premier League players Reading F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA Euro 2000 players Wembley F.C. players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 1966 births Living people Supporters' trusts Association football culture Australian rules football culture Baseball culture Basketball culture Cricket culture Gaelic games culture Rugby football culture Sports culture 1997 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1997 24-hour television news channels in the United Kingdom BBC television channels in the United Kingdom BBC News channels Television stations in Ireland 24-hour television news channels in India 1987 births Living people English footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Stocksbridge Park Steels F.C. players F.C. Halifax Town players Fleetwood Town F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Northern Premier League players Footballers from Sheffield England international footballers English people convicted of assault 1991 births Living people Algerian footballers Algeria international footballers French footballers French people of Algerian descent French people of Moroccan descent Le Havre AC players Ligue 2 players Association football wingers People from Sarcelles Quimper Kerfeunteun F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players The Football League players Algerian expatriate footballers Algerian expatriates in the United Kingdom French expatriate footballers French expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players Algerian people of Moroccan descent Premier League players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players 1959 births Sportspeople from Southampton Living people English footballers Chelsea F.C. players Dorchester Town F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Slough Town F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Stevenage F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Weymouth F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players The Football League players Scottish Football League players National League (English football) players England international footballers England B international footballers English football managers Clyde F.C. managers Yeovil Town F.C. managers Pakistan national football team managers Expatriate football managers in Pakistan Nepal national football team managers Scottish Football League managers English expatriates in Pakistan Geography of Greenwich Time zones Time in the United Kingdom Europe Continents Association football terminology Sports terminology 2010–11 in European football UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying UEFA European Championship qualifying Tournament systems Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Rugby union leagues in France French rugby union championship National rugby union premier leagues Professional sports leagues Swansea Cities in Wales Counties of Wales Glamorgan Populated coastal places in Wales Populated places established in the 12th century Port cities and towns in Wales Principal areas of Wales Seaside resorts in Wales Swansea Bay 1973 births 21st-century physicians Alumni of Queen Mary University of London Alumni of the University of Nottingham Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff Galician people Gibraltarian emigrants to the United Kingdom Gibraltarian medical doctors Gibraltarian people of English descent Gibraltarian people of Spanish descent Living people People from Gibraltar Team physicians West Ham United F.C. non-playing staff Women physicians 21st-century British medical doctors Southampton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in South East England Local government districts of South East England Local government in Hampshire Populated coastal places in Hampshire Port cities and towns in England Ports and harbours of Hampshire Ports and harbours of the English Channel Staple ports Towns in Hampshire Unitary authority districts of England Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England 1970 births Living people English football referees Sportspeople from Sunderland, Tyne and Wear People from Horsforth Sportspeople from Leeds FA Cup Final referees 1948 establishments in Portugal Media in Lisbon Newspapers published in Portugal Publications established in 1948 Portuguese-language newspapers Sports media in Portugal Sports newspapers UEFA Association football governing bodies in Europe Sports governing bodies in Europe Supraorganizations Sports organisations established in 1954 International sports bodies based in Switzerland FIFA confederations 1954 establishments in Europe FC Porto Football clubs in Porto Football clubs in Portugal Companies listed on the Euronext exchanges Publicly traded sports companies Association football clubs established in 1893 Sports clubs established in 1893 Multi-sport clubs in Portugal G-14 clubs 1893 establishments in Portugal Unrelegated association football clubs Taça de Portugal winners Primeira Liga clubs Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata Inter Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1908 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1908 establishments in Italy Unrelegated association football clubs Perth Glory FC A-League teams Association football clubs established in 1995 National Soccer League (Australia) teams Soccer clubs in Perth, Western Australia 1995 establishments in Australia Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain La Liga Football leagues in Spain Top level football leagues in Europe 1928 establishments in Spain Sports leagues established in 1928 Atlético de Kolkata owners England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 1961 births Living people Sportspeople from York Footballers from North Yorkshire English footballers Hull City A.F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Lincoln City F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players The Football League players English football managers Middlesbrough F.C. managers England national football team managers FC Twente managers VfL Wolfsburg managers Nottingham Forest F.C. managers Derby County F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers Eredivisie managers Bundesliga managers The Football League managers Derby County F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Queens Park Rangers F.C. non-playing staff UEFA Pro Licence holders British expatriates in the Netherlands Expatriate football managers in Germany Expatriate football managers in the Netherlands English expatriates in Germany Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester 1988 births Living people People from Sergipe Brazilian emigrants to Spain Naturalised citizens of Spain Brazilian footballers Spanish footballers Association football forwards Primeira Liga players Segunda Liga players S.C. Braga players F.C. Penafiel players La Liga players Segunda División players Atlético Madrid footballers Celta de Vigo players Albacete Balompié players Real Valladolid footballers Rayo Vallecano footballers Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Brazil international footballers Spain international footballers Dual internationalists (football) 2014 FIFA World Cup players Brazilian expatriate footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in England Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in Spain Spanish expatriates in England 1988 births Living people People from São Paulo (state) Brazilian people of African descent Brazilian Christians Brazilian footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazil youth international footballers Brazil under-20 international footballers Brazil international footballers Expatriate footballers in Ukraine Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in England Association football midfielders Sport Club Corinthians Paulista players FC Shakhtar Donetsk players FC Anzhi Makhachkala players Chelsea F.C. players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Ukrainian Premier League players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Copa América players Brazilian expatriates in Ukraine Brazilian expatriates in Russia Brazilian expatriates in England 1991 births Brazil international footballers Brazil under-20 international footballers Brazil youth international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian footballers Brazilian Roman Catholics Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Chelsea F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic medalists in football Olympic silver medalists for Brazil People from Americana, São Paulo Premier League players São Paulo FC players Sport Club Internacional players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1987 births Living people People from Maresme Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football midfielders Premier League players La Liga players Arsenal F.C. players FC Barcelona players Chelsea F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Catalonia international footballers FIFA Century Club Spain national football team European national association football teams National sports teams of Spain UEFA European Championship-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Turkey national football team European national association football teams Football in Turkey National sports teams of Turkey Recipients of the State Medal of Distinguished Service Netherlands Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Kingdom of the Netherlands Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Western Europe Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Sevilla FC La Liga clubs Football clubs in Andalusia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners Association football clubs established in 1905 1905 establishments in Spain FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain Top level football leagues in Europe Bundesliga Professional sports leagues 1963 establishments in West Germany Sports leagues established in 1963 Association football leagues in Germany Atlético Madrid La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners Multi-sport clubs in Spain Association football clubs established in 1903 1903 establishments in Spain Dalian Wanda Group Atlético de Kolkata owners Argentine footballers Argentine people of Italian descent Argentina youth international footballers Argentina under-20 international footballers Argentina international footballers FIFA Century Club Association football midfielders Atlético Madrid footballers Inter Milan players A.C. Pisa 1909 players Racing Club de Avellaneda footballers S.S. Lazio players Sevilla FC players Club Atlético Vélez Sarsfield footballers La Liga players Serie A players Olympic footballers of Argentina Olympic silver medalists for Argentina Footballers at the 1996 Summer Olympics 1991 Copa América players 1992 King Fahd Cup players 1993 Copa América players 1994 FIFA World Cup players 1995 Copa América players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 1999 Copa América players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Copa América-winning players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Argentine football managers Racing Club de Avellaneda managers River Plate managers Estudiantes de La Plata managers Calcio Catania managers Serie A managers Atlético Madrid managers La Liga managers People from Buenos Aires 1970 births Living people Argentine expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Argentine Primera División players Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Italy Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain Expatriate football managers in Italy Olympic medalists in football Primeira Liga managers UEFA Cup winning managers 1959 births 1986 FIFA World Cup players 1990 FIFA World Cup players A.S. Roma players A.C. Milan players A.C. Milan managers A.C. Reggiana 1919 managers Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in France Expatriate football managers in Spain Juventus F.C. managers Living people Italian expatriate football managers Italian expatriates in England Italian expatriates in France Italian expatriates in Spain Italian footballers Italian football managers Italy international footballers La Liga managers Ligue 1 managers People from the Province of Reggio Emilia Paris Saint-Germain F.C. managers Parma F.C. managers Parma F.C. players Premier League managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Recipients of the Order of the Star of Italian Solidarity Serie A managers Serie A players UEFA Champions League winning managers UEFA Euro 1988 players 1946 births Living people Italian footballers Italy international footballers SPAL 1907 players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players A.S. Roma players A.C. Milan players 1974 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.S. Roma managers Juventus F.C. managers La Liga managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers England national football team managers Russia national football team managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Spain People from San Canzian d'Isonzo People from the Province of Gorizia Italian Roman Catholics Italian expatriate football managers