 1964 births Living people People from Iesi Italian Roman Catholics Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italy under-21 international footballers Bologna F.C. 1909 players U.C. Sampdoria players S.S. Lazio players Leicester City F.C. players Serie A players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers S.S. Lazio managers ACF Fiorentina managers Inter Milan managers Serie A managers Premier League players Italian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Manchester City F.C. managers Italian expatriate football managers Galatasaray S.K. (football) managers Italian expatriate sportspeople in Turkey Expatriate football managers in Turkey Süper Lig managers Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Defunct Football League divisions Football League First Division Defunct top level football leagues in Europe Defunct second level football leagues in Europe Sports coaches Education and training occupations Sports occupations and roles UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe FA Cup Finals FA Cup Sports terminology Association football terminology Association football records and statistics Caps Málaga CF La Liga clubs Football clubs in Andalusia Football clubs in Spain Association football clubs established in 1904 1904 establishments in Spain 1953 births Living people Association football defenders Chilean people of Italian descent Chilean Roman Catholics Chile international footballers Chilean football managers Universidad de Chile managers O'Higgins F.C. managers Club Deportivo Universidad Católica managers Expatriate football managers in Argentina Expatriate football managers in Ecuador Expatriate football managers in Spain La Liga managers LDU Quito managers Málaga CF managers Manchester City F.C. managers Pontifical Catholic University of Chile alumni Premier League managers Real Madrid C.F. managers River Plate managers San Lorenzo managers Sportspeople from Santiago Universidad de Chile footballers Villarreal CF managers Club Deportivo Palestino managers Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs Government occupations Management occupations Titles Local government in the United States Heads of local government 2015–16 UEFA Champions League 2015–16 in UEFA football UEFA Champions League seasons Current association football seasons 1949 births Living people People from Collyhurst English footballers England international footballers England under-23 international footballers Manchester United F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Everton F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players The Football League players North American Soccer League (1968–84) players North American Soccer League (1968–84) indoor players Atlanta Chiefs players Fort Lauderdale Strikers (1977–83) players Minnesota Strikers players English football managers Barrow A.F.C. managers Preston North End F.C. managers Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Leeds United F.C. non-playing staff Sheffield United F.C. non-playing staff Manchester City F.C. non-playing staff Premier League managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Portsmouth F.C. non-playing staff Association football forwards The Football League representative players 2010 racehorse births Racehorses bred in Kentucky Racehorses trained in the United States Thoroughbred family 22-c Eclipse Award winners Club América Association football clubs established in 1916 Football clubs in Mexico City Liga MX teams 1916 establishments in Mexico Primera Fuerza Unrelegated association football clubs South American national association football teams Chile national football team Football in Chile National sports teams of Chile La Liga seasons 2004–05 in Spanish football leagues 2004–05 in European association football leagues Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Sevilla FC La Liga clubs Football clubs in Andalusia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners Association football clubs established in 1905 1905 establishments in Spain Holism Philosophical theories Natural philosophy Philosophy of science Political philosophy Social theories Communalism New Thought terminology Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Emirati chief executives Tufts University alumni English football chairmen and investors Manchester City F.C. directors and chairmen Living people Emirati Muslims Emirati urban planners Year of birth uncertain 1963 births Living people People from Ruabon Welsh footballers Welsh expatriate footballers Association football forwards Wales international footballers Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Germany Welsh expatriates in Germany FC Bayern Munich footballers Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Southampton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Welsh football managers Wales national football team managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Fulham F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Stoke City F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Bundesliga players English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Ysgol Rhiwabon Officers of the Order of the British Empire La Liga players Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 2009–10 UEFA Champions League UEFA Champions League group stages 2007–08 in Welsh football 2008 in London FA Cup Finals 2007–08 FA Cup Portsmouth F.C. matches Cardiff City F.C. matches Events at Wembley Stadium 1985 births Living people People from Camberwell Sportspeople from London English footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Crystal Palace F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Watford F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Association football terminology 1923 establishments in England 1948 Summer Olympic venues 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums 2000 disestablishments in England American Bowl venues Athletics venues in London Buildings and structures demolished in 2003 Defunct athletics (track and field) venues in England Defunct football venues in England Defunct rugby league venues in England Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct speedway venues in England Demolished buildings and structures in London Destroyed landmarks in the United Kingdom England national football team Equestrian sports in England Event venues established in 1923 FA Cup Final venues Field hockey in England Football venues in London Former buildings and structures in Brent Former music venues in the United Kingdom Greyhound racing venues in the United Kingdom Music venues in London National stadiums Olympic athletics venues Olympic equestrian venues Olympic field hockey venues Olympic football venues Olympic stadiums Rugby League World Cup stadiums UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Defunct sports venues in London Sports venues completed in 1923 Sports venues demolished in 2003 Stadiums that have hosted a FIFA World Cup final match UEFA Association football rankings Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Liverpool F.C. Manchester United F.C. England football derbies 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata Inter Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1908 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1908 establishments in Italy Unrelegated association football clubs 2011–12 UEFA Champions League UEFA Champions League group stages 2013–14 Premier League Premier League seasons 2013–14 in European association football leagues 2013–14 in English football leagues FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners S.S.C. Napoli Association football clubs established in 1926 Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Campania Football clubs in Italy Italian football First Division clubs Lega Pro Prima Divisione clubs Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Naples 1926 establishments in Italy Tournament systems Borussia Dortmund 1909 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1909 Dortmund Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in North Rhine-Westphalia G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Germany Publicly traded sports companies AFC Ajax 1900 establishments in the Netherlands Association football clubs established in 1900 Football clubs in Amsterdam Football clubs in the Netherlands G-14 clubs Association football terminology England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories Tournament systems Physiognomy Phrenology History of neuroscience Criminology Pseudoscience Football venues in England Sports venues in Reading, Berkshire Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Reading F.C. London Irish Sports venues completed in 1998 Football League venues Norwich Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in the East of England County towns in England Local government districts of the East of England Non-metropolitan districts of Norfolk Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham St. Louis, Missouri 1764 establishments in New Spain 1764 in New France Cities in Greater St. Louis Cities in Missouri Communities on U.S. Route 66 Former colonial and territorial capitals in the United States French colonial settlements of Upper Louisiana Independent cities in the United States Missouri populated places on the Mississippi River Populated places established in 1764 Regions of Greater St. Louis