 Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Aston Villa F.C. 1874 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1874 FA Cup winners Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club 1988 births Living people People from the Province of Burgos Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Castilian-Leonese footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Real Madrid C.F. players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Valencia CF players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 1978 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers FIFA Century Club Manchester City F.C. players People educated at Brentwood School (Essex) People from Romford Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players West Ham United F.C. players Conservative Party (UK) people Members of the Order of the British Empire New York City FC players English expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players 1987 births Living people Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Joinville Esporte Clube players Cruzeiro Esporte Clube players S.L. Benfica footballers Chelsea F.C. players Jiangsu Suning F.C. players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Primeira Liga players Premier League players Chinese Super League players Brazilian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in China Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in China Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Ancient Egyptian Jews Angelic visionaries Moses 15th-century BC biblical rulers Biblical murderers Book of Exodus Adoptees Ancient Egyptian princes Christian saints from the Old Testament Prophets of Islam People in the canonical gospels People in the General Epistles Torah people Wonderworkers Founders of religions 1991 births Brazil international footballers Brazil under-20 international footballers Brazil youth international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian footballers Brazilian Roman Catholics Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Chelsea F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Living people Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic medalists in football Olympic silver medalists for Brazil People from Americana, São Paulo Premier League players São Paulo FC players Sport Club Internacional players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players Association football terminology 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Kinshasa Belgian footballers Belgian Christians Belgium youth international footballers Belgium under-21 international footballers Belgium international footballers Association football forwards K.R.C. Genk players Standard Liège players KV Mechelen players K.V. Kortrijk players Aston Villa F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Belgian Pro League players Premier League players Democratic Republic of the Congo emigrants to Belgium Belgian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Belgian expatriates in England 1984 births Living people People from Sremska Mitrovica Association football defenders Association football utility players Serbian footballers Serbia and Montenegro international footballers Serbia international footballers Serbian expatriate footballers Serbian expatriates in Russia Serbian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in England FK Srem players OFK Beograd players FC Lokomotiv Moscow players Chelsea F.C. players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Serbia under-21 international footballers 1969 births Living people Sportspeople from Renfrewshire Expatriate footballers in Germany Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers Scotland B international footballers St Mirren F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Borussia Dortmund players Celtic F.C. players Livingston F.C. players 1998 FIFA World Cup players Scottish Football League players Bundesliga players Scottish Premier League players Scottish expatriate footballers Scottish football managers Livingston F.C. managers Wycombe Wanderers F.C. managers Colchester United F.C. managers Norwich City F.C. managers Aston Villa F.C. managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers The Football League managers Premier League managers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Premier League managers People educated at Linwood High School Scottish Football League representative players Scotland under-21 international footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow 1960 births Living people Sportspeople from Madrid UEFA Cup winning managers Spanish football managers Spanish footballers Madrilenian footballers Real Madrid Castilla footballers Real Madrid C footballers Real Madrid Castilla managers Liverpool F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Valencia CF managers CA Osasuna managers CF Extremadura managers CD Tenerife managers Real Valladolid managers La Liga managers Segunda División managers Premier League managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy UEFA Pro Licence holders Polytechnic University of Madrid alumni Linares CF players S.S.C. Napoli managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Spanish expatriate football managers Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy 1985 births Living people People from Dronfield Sportspeople from Derbyshire English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Aston Villa F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players English people of Irish descent 1207 establishments Liverpool Cities in North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated coastal places in Merseyside Populated places established in the 13th century Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Port cities and towns in England Towns in Merseyside Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Local government districts of North West England NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham 1989 births Living people Sportspeople from Pamplona Spanish footballers Basque footballers Navarrese footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División B players CA Osasuna players Ligue 1 players Olympique de Marseille players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Spain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in France Chelsea, London Districts of Kensington and Chelsea Districts of London on the River Thames English football referees Sportspeople from Stoke-on-Trent 1963 births Living people FA Cup Final referees The Football League referees Premier League referees Liverpool F.C. Sports venues in Liverpool Football venues in England Premier League venues Football League venues UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Visitor attractions in Liverpool Everton F.C. Sports venues completed in 1884 1989 births Living people People from Melbourne People from Perth, Western Australia Australian people of Scottish descent Australian soccer players Australia under-20 international soccer players Australia international soccer players Association football utility players Australian expatriate soccer players Expatriate footballers in England Aston Villa F.C. players Port Vale F.C. players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Lincoln City F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Chesterfield F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2015 AFC Asian Cup players AFC Asian Cup-winning players 1989 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics 2014 FIFA World Cup players English Christians Black British sportspeople Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands Living people Australian drug traffickers Deaths by heroin overdose in Australia Australian rugby league players Newtown Jets players Australian people imprisoned abroad Prisoners and detainees of Thailand 1954 births 1992 deaths Laws of association football Association football terminology Villages in Greater Manchester Geography of Wigan Borough 1980 births Living people People from Stepney English footballers Association football fullbacks 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players A.S. Roma players LA Galaxy players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriates in Italy Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English people of Barbadian descent Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Everton F.C. FA Cup winners The Football League founder members Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs West Bromwich Albion F.C. Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1878 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs West Bromwich FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1878 establishments in England 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Association football midfielders Manchester City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Irish expatriate association footballers 1985 births Living people People from Koggenland Dutch footballers Dutch expatriate footballers Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Association football defenders AZ Alkmaar players Feyenoord players Aston Villa F.C. players Eredivisie players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Birmingham, West Midlands English people of Nigerian descent English people of Scottish descent Black English sportspeople English footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. players Watford F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 1962 births Living people American bankers American billionaires American chairmen of corporations American investors American Jews American people of Russian-Jewish descent Aston Villa F.C. directors and chairmen Cleveland Browns owners MBNA people National Football League team presidents Columbia University alumni Columbia Law School alumni People from Brooklyn People from Cleveland, Ohio People from Amagansett, New York Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England Football clubs in England Leeds United F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1919 Football clubs in West Yorkshire FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Championship clubs 1919 establishments in England Sport in Leeds Phoenix clubs (association football) Execution methods Torture  Christmas traditions Christmas-linked holidays Public holidays in Australia Public holidays in Canada Public holidays in New Zealand Public holidays in the United Kingdom December observances 2009 Christmas albums Christmas albums by American artists Atlantic Records albums Straight No Chaser (group) albums 1989 singles Lorrie Morgan songs Song recordings produced by Barry Beckett RCA Records singles Songs written by Carson Whitsett 1989 songs Sundaes Maya civilization Former monarchies of North America History of the Yucatán Peninsula World Digital Library related History of Guatemala History of Belize History of Chiapas History of El Salvador 2nd-millennium BC establishments in the Maya civilization 1697 disestablishments in the Maya civilization Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology Association football terminology Tournament systems 1994 births Living people Sportspeople from São Paulo (city) Brazilian footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in Germany Brazilian expatriate footballers Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in Spain Brazilian expatriates in the Netherlands Brazilian expatriates in Germany Association football forwards Chelsea F.C. players Málaga CF players SBV Vitesse players Eintracht Frankfurt players Premier League players La Liga players Eredivisie players Bundesliga players Brazil youth international footballers Footballers at the 2015 Pan American Games Ireland Celtic nations Divided regions International islands Northern Europe Western Europe Rugby union positions Football positions 1974 births Living people People from Bury British people of Irish descent English footballers Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers West Ham United F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Ipswich Town F.C. players Charlton Athletic F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2002 FIFA World Cup players British association football commentators New Deal United States economic policy United States presidential domestic programs Political terminology of the United States Former national association football teams in Europe Ireland national football team (1882–1950) National sports teams of Ireland History of association football in Ireland 1882 establishments in Ireland Communes of Haute-Savoie English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports 1988 births Living people Danish footballers Denmark youth international footballers Denmark under-21 international footballers Denmark international footballers Association football forwards Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Juventus F.C. players VfL Wolfsburg players Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players Bundesliga players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Sportspeople from Copenhagen Danish expatriate footballers Danish expatriates in England Danish expatriates in Italy Danish expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Germany 1989 births Aston Villa F.C. players Blackpool F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Derby County F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Sheffield Wednesday F.C. players Association football midfielders Living people People from Airdrie, North Lanarkshire Scotland B international footballers Scotland under-21 international footballers Scottish footballers The Football League players Premier League players Scotland international footballers 2014–15 Premier League 2014–15 in European association football leagues 2014–15 in English football leagues Premier League seasons Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Ball and bat games Cricket Former Summer Olympic sports Sports originating in England Team sports  Association football positions Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating Ten Commandments Biblical phrases Book of Deuteronomy Book of Exodus Christian ethics Law in the Bible Codes of conduct Commandments Divine command theory Hebrew Bible topics Jewish ethics Jewish law and rituals Judeo-Christian topics Moses Mosaic law in Christian theology 1979 births Living people People from Montana, Bulgaria Association football midfielders Bulgarian footballers Bulgaria international footballers Bulgarian expatriate footballers Bulgarian expatriates in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in Scotland Expatriate footballers in England PFC Montana players PFC CSKA Sofia players Celtic F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Bulgarian A Football Group players Scottish Premier League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players FIFA Century Club People with cancer 1993 births Living people Connacht Rugby players Sportspeople from County Clare Sleep Euro 1999 in economics 1999 introductions 2002 introductions Currencies of North America Currencies of South America Currencies of the Caribbean Currency unions Economy of the European Union Eurozone Symbols of the European Union Warrants issued in Hong Kong Stock Exchange 1975 births Living people People from Bury English footballers English football managers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football fullbacks Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Salford City F.C. Daily Telegraph journalists British association football commentators English Football Hall of Fame inductees English expatriates in Spain La Liga managers Valencia CF managers Expatriate football managers in Spain 1984 births Living people Australian soccer players Association football forwards Parramatta Power players Feyenoord players SBV Excelsior players NEC Nijmegen players AZ Alkmaar players Aston Villa F.C. players Al-Nasr SC (Dubai) players National Soccer League (Australia) players Eredivisie players Eerste Divisie players Premier League players Australia international soccer players Olympic soccer players of Australia Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Australian expatriate soccer players Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Australian expatriates in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in the United Arab Emirates Australian expatriates in the United Arab Emirates Soccer players from Sydney 2007 AFC Asian Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2011 AFC Asian Cup players UAE Arabian Gulf League players Terminology used in multiple sports Baseball field Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology Swansea City A.F.C. Football clubs in Wales Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1912 Sport in Swansea Welsh football clubs in English leagues Southern Football League clubs Football League Trophy winners 1912 establishments in the United Kingdom Football League Cup winners Alex Ferguson 1941 births Living people Scottish footballers Ayr United F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players Queen's Park F.C. players Rangers F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Scottish football managers The Football League managers Aberdeen F.C. managers East Stirlingshire F.C. managers St Mirren F.C. managers Premier League managers Manchester United F.C. managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Scotland national football team managers 1986 FIFA World Cup managers Scottish racehorse owners and breeders Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Knights Bachelor Football players and officials awarded knighthoods English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Govan High School People from Govan Scottish autobiographers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish Football League representative players Scottish Football League managers Association football forwards 20th-century Scottish writers 21st-century Scottish writers Labour Party (UK) people Scottish league football top scorers 1985 births Living people Serbian rowers Manchester 1st-century establishments in Roman Britain 79 establishments Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North West England Local government districts of North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 1st century Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Dad's Army 1968 British television programme debuts 1977 British television programme endings 1960s British television series 1970s British television series Television programs adapted into radio programs BBC Radio comedy programmes BBC television sitcoms English-language television programming David Croft sitcoms Military comedy television series Television programs adapted into films Television programs adapted into plays 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Lagos Nigerian footballers Nigeria international footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football wingers Crystal Palace F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Stoke City F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players English people of Nigerian descent Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Africa Cup of Nations-winning players People educated at Whitgift School The Clash 1976 establishments in England 1986 disestablishments in England English anti-fascists Political music English buskers English punk rock groups Grammy Award winners Musical groups disestablished in 1986 Musical groups established in 1976 Musical groups from London Musical quartets Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees Aston Villa F.C. Sports venues in Birmingham, West Midlands 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums Football venues in England UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Defunct velodromes in the United Kingdom Darts venues Sports venues completed in 1897 Football League venues 1583 births 1662 deaths 17th-century English Anglican priests English subscribers to the Solemn League and Covenant 1643 English Presbyterian ministers of the Interregnum (England) Westminster Divines People from Warwick Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 1936 establishments in the United Kingdom BBC television channels in the United Kingdom English-language television stations in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1936 Television channels in the United Kingdom 1980 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football central defenders Chelsea F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Living people Nottingham Forest F.C. players People acquitted of crimes People from Barking Premier League players Senrab F.C. players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom Christmas Quarter days December observances 1987 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Norway Igbo sportspeople Lyn Fotball players Manchester United F.C. players Nigeria international footballers Nigerian expatriate footballers Nigerian expatriate sportspeople in Norway Nigerian expatriates in the United Kingdom Nigerian footballers Tippeligaen players People from Jos Pepsi Football Academy players Plateau United footballers Premier League players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Africa Cup of Nations-winning players Hip extensors Knee flexors Muscles of the lower limb Posterior compartment of thigh 1989 births Living people People from Southwark Black English sportspeople England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football fullbacks Gillingham F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics English footballers  Tournament systems 1924 establishments in Ireland European national association football teams Football Association of Ireland Irish national football teams Republic of Ireland national football team Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports Japan national football team AFC Asian Cup-winning countries Asian national association football teams National sports teams of Japan FIFA Club World Cup FIFA club competitions World championships