 Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1939 births Living people Scottish footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scotland international footballers Celtic F.C. players Scottish expatriates in South Africa Manchester United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Scottish football managers Northampton Town F.C. managers Sportspeople from Glasgow Scottish people of Irish descent Bidvest Wits F.C. players Expatriate soccer players in South Africa People educated at Holyrood Secondary School Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish Football League representative players The Football League players Duntocher Hibernian F.C. players Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1971 births Living people Sportspeople from Cork (city) Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland expatriate association footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Scotland Association football midfielders Cobh Ramblers F.C. players League of Ireland players Nottingham Forest F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players Celtic F.C. players Scottish Premier League players Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers 1994 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Republic of Ireland football managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Premier League managers English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 The Football League managers Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain Sports penalties Terminology used in multiple sports Sports rules and regulations Spain Countries in Europe Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Romance countries and territories Spanish-speaking countries and territories Southern Europe Southwestern Europe Western Europe Spanish monarchy BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom Ulster Divided regions Provinces of Ireland Radio programmes in Northern Ireland BBC Radio Ulster programmes