 Laws of association football Association football terminology 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs 1969 births Living people People from Edmonton, London English businesspeople Birmingham City F.C. directors and chairmen English autobiographers English journalists English columnists English television personalities English television presenters The Apprentice (UK TV series) English people of Irish descent English people of Italian descent People educated at Aldenham School West Ham United F.C. directors and chairmen Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Female life peers Conservative Party (UK) life peers Chauvinism Discrimination Hatred Prejudices Sexism Sexuality and gender-related prejudices Social problems Articles in Wikipedia Primary School Project SSAJRP Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991 1955 births Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Aston Villa F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Everton F.C. players First Division/Premier League top scorers Living people Notts County F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish association football commentators Scottish Football League players Scottish footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Scottish league football top scorers 1957 births Living people British association football commentators Cycling announcers People from Coventry Sky Sports presenters and reporters Association football commentators English football referees 1985 births People from Coventry Living people FIFA Women's World Cup referees Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. Sport in Wolverhampton Football venues in England Sports venues in the West Midlands (county) Sports venues completed in 1889 Football League venues FA Women's Cup Women's national association football cups Women's football competitions in England Recurring sporting events established in 1971 2007–08 in Welsh football 2008 in London FA Cup Finals 2007–08 FA Cup Portsmouth F.C. matches Cardiff City F.C. matches Events at Wembley Stadium 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from Porto Portuguese footballers Association football midfielders Primeira Liga players Segunda Liga players Portuguese Second Division players C.D. Aves players Boavista F.C. players FC Porto players FC Porto B players Premier League players Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Süper Lig players Fenerbahçe footballers Portugal youth international footballers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Portugal Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Turkey 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club English football referees 1962 births People from Poole Living people Dorset Non-metropolitan counties  Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England 1980s British television series 1990s British television series 2000s British television series 2010s British television series 1988 British television programme debuts ITV television programmes English-language television programming Television series by ITV Studios  1975 births Living people Scottish sports broadcasters People from Glasgow 1951 births 1974 FIFA World Cup players 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. players Cumbernauld United F.C. players English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players Scottish league football top scorers Sky Sports Fox Soccer Channel shows Television channels and stations established in 1998 1998 establishments in the United Kingdom Broadcast news analysts Broadcasting occupations Journalism occupations Media occupations Radio journalists Reporting specialties Television journalists Television terminology ESPN Bristol, Connecticut ESPN media outlets Sports television networks in the United States Television channels and stations established in 1979 Webby Award winners Peabody Award winners 1979 establishments in Connecticut 1959 births Living people Japanese female singers Musicians from Osaka Tokuma Japan Communications artists Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software Nail polish Chinese inventions Cosmetics History of cosmetics