 Sky Sports Sky plc television channels Sports television in the United Kingdom 1991 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1991  1992 births Living people Sportspeople from Watford Black English sportspeople English footballers Association football forwards Association football wingers Watford F.C. players Wealdstone F.C. players Yeovil Town F.C. players Colchester United F.C. players The Football League players Isthmian League players People from Lochgelly Scottish footballers Lochgelly United F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Everton F.C. players Reading F.C. players East Fife F.C. players Scottish Football League players The Football League players Association football forwards 1884 births Year of death missing English football referees 1985 births People from Coventry Living people FIFA Women's World Cup referees 1955 births Association football forwards Aston Villa F.C. non-playing staff Aston Villa F.C. players Cheltenham Town F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Everton F.C. players First Division/Premier League top scorers Living people Notts County F.C. players Rangers F.C. players Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish association football commentators Scottish Football League players Scottish footballers Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. players Scottish league football top scorers Sheffield Wednesday F.C. Association football clubs established in 1867 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in South Yorkshire The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Hillsborough, South Yorkshire Premier League clubs Sports teams and clubs in Sheffield 1867 establishments in England Tournament systems Association football terminology Tournament systems Birmingham City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1875 Football clubs in England Sport in Birmingham, West Midlands Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs The Football League clubs Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market 1875 establishments in England Football clubs in Birmingham, West Midlands Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. The Football League founder members Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Association football clubs established in 1877 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners United Soccer Association imported teams Sport in Wolverhampton 1877 establishments in England 1207 establishments Liverpool Cities in North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated coastal places in Merseyside Populated places established in the 13th century Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Port cities and towns in England Towns in Merseyside Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Local government districts of North West England NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Burton Albion F.C. Football clubs in Staffordshire The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1950 East Staffordshire 1950 establishments in England Southern Football League clubs Burton upon Trent Laws of association football Association football terminology 1957 births Living people British association football commentators Cycling announcers People from Coventry Sky Sports presenters and reporters Association football commentators Monday Night Football 1970 American television series debuts 1970s American television series 1980s American television series 1990s American television series 2000s American television series 2010s American television series American Broadcasting Company network shows ABC Sports English-language television programming ESPN network shows Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham Bolton Wanderers F.C. 1877 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1877 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bolton Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Football League Trophy winners Premier League clubs 1956 births Living people English footballers England under-21 international footballers Coventry City F.C. players Everton F.C. players People acquitted of sex crimes Preston North End F.C. players Seiko players Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong Hong Kong First Division League players English football managers Cardiff City F.C. managers Southampton F.C. managers Stockport County F.C. managers Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. managers Premier League managers Sportspeople from Liverpool The Football League managers Sheffield Wednesday F.C. managers The Clash 1976 establishments in England 1986 disestablishments in England English anti-fascists Political music English buskers English punk rock groups Grammy Award winners Musical groups disestablished in 1986 Musical groups established in 1976 Musical groups from London Musical quartets Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom West Bromwich Albion F.C. Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1878 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs West Bromwich FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1878 establishments in England Wigan Athletic F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Association football clubs established in 1932 Football League Trophy winners 1932 establishments in England Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Wigan Borough Football clubs in England FA Cup winners Phoenix clubs (association football) Northern Premier League clubs Crewe Alexandra F.C. Crewe The Football League clubs Football clubs in Cheshire Association football clubs established in 1877 1877 establishments in England  Bradford Cities in Yorkshire and the Humber History of the textile industry Market towns in West Yorkshire Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Towns in West Yorkshire