 Football clubs in England Chelsea F.C. Association football clubs established in 1905 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Edwardian era Football clubs in London 1905 establishments in England Fulham FC Bayern Munich Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1900 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1900 Multi-sport clubs in Germany G-14 clubs 1900 establishments in Bavaria Laureus World Sports Awards winners Association football Association football terminology Ball games Football codes Laws of association football Sports originating in England Physical education Summer Olympic sports Articles containing video clips UEFA Champions League UEFA club competitions Sports leagues established in 1955 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe Association football defenders Association football positions Association football terminology Twitter 2006 establishments in California American brands Android (operating system) software Companies based in San Francisco, California Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange Firefox OS software Internet companies of the United States Internet properties established in 2006 IOS software Microblogging Real-time web Social networking services Social networking websites South of Market, San Francisco Text messaging Windows Phone software Windows software 1978 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2006 Africa Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players African Footballer of the Year winners Ivory Coast international footballers Ivorian Roman Catholics EA Guingamp players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in China Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate soccer players in Canada Association football forwards French people of Ivorian descent Ivorian expatriates in France Ivorian expatriates in England Ivorian expatriates in China Ivorian expatriate footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Premier League players Chinese Super League players Süper Lig players Major League Soccer players Designated Players (MLS) Living people Naturalized citizens of France Levallois SC players Le Mans FC players Olympique de Marseille players Chelsea F.C. players Shanghai Shenhua F.C. players Galatasaray S.K. footballers Montreal Impact players People from Abidjan First Division/Premier League top scorers 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players Ivorian expatriates in Turkey Ivorian footballers Munich German state capitals Populated places established in the 12th century 1970 births Living people People from Schaffhausen Italian footballers Italy international footballers Italian expatriate footballers S.S. Lazio players Chelsea F.C. players Premier League players Italian football managers Milton Keynes Dons F.C. managers West Bromwich Albion F.C. managers Chelsea F.C. managers Premier League managers The Football League managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate footballers in England FC Schalke 04 managers Bundesliga managers UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players FC Schaffhausen players FC Zürich players FC Aarau players Serie A players Swiss Super League players Swiss people of Italian descent Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom UEFA Champions League winning managers Italian expatriate football managers Expatriate football managers in Germany Italian expatriates in Germany BBC Sport Sports radio in the United Kingdom Sports television in the United Kingdom  1984 births Living people Dutch footballers Association football wingers Netherlands youth international footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers PSV Eindhoven players FC Groningen players Chelsea F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players FC Bayern Munich footballers Eredivisie players Premier League players La Liga players Bundesliga players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Dutch expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Spain People from Bedum Dutch expatriates in England Dutch expatriates in Germany Dutch expatriates in Spain Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology BBC Radio 5 Live BBC national radio stations News and talk radio stations in the United Kingdom Radio stations established in 1994 1994 establishments in the United Kingdom Sports radio stations in the United Kingdom Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group British male journalists British sportswriters 1957 births Living people American Soccer League (1988–89) players British association football commentators English footballers Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Preston North End F.C. players Brighton & Hove Albion F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Barnet F.C. players The Football League players National League (English football) players Republic of Ireland football managers Tampa Bay Rowdies (1975–93) players Oxford United F.C. managers Peterborough United F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. non-playing staff People from Penwortham English people of Irish descent BBC sports presenters and reporters 1982 births Living people Sportspeople from Plzeň Association football goalkeepers Czech footballers Czech Republic youth international footballers Czech Republic under-21 international footballers Czech Republic international footballers FK Chmel Blšany players AC Sparta Prague players Czech expatriate footballers Czech expatriates in France Czech expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Stade Rennais F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Czech First League players FIFA Century Club 1985 births People from Biberach (district) German people of Spanish descent German footballers Association football forwards Bundesliga players VfB Stuttgart II players VfB Stuttgart players FC Bayern Munich footballers Germany international footballers Germany B international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Living people ACF Fiorentina players Serie A players Expatriate footballers in Italy German expatriate footballers Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Süper Lig players Expatriate footballers in Turkey German expatriates in Italy German expatriates in Turkey Political pundits Political occupations Sports venues completed in 2005 2006 FIFA World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Munich Herzog & de Meuron buildings Lattice shell structures High-tech architecture Postmodern architecture Modernist architecture in Germany Visitor attractions in Munich Football venues in Germany FC Bayern Munich TSV 1860 München UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums 1985 births Living people People from Dronfield Sportspeople from Derbyshire English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football defenders Aston Villa F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players English people of Irish descent Association football forwards Association football positions Association football terminology 1983 births Living people 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football wingers Converts to Islam Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Turkey FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Metz players France international footballers French expatriate footballers French expatriates in Germany French expatriates in Turkey French footballers French Muslims Bundesliga players Galatasaray S.K. footballers Ligue 1 players Olympique Alès players Olympique de Marseille players People from Boulogne-sur-Mer Stade Brestois 29 players Süper Lig players US Boulogne players UEFA Euro 2008 players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1989 births Living people People from Southwark Black English sportspeople England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football fullbacks Gillingham F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.F.C. Bournemouth players Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Reading F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Olympic footballers of Great Britain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics English footballers 1987 births Living people People from São Paulo (state) Brazilian Christians Brazilian footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Esporte Clube Vitória players Primeira Liga players S.L. Benfica footballers Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Ligue 1 players Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players Brazil international footballers 2011 Copa América players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2015 Copa América players Brazil youth international footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in France FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players Brazil under-20 international footballers 2014 FIFA World Cup players 1872 establishments in England England national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries Men's national sports teams of England England national football teams Football teams in England 1980 births 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Association football central defenders Chelsea F.C. players English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Living people Nottingham Forest F.C. players People acquitted of crimes People from Barking Premier League players Senrab F.C. players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players West Ham United F.C. players Race-related controversies in the United Kingdom 1984 births Living people People from Fuenlabrada Madrilenian footballers Spanish footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain international footballers Association football forwards Atlético Madrid footballers Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players A.C. Milan players Segunda División players La Liga players Premier League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA European Championship-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Italy Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Italy FIFA Century Club UEFA Champions League Finals 2010–11 UEFA Champions League 2010–11 in English football 2010–11 in Spanish football 2011 in London Football competitions hosted by London Events at Wembley Stadium FC Barcelona matches Manchester United F.C. matches La Liga clubs in Europe Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester 1984 births Living people People from Kolbermoor German footballers German Roman Catholics FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players Germany international footballers Footballers from Bavaria UEFA Euro 2004 players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players Bundesliga players Association football midfielders Germany under-21 international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA Century Club Manchester United F.C. players German expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in England German expatriate footballers Premier League players FC Barcelona La Liga clubs Football clubs in Barcelona Football clubs in Catalonia Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Catalan symbols Unrelegated association football clubs Association football clubs established in 1899 1899 establishments in Spain Association football penalty shootouts Laws of association football Association football terminology 1980 births Living people People from Stepney English footballers Association football fullbacks 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Black English sportspeople Arsenal F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players A.S. Roma players LA Galaxy players English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Italy English expatriates in Italy Expatriate soccer players in the United States English expatriates in the United States England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English people of Barbadian descent Premier League players The Football League players Serie A players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA Century Club 1985 births Living people Ivorian footballers ASEC Mimosas players Feyenoord players SBV Excelsior players Chelsea F.C. players Lille OSC players Hertha BSC players Eredivisie players Eerste Divisie players Premier League players Ligue 1 players Bundesliga players Ivory Coast international footballers Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Côte d'Ivoire 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2012 Africa Cup of Nations players 2013 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2015 Africa Cup of Nations players Ivorian expatriate footballers Ivorian expatriates in the Netherlands Ivorian expatriates in the United Kingdom Ivorian emigrants to the United Kingdom Ivorian expatriates in Germany Expatriate footballers in the Netherlands Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in Germany Africa Cup of Nations-winning players People from Abidjan London Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) British capitals Capitals in Europe Populated places established in the 1st century Port cities and towns in England Staple ports 1978 births Living people Association football midfielders Chelsea F.C. players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players England B international footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English footballers FIFA Century Club Manchester City F.C. players People educated at Brentwood School (Essex) People from Romford Premier League players Swansea City A.F.C. players The Football League players UEFA Euro 2004 players West Ham United F.C. players Conservative Party (UK) people Members of the Order of the British Empire New York City FC players English expatriate footballers Expatriate soccer players in the United States Designated Players (MLS) Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Terminology used in multiple sports People from Mönchengladbach Sportspeople from North Rhine-Westphalia 1945 births Living people German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers UEFA Euro 1972 players 1974 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Bundesliga players Borussia Mönchengladbach players Hannover 96 players German football managers Expatriate football managers in Spain Expatriate football managers in Portugal UEFA Champions League winning managers German expatriates in Spain German expatriates in Portugal Bundesliga managers La Liga managers Primeira Liga managers Borussia Mönchengladbach managers FC Bayern Munich managers Athletic Bilbao managers Eintracht Frankfurt managers CD Tenerife managers Real Madrid C.F. managers S.L. Benfica managers FC Schalke 04 managers Bayer 04 Leverkusen managers Kicker-Torjägerkanone Award winners DFB-Pokal Football cup competitions in Germany National association football cups Recurring sporting events established in 1935 Association football terminology FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England 1966 births Living people Adoptees adopted by relations Chelsea F.C. chairmen and investors English football chairmen and investors Governors of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug Jewish Russian politicians Members of the State Duma (Russian Federation) People from Saratov Russian billionaires Russian businesspeople in the oil industry Russian capitalists Russian chief executives Russian emigrants to the United Kingdom Russian football chairmen and investors Russian investors Russian Jews Yukos British people of Russian-Jewish descent Arsenal F.C. Association football clubs established in 1886 Companies formerly listed on the Alternative Investment Market FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Former Football League clubs Football League Cup winners G-14 clubs Premier League clubs 1886 establishments in England 1988 births Living people People from the Province of Burgos Spanish footballers Asturian footballers Castilian-Leonese footballers Association football wingers Association football forwards La Liga players Segunda División players Real Madrid C.F. players Real Madrid Castilla footballers Valencia CF players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Spain international footballers 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players FIFA World Cup-winning players UEFA European Championship-winning players Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Spain Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players BBC World Service BBC national radio stations Radio stations established in 1932 Public Radio International 1932 establishments in the United Kingdom 1960 births Living people People from Corbridge English footballers England youth international footballers England B international footballers Association football defenders Wallsend Boys Club players Gillingham F.C. players Norwich City F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Sheffield United F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players English football managers Sheffield United F.C. managers Huddersfield Town A.F.C. managers Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Crystal Palace F.C. managers Birmingham City F.C. managers Sunderland A.F.C. managers Hull City A.F.C. managers The Football League managers Premier League managers English people of Irish descent Norwich City F.C. captains Real Madrid C.F. La Liga clubs Football clubs in Madrid Football clubs in Spain Copa del Rey winners G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Spain Unrelegated association football clubs Organisations based in Spain with royal patronage Association football clubs established in 1902 1902 establishments in Spain 1960 births Living people People from Lörrach (district) Sportspeople from Baden-Württemberg Fenerbahçe football managers German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers German football managers Expatriate football managers in Austria Germany national football team managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers UEFA Euro 2008 managers UEFA Euro 2012 managers SC Freiburg players VfB Stuttgart players Eintracht Frankfurt players Karlsruher SC players Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Süper Lig managers VfB Stuttgart managers Karlsruher SC managers FK Austria Wien managers Bundesliga managers 2. Bundesliga managers Recipients of the Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Expatriate football managers in Turkey German expatriates in Turkey FC Tirol Innsbruck managers FIFA World Cup-winning managers FC Frauenfeld players Germany's Sports Hall of Fame inductees FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Germany national football team European national association football teams FIFA World Cup-winning countries UEFA European Championship-winning countries National sports teams of Germany Recipients of the Silver Laurel Leaf Association football goalkeepers Association football positions Association football terminology Laws of association football Association football terminology Bandy rules Fencing Field hockey terminolgy Sports equipment Water polo 1984 births Living people People from Sremska Mitrovica Association football defenders Association football utility players Serbian footballers Serbia and Montenegro international footballers Serbia international footballers Serbian expatriate footballers Serbian expatriates in Russia Serbian expatriates in England Expatriate footballers in Russia Expatriate footballers in England FK Srem players OFK Beograd players FC Lokomotiv Moscow players Chelsea F.C. players Russian Football Premier League players Premier League players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Serbia under-21 international footballers England English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries United Kingdom Germanic countries and territories 1979 births Living people People from Davor, Croatia Croatian footballers Croatian expatriate footballers Croatia youth international footballers Croatia under-21 international footballers Croatia international footballers Croatian expatriates in Germany Croatian expatriates in Russia NK Marsonia players Hertha BSC players NK Zagreb players GNK Dinamo Zagreb players PFC CSKA Moscow players Hamburger SV players FC Bayern Munich footballers VfL Wolfsburg players Croatian First Football League players Croatian Second Football League players Croatian Third Football League players Russian Football Premier League players Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in Russia 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players FIFA Century Club Beer culture Beer gardens German beer culture German cuisine Types of drinking establishment Manchester 1st-century establishments in Roman Britain 79 establishments Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North West England Local government districts of North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 1st century Laws of association football Association football tactics and skills 1982 births Living people People from Mbandaka Portuguese people of Democratic Republic of the Congo descent Portuguese footballers Association football defenders Primeira Liga players Segunda Liga players Boavista F.C. players S.C. Freamunde players FC Porto players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Süper Lig players Trabzonspor footballers Portugal youth international footballers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Portugal Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Turkey 1987 births Living people Brazilian footballers Brazil international footballers Joinville Esporte Clube players Cruzeiro Esporte Clube players S.L. Benfica footballers Chelsea F.C. players Jiangsu Suning F.C. players Campeonato Brasileiro Série A players Primeira Liga players Premier League players Chinese Super League players Brazilian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Portugal Expatriate footballers in China Brazilian expatriates in England Brazilian expatriates in Portugal Brazilian expatriates in China Footballers at the 2008 Summer Olympics Olympic footballers of Brazil Olympic bronze medalists for Brazil 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2011 Copa América players Olympic medalists in football Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics UEFA Europa League UEFA club competitions Recurring sporting events established in 1971 Multi-national association football leagues in Europe 1928 films American romantic comedy films American silent feature films American films American black-and-white films 1920s comedy films BBC Radio in the United Kingdom BBC Radio Publicly funded broadcasters Companies based in London Companies established in 1927 1927 establishments in the United Kingdom European Broadcasting Union members Multilingual broadcasters British brands Public corporations of the United Kingdom with a Royal Charter Department for Culture, Media and Sport Peabody Award winners Government-owned companies of the United Kingdom Borussia Dortmund 1909 establishments in Germany Association football clubs established in 1909 Dortmund Football clubs in Germany Football clubs in North Rhine-Westphalia G-14 clubs Multi-sport clubs in Germany Publicly traded sports companies Ball games Football Sports originating in England 19th-century introductions Association football positions UEFA European Championship Recurring sporting events established in 1960 UEFA competitions Quadrennial sporting events Italy Countries in Europe G7 nations G8 nations G20 nations Italian-speaking countries and territories Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Republics Romance countries and territories Southern Europe States and territories established in 1861 Amulets Practical Kabbalah 2010–11 UEFA Europa League 2010–11 in European football UEFA Europa League seasons 1978 births Living people People from Chimay Belgian footballers Belgium youth international footballers Belgium under-21 international footballers Belgium international footballers Association football central defenders Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players Olympique de Marseille players Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in England R. Charleroi S.C. players Standard Liège players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players Expatriate footballers in Germany Belgian Pro League players Ligue 1 players Premier League players Bundesliga players 3. Liga players Belgian expatriate footballers Belgian people of German descent Belgian expatriates in Germany Belgian expatriates in France Belgian expatriates in England Amberg-Sulzbach 1990 births Living people Association football midfielders People from Greifswald German footballers German expatriate footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players Bayer 04 Leverkusen players Real Madrid C.F. players Bundesliga players 3. Liga players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Expatriate footballers in Spain German expatriates in Spain 1979 births Living people People from Lutsk Ukrainian footballers Ukraine international footballers Ukraine under-21 international footballers FC Volyn Lutsk players FC Shakhtar Donetsk players FC Shakhtar-2 Donetsk players FC Zenit Saint Petersburg players FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Kairat players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Ukrainian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Russia Ukrainian Premier League players Russian Football Premier League players Expatriate footballers in Germany Bundesliga players Expatriate footballers in Kazakhstan FIFA Century Club Ukrainian expatriates in Germany Ukrainian expatriates in Russia Ukrainian expatriates in Kazakhstan 1979 births Living people People from Cayenne French people of French Guianan descent French Guianan footballers French footballers French Roman Catholics France international footballers LB Châteauroux players EA Guingamp players FC Metz players Association football forwards Olympique Lyonnais players Chelsea F.C. players Trabzonspor footballers Delhi Dynamos FC players Wadi Degla FC players 2006 FIFA World Cup players French expatriate footballers French Guianan expatriate footballers Premier League players Ligue 1 players Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Expatriate footballers in India UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players Süper Lig players French expatriates in England French expatriates in Turkey 1983 births Sportspeople from Munich German footballers Association football fullbacks Bundesliga players FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Bayern Munich II players VfB Stuttgart players Germany international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany youth international footballers UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players FIFA World Cup-winning captains Living people FIFA Century Club Footballers from Bavaria German autobiographers Writers from Bavaria 21st-century German writers German male writers Laws of association football Association football terminology Association football terminology 1983 births Living people Sportspeople from Porto Portuguese footballers Association football midfielders Primeira Liga players Segunda Liga players Portuguese Second Division players C.D. Aves players Boavista F.C. players FC Porto players FC Porto B players Premier League players Liverpool F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Süper Lig players Fenerbahçe footballers Portugal youth international footballers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Olympic footballers of Portugal Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Turkey Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Turkey 1892 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1892 Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners G-14 clubs Liverpool F.C. Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Hashtags Collective intelligence Computer jargon Information retrieval techniques Knowledge representation Metadata Reference Web 2.0 Social media 2010s slang Living people BBC newsreaders and journalists British broadcasters Shipbuilding companies of the Netherlands 2001–02 in English football 2012 Summer Olympic venues Rugby league stadiums in England Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues in Greater Manchester 1966 FIFA World Cup stadiums FA Cup Final venues Football venues in England Manchester United F.C. UEFA Euro 1996 stadiums Premier League venues Rugby union stadiums in England Buildings and structures in Trafford Stretford Sports venues completed in 1910 Football League venues 1207 establishments Liverpool Cities in North West England Metropolitan boroughs Populated coastal places in Merseyside Populated places established in the 13th century Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea Port cities and towns in England Towns in Merseyside Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Local government districts of North West England NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Association football terminology Association football tactics and skills Destiny Determinism Mythography Synchronicity S.L. Benfica 1904 establishments in Portugal Association football clubs established in 1904 Football clubs in Portugal Taça de Portugal winners Primeira Liga clubs Sports clubs established in 1904 Multi-sport clubs in Portugal Sport in Lisbon Golf clubs and courses in Portugal Companies listed on the Euronext exchanges Publicly traded sports companies Unrelegated association football clubs 1971 births Living people People from Hammersmith Sportspeople from London Association football midfielders English footballers England under-21 international footballers Chelsea F.C. players Cardiff City F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Oxford United F.C. players Barnet F.C. players Hayes F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff Black English sportspeople Converts to Islam British Muslims 1986 births Living people Sportspeople from Gelsenkirchen German footballers German Roman Catholics Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers Association football goalkeepers FC Schalke 04 players FC Schalke 04 II players FC Bayern Munich footballers Bundesliga players 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players 2014 FIFA World Cup 1988 births Living people German footballers Tennis Borussia Berlin players Hertha BSC players Hertha BSC II players Hamburger SV players Manchester City F.C. players FC Bayern Munich footballers Bundesliga players Premier League players German people of Ghanaian descent Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers German expatriate footballers Germany youth international footballers Association football defenders Sportspeople from Berlin 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA World Cup-winning players Manchester City F.C. Association football clubs established in 1880 FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Premier League clubs 1880 establishments in England Sport in Manchester Football clubs in Manchester A.C. Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1899 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1899 establishments in Italy Multi-sport clubs in Italy Europe Continents Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology 1971 births English footballers English people of Jamaican descent Association football forwards England under-21 international footballers England B international footballers England international footballers First Division/Premier League top scorers Arsenal F.C. players Fulham F.C. players Bristol City F.C. players Newcastle United F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Manchester City F.C. players Portsmouth F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Nottingham Forest F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Black English sportspeople Huddersfield Town A.F.C. non-playing staff Sportspeople from Nottingham Living people 1990 births Living people Sportspeople from Munich German footballers Association football fullbacks FC Bayern Munich II players FC Bayern Munich footballers FC Girondins de Bordeaux players Bundesliga players Ligue 1 players 3. Liga players German expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in France German people of Italian descent Germany youth international footballers Footballers from Bavaria People of Campanian descent 1976 births People from Görlitz Sportspeople from Saxony Living people 1999 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 1. FC Kaiserslautern II players 1. FC Kaiserslautern players Bayer 04 Leverkusen players Chelsea F.C. players Chemnitzer FC players Expatriate footballers in England FC Bayern Munich footballers FIFA 100 Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Association football midfielders German expatriate footballers German expatriates in the United Kingdom German footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers Premier League players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players UEFA Euro 2008 players 1946 births Living people Italian footballers Italy international footballers SPAL 1907 players Serie A players Juventus F.C. players A.S. Roma players A.C. Milan players 1974 FIFA World Cup players Italian football managers 2010 FIFA World Cup managers 2014 FIFA World Cup managers A.C. Milan managers A.S. Roma managers Juventus F.C. managers La Liga managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Serie A managers UEFA Champions League winning managers England national football team managers Russia national football team managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Spain People from San Canzian d'Isonzo People from the Province of Gorizia Italian Roman Catholics Italian expatriate football managers 1992 births Living people Austrian people of Nigerian descent Austrian people of Yoruba descent Austrian people of Filipino descent Austrian Seventh-day Adventists Nigerian people of Filipino descent Sportspeople from Vienna Austrian footballers Austria international footballers Austrian expatriate footballers Association football midfielders Association football fullbacks FK Austria Wien players FC Bayern Munich II players FC Bayern Munich footballers TSG 1899 Hoffenheim players Bundesliga players 3. Liga players Yoruba sportspeople Expatriate footballers in Germany Austrian expatriates in Germany 1989 births Living people People from Memmingen Footballers from Bavaria German footballers Germany youth international footballers Germany under-21 international footballers Germany international footballers Association football defenders 3. Liga players Bundesliga players FC Bayern Munich II players FC Bayern Munich footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2012 players 1977 births Living people Sportspeople from Porto Portuguese football managers FC Porto managers Chelsea F.C. managers Tottenham Hotspur F.C. managers Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Russia Primeira Liga managers Premier League managers UEFA Cup winning managers Portuguese people of British descent Portuguese expatriate football managers FC Zenit Saint Petersburg managers Russian Football Premier League managers Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Russia Banks of Germany Insurance companies of Germany Companies based in Munich German brands Mutual fund families Companies formerly listed on the New York Stock Exchange Investment management companies of Germany Companies established in 1890 Societates Europaeae Multinational companies headquartered in Germany Companies in the Euro Stoxx 50 Moscow Moscow Governorate 1147 establishments in Russia Capitals in Europe 1971 births Living people People from Lambeth English people of Jamaican descent English footballers Jamaican footballers Jamaica international footballers Association football defenders Black English sportspeople Chelsea F.C. players West Bromwich Albion F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Burnley F.C. players Huddersfield Town A.F.C. players Lincoln City F.C. players Wycombe Wanderers F.C. players Wrexham F.C. players Hendon F.C. players Colwyn Bay F.C. players Brackley Town F.C. players Colwyn Bay F.C. managers Premier League players The Football League players National League (English football) players Isthmian League players 1998 CONCACAF Gold Cup players 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2000 CONCACAF Gold Cup players Children's sport Physical education Youth sport 1960–61 domestic association football cups 1959–60 in Israeli football 1960–61 in Israeli football Israel State Cup seasons 2014–15 UEFA Champions League UEFA Champions League group stages Turkish Cup seasons 2014–15 European domestic association football cups Newcastle upon Tyne Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in North East England History of Newcastle upon Tyne Local government districts of North East England Metropolitan boroughs Populated places established in the 2nd century Port cities and towns in England Port cities and towns of the North Sea Ports and harbours of Tyne and Wear Staple ports Towns in Tyne and Wear Trading posts of the Hanseatic League 2013–14 UEFA Champions League 2013–14 in European football UEFA Champions League seasons Chelsea, London Districts of Kensington and Chelsea Districts of London on the River Thames European national association football teams Football teams in Norway Norway national football team National sports teams of Norway 1908 establishments in Norway Association football clubs established in 1908 Association football clubs established in 1899 Football clubs in England The Football League clubs Scunthorpe Scunthorpe United F.C. Football clubs in Lincolnshire 1899 establishments in England  West Bromwich Albion F.C. Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1878 Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs West Bromwich FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1878 establishments in England Cinderella Terminology used in multiple sports Sports terminology UEFA Association football rankings Top level football leagues in Europe Bundesliga Professional sports leagues 1963 establishments in West Germany Sports leagues established in 1963 Association football leagues in Germany Fantasy artists Science fiction artists Living people Year of birth missing (living people) Fairies Fairy tales Fantasy genres Fiction Folklore Literary techniques Persuasion techniques Nine Network shows 2006 Australian television series debuts 2007 Australian television series endings 2000s Australian television series Football clubs in England Association football clubs established in 1876 Association football clubs established in 1929 Association football clubs disestablished in 1978 Association football clubs established in 1992 Sport in Havering Southern Football League clubs Eastern Counties Football League Essex Senior Football League Isthmian League Athenian League 1876 establishments in England 1929 establishments in England 1992 establishments in England 1978 disestablishments in England Romford Football clubs in London Oktoberfest Beer festivals in Germany Culture in Munich Visitor attractions in Munich September observances October observances Autumn festivals German folklore 1810 establishments Annual events in Germany 1951 births 1974 FIFA World Cup players 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players Association football forwards BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Celtic F.C. managers Celtic F.C. players Cumbernauld United F.C. players English Football Hall of Fame inductees FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club Liverpool F.C. managers Liverpool F.C. players Living people Members of the Order of the British Empire Newcastle United F.C. managers Premier League managers Scotland international footballers Scotland under-23 international footballers Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish footballers Scottish Premier League managers Scottish Sports Hall of Fame inductees Sportspeople from Glasgow The Football League managers The Football League players Scottish league football top scorers UEFA Euro 2012 2011–12 in European football 2011–12 in Polish football 2011–12 in Ukrainian football International association football competitions hosted by Poland International association football competitions hosted by Ukraine UEFA European Championship tournaments Poland–Ukraine relations Chelsea F.C. Football venues in London FA Cup Final venues Premier League venues Defunct speedway venues Defunct greyhound racing venues Defunct cricket grounds in England Sports venues completed in 1877 Fulham Buildings and structures in Hammersmith and Fulham Cornish sportspeople 1966 births Living people People from St Austell Association football goalkeepers English footballers Footballers from Cornwall Bristol Rovers F.C. players Crystal Palace F.C. players Leeds United F.C. players Everton F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players England international footballers England B international footballers England under-21 international footballers UEFA Euro 1992 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players 2002 FIFA World Cup players Bradford City A.F.C. non-playing staff Super Furry Animals songs Creation Records singles 2000 singles 2000 songs 2007 establishments in England 2012 Summer Olympic venues American football venues in the United Kingdom Buildings and structures in Brent England national football team FA Cup Final venues Football venues in London Music venues completed in 2007 Music venues in London National stadiums National Football League venues Olympic football venues European retractable-roof stadiums Rugby league stadiums in London Rugby League World Cup stadiums Sports venues completed in 2007 Wembley Stadium and Wembley Arena Retractable-roof stadiums UEFA Euro 2020 stadiums Neo-futurism architecture  Israel 1948 establishments in Israel Arabic-speaking countries and territories Eastern Mediterranean Hebrew words and phrases Levant Liberal democracies Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Member states of the United Nations Middle Eastern countries Near Eastern countries Republics Southern Levant States and territories established in 1948 Western Asian countries Articles containing video clips English law Human names Hong Kong films 1992 films 1990s action films 1990s martial arts films 1990s comedy films Hong Kong action comedy films Hong Kong martial arts films Tae kwon do films Police detective films Martial arts tournament films Martial arts comedy films Cantonese-language films Films set in Hong Kong Films shot in Hong Kong Films directed by Benny Chan Cambridge Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in the East of England County towns in England Local government in Cambridgeshire University towns in the United Kingdom Non-metropolitan districts of Cambridgeshire Local government districts of the East of England Derby Local government in Derbyshire Railway towns in England Unitary authority districts of England County towns in England Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Cities in the East Midlands Local government districts of the East Midlands The Five Boroughs 1968 births Living people Jersey footballers Alumni of Kingston University English footballers Chelsea F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Premier League players English people of French descent England under-21 international footballers England international footballers England B international footballers 1998 FIFA World Cup players Dancing on Ice participants Wembley F.C. players Chelsea L.F.C. Chelsea F.C. Women's football clubs in England Women's football clubs in London Association football clubs established in 1992 1992 establishments in England FA WSL teams Derby County F.C. Premier League clubs The Football League clubs Football clubs in England The Football League founder members Association football clubs established in 1884 Football clubs in Derbyshire FA Cup winners Football League Championship clubs Sport in Derby 1884 establishments in England 2014 singles 2014 songs Ne-Yo songs Motown singles Songs written by Ne-Yo Songs written by Young Jeezy God Allah Creator gods Deities Singular God 1955 births 1978 FIFA World Cup players 1982 FIFA World Cup players 1986 FIFA World Cup players AS Nancy players AS Saint-Étienne players Association football midfielders Dual internationalists (football) English Football Hall of Fame inductees European Footballer of the Year winners Expatriate footballers in Italy FIFA 100 Footballers at the 1976 Summer Olympics France international footballers France national football team managers France under-21 international footballers French expatriate footballers French footballers French football managers French people of Italian descent French sports executives and administrators Juventus F.C. players Kuwait international footballers Ligue 1 players Ligue 2 players Living people Officiers of the Légion d'honneur Officiers of the Ordre national du Mérite Olympic footballers of France Olympic cauldron lighters People from Meurthe-et-Moselle People of Piedmontese descent Presidents of UEFA Recipients of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin Serie A players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players UEFA Euro 1984 players UEFA Euro 1992 managers World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners Morrissey 1959 births 20th-century British singers 20th-century British writers 21st-century British novelists 21st-century British singers 21st-century British writers Alternative rock singers Animal rights advocates Ballad musicians British activists British alternative rock musicians British baritones British expatriates in the United States British male singers British people of Irish descent British republicans British rock singers British singer-songwriters Decca Records artists Harvest Records artists Island Records artists Ivor Novello Award winners LGBT musicians from England Living people Lost Highway Records artists Mercury Records artists Musicians from Manchester People from Davyhulme People with cancer Polydor Records artists RCA Records artists Rough Trade Records artists Sire Records artists The Smiths members Torch singers 2007 songs 2008 singles Chris Brown songs Songs written by James Fauntleroy Song recordings produced by The Underdogs (production team) Jive Records singles Songs written by Damon Thomas (record producer) Songs written by Harvey Mason, Jr. 1992 births Living people People from Stevenage Footballers from Hitchin English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers England international footballers Association football midfielders Association football wingers Luton Town F.C. players Arsenal F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Premier League players 2014 FIFA World Cup players 2010 singles Tinie Tempah songs Irish Singles Chart number-one singles UK Singles Chart number-one singles UK R&B Singles Chart number-one singles WrestleMania themes Rap rock songs Songs written by Eshraque "iSHi" Mughal Songs written by Tinie Tempah 2010 songs Parlophone singles Songs written by Eric Turner (singer) 1981 singles 1981 songs Alvin and the Chipmunks songs Electric Light Orchestra songs Jet Records singles Multilingual songs Number-one singles in Spain Number-one singles in Switzerland Rock-and-roll songs Song recordings produced by Jeff Lynne Songs written by Jeff Lynne Towns in Bedfordshire Sport in Colchester Colchester United F.C. Football clubs in England Football clubs in Essex Association football clubs established in 1937 1937 establishments in England Sport in Essex The Football League clubs Southern Football League clubs NHS hospitals in England Health in Greater Manchester Teaching hospitals in England Wythenshawe NHS Foundation Trusts Labor Labor economics Netherlands Benelux Countries in Europe Dutch-speaking countries and territories Germanic countries and territories Kingdom of the Netherlands Liberal democracies Member states of NATO Member states of the Dutch Language Union Member states of the European Union Member states of the Union for the Mediterranean Western Europe Take That English boy bands English dance music groups Musical groups from Cheshire Musical groups from Manchester 1996 disestablishments in England 2005 establishments in England Ivor Novello Award winners Musical groups disestablished in 1996 Musical groups reestablished in 2005 Brit Award winners Echo (music award) winners Vocal quartets Vocal quintets Vocal trios Musical groups established in 1990 1990 establishments in England Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Birmingham, West Midlands Cities in the West Midlands (region) Local government districts of the West Midlands (region) Metropolitan boroughs NUTS 3 statistical regions of the United Kingdom Populated places established in the 6th century FIFA Association football governing bodies International sports federations IOC-recognised international federations International sports bodies based in Switzerland Organisations based in Zürich Sports organisations established in 1904 Player-coaches Sports coaches Basketball personnel 1962 births Living people Dutch footballers Netherlands under-21 international footballers Netherlands international footballers Dutch football managers Player-coaches Dutch people of Surinamese descent HFC Haarlem players Feyenoord players PSV Eindhoven players A.C. Milan players U.C. Sampdoria players Chelsea F.C. players Eredivisie players Serie A players Premier League players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1992 players UEFA European Championship-winning captains UEFA European Championship-winning players European Footballer of the Year winners World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners FIFA 100 Association football utility players Chelsea F.C. managers Newcastle United F.C. managers Feyenoord managers LA Galaxy coaches FC Terek Grozny managers Premier League managers Eredivisie managers Major League Soccer coaches Russian Football Premier League managers International opponents of apartheid in South Africa Footballers from Amsterdam Dutch expatriate footballers Dutch expatriates in Italy Expatriate footballers in Italy Dutch expatriates in the United Kingdom Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate football managers in England Dutch expatriates in the United States Expatriate soccer managers in the United States Dutch expatriates in Russia Expatriate football managers in Russia AFC DWS players Dutch expatriate football managers Knights of the Order of Orange-Nassau American game shows American Broadcasting Company network shows First-run syndicated television programs in the United States 1970s American television series 1972 American television series debuts 1975 American television series endings 1980s American television series 1986 American television series debuts 1987 American television series endings Television series by Stefan Hatos-Monty Hall Productions English-language television programming Television series revived after cancellation Television series produced in Toronto Association football terminology 2007 television films 2000s comedy films American films English-language films ABC Family original films High school films Relativity Media films New Line Cinema films Films shot in Winnipeg 1966 births People from Paddington Living people English people of Saint Lucian descent Members of the Order of the British Empire Association football forwards English footballers England B international footballers England international footballers English expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Turkey Queens Park Rangers F.C. players Brentford F.C. players Beşiktaş J.K. footballers Newcastle United F.C. players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players West Ham United F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Reading F.C. players Watford F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. non-playing staff Süper Lig players Black English sportspeople Southall F.C. players Sportspeople from London People educated at Phoenix High School, London Queens Park Rangers F.C. directors and chairmen Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers English football managers English autobiographers American football positions Handball Ball games Indoor sports Team sports Summer Olympic sports Sports originating in Denmark Sports originating in Germany Articles containing video clips Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating 1970 births Living people Portuguese football referees UEFA Champions League referees 2014 FIFA World Cup referees Juventus F.C. 1897 establishments in Italy Association football clubs established in 1897 Companies established in 1897 Companies listed on the Borsa Italiana Coppa Italia winners Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Piedmont and Aosta Valley Football clubs in Turin G-14 clubs Italian football First Division clubs Publicly traded sports companies Scudetto winners Serie A clubs Serie B clubs Sport in Turin 1978 births Living people Sportspeople from Wakefield English rugby league players Halifax RLFC players Wigan Warriors players Hull F.C. players Hull Kingston Rovers players Olympique de Marseille Association football clubs established in 1899 G-14 clubs Football clubs in Marseille 1899 establishments in France Red Star Belgrade Football clubs in Yugoslavia Football clubs in Belgrade Association football clubs established in 1945 1945 establishments in Serbia Pontefract Geography of Wakefield District Market towns in West Yorkshire Towns in West Yorkshire Association football terminology Football in Brazil  1978 albums Dusty Springfield albums Albums arranged by Peter Matz Albums produced by Roy Thomas Baker Mercury Records albums United Artists Records albums 1969 births Sportspeople from Leicester Living people English footballers Association football forwards Association football central defenders Association football defenders Association football utility players Norwich City F.C. players Cambridge United F.C. players Barnet F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Coventry City F.C. players Aston Villa F.C. players Millwall F.C. players Leicester City F.C. players Celtic F.C. players England international footballers The Football League players Premier League players First Division/Premier League top scorers Scottish Premier League players Black English sportspeople British association football commentators British television presenters BBC people Coventry City F.C. Hall of Fame inductees 1913 births 2001 deaths People educated at Malvern College Graduates of the Royal Military College, Sandhurst Durham Light Infantry officers British Army personnel of World War II Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry officers Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath Commanders of the Order of the British Empire British Army generals British Army personnel of the Malayan Emergency Companions of the Distinguished Service Order and Bar Commandants of Sandhurst NATO military personnel British television soap operas 1986 British television programme debuts 1980s British television series 1990s British television series 2000s British television series 2010s British television series BBC television dramas British medical television series Holby Media in Bristol Television programmes shot in Bristol BBC Cymru Wales television programmes 1981 births Living people Footballers from Bristol English footballers Association football defenders Bristol City F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Hartlepool United F.C. players Bristol Rovers F.C. players Exeter City F.C. players Forest Green Rovers F.C. players The Football League players 1982 births Sportspeople from Accra Living people Ghanaian Roman Catholics Association football midfielders Association football utility players Ghanaian footballers Ghana international footballers Ghanaian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in France Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Greece Liberty Professionals F.C. players SC Bastia players Olympique Lyonnais players Chelsea F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players A.C. Milan players Panathinaikos F.C. players Ligue 1 players Premier League players La Liga players Serie A players 2006 FIFA World Cup players 2002 African Cup of Nations players 2008 Africa Cup of Nations players 2010 Africa Cup of Nations players 2014 FIFA World Cup players Naturalized citizens of France Ghanaian expatriates in France Ghanaian expatriates in the United Kingdom 1991 births Living people People from Montsià Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players La Liga players Segunda División players Segunda División B players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players Valencia CF players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Southampton F.C. players Bundesliga players VfB Stuttgart players Spain youth international footballers Spain under-21 international footballers Spain under-23 international footballers Olympic footballers of Spain Footballers at the 2012 Summer Olympics Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Expatriate footballers in Germany Spanish expatriates in England Spanish expatriates in Germany Articles containing video clips 1979 births Living people People from Cascais Portuguese footballers Association football defenders Primeira Liga players Segunda Liga players Portuguese Second Division players G.D. Estoril Praia players Vitória F.C. players FC Porto players Premier League players Chelsea F.C. players Portugal youth international footballers Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal international footballers UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2008 players 2010 FIFA World Cup players Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England Portuguese expatriates in England Chelsea F.C. non-playing staff 1979 births Bedfordshire cricketers Cricketers at the 2011 Cricket World Cup England One Day International cricketers England Test cricketers England Twenty20 International cricketers English cricketers English cricketers of the 21st century English cricket captains Living people Marylebone Cricket Club cricketers NBC Denis Compton Award recipients Northamptonshire cricketers Nottinghamshire cricketers Sportspeople from Northampton Wisden Cricketers of the Year Association football in South America Association football tactics and skills Association football terminology 1990 births People from Marion County, Iowa Living people American softball players Missouri Tigers athletes Softball players at the 2011 Pan American Games Sportspeople from Iowa Laws of association football Association football terminology Belfast British capitals Capitals in Europe Districts of Northern Ireland, 2015-present Populated coastal places in the United Kingdom Port cities and towns in Northern Ireland Port cities and towns of the Irish Sea University towns in Ireland University towns in the United Kingdom Districts of Northern Ireland, 1972–2015 Euro 1999 in economics 1999 introductions 2002 introductions Currencies of North America Currencies of South America Currencies of the Caribbean Currency unions Economy of the European Union Eurozone Symbols of the European Union Warrants issued in Hong Kong Stock Exchange 1977 births Association football defenders Association football midfielders Association football utility players Living people England B international footballers English footballers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. non-playing staff Manchester United F.C. players People from Bury Premier League players Twin sportspeople from England UEFA Euro 1996 players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players Salford City F.C. British association football commentators English expatriates in Spain English football managers 1974 births Living people Blackburn Rovers F.C. players England B international footballers England under-21 international footballers Leeds United F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Premier League players The Football League players Scotland international footballers Scottish people of Italian descent Scottish footballers Stoke City F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Sportspeople from Dumfries Leeds Leeds City Region University towns in the United Kingdom Market towns in West Yorkshire Towns in West Yorkshire Musical terminology Rhythm and meter Temporal rates Sport in Munich Football in Upper Bavaria 1955 births Scottish association football commentators Living people Association football defenders Scottish footballers Scotland international footballers 1982 FIFA World Cup players Partick Thistle F.C. players Liverpool F.C. players Scottish Football League players Scottish people of Danish descent The Football League players BBC sports presenters and reporters People from Clackmannanshire English Football Hall of Fame inductees Scottish Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Lornshill Academy Scotland under-23 international footballers Sauchie F.C. players Thoroughbred racehorses Racehorses bred in the United Kingdom Racehorses trained in the United Kingdom British Classic Race winners 1950 racehorse births 1970 racehorse deaths Thoroughbred family 14-c Godolphin Arabian sire line Bones of the lower limb Long bones Tibia  Spiders Articles containing video clips Extant Pennsylvanian first appearances Aerial maneuvers Aerial warfare 1967 births Living people People from Moss, Norway Norwegian footballers Norway international footballers Norwegian football managers Moss FK players FC Bayern Munich footballers Chelsea F.C. players Rosenborg BK players Strømsgodset IF players Tippeligaen players Bundesliga players Premier League players The Football League players 1994 FIFA World Cup players Norwegian expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Germany Expatriate footballers in England Moss FK managers Lillestrøm SK managers  Norway Countries in Europe Nordic countries Scandinavia Northern Europe Liberal democracies States and territories established in 872 States and territories established in 1905 Member states of NATO Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations Germanic countries and territories Scotland Autonomous regions Celtic nations English-speaking countries and territories Great Britain Island countries NUTS 1 statistical regions of the United Kingdom United Kingdom John Farnham live albums 1991 live albums Bingo 1530 introductions Spider-Man Spider-Man characters Characters created by Stan Lee Characters created by Steve Ditko Child superheroes Comics by Stan Lee Comics by Steve Ditko Comics adapted into films Comics adapted into plays Comics adapted into radio series Comics adapted into television series Comics adapted into animated series Comics adapted into video games Fictional adoptees Fictional business executives Fictional characters from New York City Fictional characters with precognition Fictional inventors Fictional orphans Marvel Comics characters with accelerated healing Fictional photographers Fictional reporters Fictional schoolteachers Fictional scientists Fictional vigilantes Superhero film characters Marvel Comics characters who can move at superhuman speeds Marvel Comics characters with superhuman strength Marvel Comics martial artists Marvel Comics mutates Comics characters introduced in 1962 1962 comics debuts Superheroes who are adopted Teenage characters in film Human and non-human experimentation in fiction Action heroes English phrases Metaphors referring to sport Association football terminology Terminology used in multiple sports 2009 singles Eva Simons songs EMI Records singles Debut singles 2009 songs Mosaic Mosaics Arts and crafts Decorative arts Architectural elements Italian mosaic Persian art Ancient Roman architecture Byzantine art Art materials Pavements Stud poker Sports clothing Trousers and shorts 1990s fashion 2000s fashion 2010s fashion 1963 births Living people People from Ruabon Welsh footballers Welsh expatriate footballers Association football forwards Wales international footballers Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in Germany Welsh expatriates in Germany FC Bayern Munich footballers Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Everton F.C. players Manchester United F.C. players Southampton F.C. players FC Barcelona players Expatriate footballers in Spain Welsh expatriates in Spain Welsh football managers Wales national football team managers Blackburn Rovers F.C. managers Manchester City F.C. managers Fulham F.C. managers Queens Park Rangers F.C. managers Stoke City F.C. managers Premier League managers UEFA Pro Licence holders BBC Wales Sports Personality of the Year Bundesliga players English Football Hall of Fame inductees People educated at Ysgol Rhiwabon Officers of the Order of the British Empire La Liga players 1979 songs 1979 singles 1992 singles AC/DC songs Songs about touring Song recordings produced by Robert John "Mutt" Lange Songs written by Malcolm Young Songs written by Angus Young Songs written by Bon Scott Hell in popular culture Atlantic Records singles Timeline templates AC/DC 1973 establishments in Australia ARIA Award winners ARIA Hall of Fame inductees Atco Records artists Atlantic Records artists Australian hard rock musical groups Australian heavy metal musical groups Blues rock groups Echo (music award) winners Grammy Award winners Musical groups established in 1973 Musical groups from Sydney Musical quintets Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees 2004 establishments in Alabama 2010 disestablishments in Alabama 21st-century musicians American Christian metal musical groups Culture of Birmingham, Alabama Heavy metal musical groups from Alabama Musical groups disestablished in 2010 Musical groups established in 2004 Musical quartets Gotee Records artists Environmental crime Environmental issues Hunting methods Illegal occupations Wildlife smuggling Hunting legislation 1975 births Living people People from Bury English footballers English football managers England international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football fullbacks Premier League players Manchester United F.C. players UEFA Euro 1996 players 1998 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players 2006 FIFA World Cup players Salford City F.C. Daily Telegraph journalists British association football commentators English Football Hall of Fame inductees English expatriates in Spain La Liga managers Valencia CF managers Expatriate football managers in Spain BBC Radio 4 programmes British radio game shows 1953 radio programme debuts Football League wartime guest players by club Stockport County F.C. Association football clubs established in 1883 Football clubs in England Former Football League clubs 1883 establishments in England National League (English football) Lancashire Combination Football clubs in Stockport Borough Music venues in Liverpool Culture in Liverpool Nightclubs in Liverpool Music in Liverpool 1957 establishments in England Visitor attractions in Liverpool Aggression Crowd psychology Information operations and warfare Mind control Propaganda techniques Psychological warfare Psychological warfare techniques Warfare by type Warfare post-1945 1984 births Living people French footballers People from Arras Cameroonian footballers Cameroon international footballers 2010 FIFA World Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players RC Lens players Tottenham Hotspur F.C. players Queens Park Rangers F.C. players AS Saint-Étienne players Ligue 1 players Premier League players The Football League players Cameroonian expatriate footballers French expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in England French people of Cameroonian descent Steve Harley albums 1992 albums 1963 births Living people People from Setúbal Portuguese footballers Association football midfielders Primeira Liga players Rio Ave F.C. players C.F. Os Belenenses players Portuguese football managers Primeira Liga managers S.L. Benfica managers U.D. Leiria managers FC Porto managers Premier League managers Chelsea F.C. managers Serie A managers Inter Milan managers La Liga managers Real Madrid C.F. managers Golden Globes (Portugal) winners UEFA Cup winning managers UEFA Champions League winning managers Technical University of Lisbon alumni Expatriate football managers in England Expatriate football managers in Italy Expatriate football managers in Spain Portuguese expatriate football managers Portuguese expatriates in England Portuguese expatriates in Italy Portuguese expatriates in Spain Portuguese Roman Catholics Commons category with local link different than on Wikidata Inter Milan Football clubs in Italy Football clubs in Lombardy Football clubs in Milan Association football clubs established in 1908 Italian football First Division clubs Serie A clubs Scudetto winners Coppa Italia winners G-14 clubs 1908 establishments in Italy Unrelegated association football clubs La Liga seasons 2008–09 in Spanish football leagues Sports media in the United Kingdom UEFA Euro 2012 UEFA European Championship Finals Spain national football team matches Italy national football team matches Spain at UEFA Euro 2012 Italy at UEFA Euro 2012 Sport in Kiev Italy–Spain relations 21st century in Kiev 1987 births Living people People from São Paulo (state) Association football midfielders Brazilian footballers Brazilian expatriate footballers Sport Club Corinthians Alagoano players Clube de Regatas Brasil players TSG 1899 Hoffenheim players FC Bayern Munich footballers VfL Wolfsburg players Expatriate footballers in Germany Brazilian expatriates in Germany Bundesliga players 2. Bundesliga players Brazilian Roman Catholics Brazil international footballers 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players 2014 FIFA World Cup players FIFA Confederations Cup-winning players 2004–05 UEFA Champions League 2004–05 in Turkish football Liverpool F.C. matches Sport in Istanbul UEFA Champions League Finals A.C. Milan matches Association football penalty shootouts International club association football competitions hosted by Turkey Association football clubs established in 1875 Football clubs in England Blackburn Rovers F.C. Sport in Blackburn The Football League founder members Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners 1875 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire WWE Bragging Rights Recurring events established in 2009 Recurring events disestablished in 2010 Italian footballers Italy international footballers World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners U.S. Cremonese players U.C. Sampdoria players Juventus F.C. players Chelsea F.C. players Serie A players Premier League players Expatriate footballers in England Italian expatriate sportspeople in the United Kingdom Italian expatriate footballers Italian football managers Premier League managers Expatriate football managers in England Chelsea F.C. managers Watford F.C. managers 1986 FIFA World Cup players UEFA Euro 1988 players 1990 FIFA World Cup players People from Cremona 1964 births Living people UEFA Pro Licence holders Italian expatriate football managers Australian inventions Swimsuits Australian clothing David Beckham 1975 births 1998 FIFA World Cup players 2002 FIFA World Cup players 2006 FIFA World Cup players A.C. Milan players Association football midfielders BBC Sports Personality of the Year winners Brimsdown Rovers F.C. players British expatriate sportspeople in the United States British people of Jewish descent Designated Players (MLS) England international footballers England under-21 international footballers England youth international footballers English bloggers English expatriate footballers English expatriates in Italy English expatriates in Spain English expatriates in the United States English Football Hall of Fame inductees English footballers English male models English people of Jewish descent Expatriate footballers in Italy Expatriate footballers in Spain Expatriate soccer players in the United States FIFA 100 FIFA Century Club LA Galaxy players La Liga players Ligue 1 players Living people Major League Soccer All-Stars Major League Soccer players Manchester United F.C. players Officers of the Order of the British Empire Paris Saint-Germain F.C. players People from Leytonstone Premier League players Preston North End F.C. players Real Madrid C.F. players Serie A players Sportspeople from London The Football League players UEFA Euro 2000 players UEFA Euro 2004 players Victoria Beckham 1992 albums Wet Wet Wet albums Mercury Records albums First Sea Lords Lords of the Admiralty Royal Navy admirals of the fleet Royal Navy personnel of the Crimean War Royal Navy personnel of the Second Opium War Royal Navy personnel of the 1882 Anglo-Egyptian War Royal Navy personnel of the Mahdist War British recipients of the Victoria Cross Royal Navy recipients of the Victoria Cross Members of the Order of Merit Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath Knights Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order People from Swaffham 1842 births 1921 deaths Grand Officiers of the Légion d'honneur Recipients of the Order of the Medjidie Grand Crosses of the Order of the Dannebrog  Family 1878 births 1964 deaths California state court judges Judges of the United States District Court for the Northern District of California United States district court judges appointed by Franklin D. Roosevelt Association football terminology Leadership positions in sports 1983 EPs 2005 albums Barnes & Barnes albums Oglio Records albums France national football team European national association football teams FIFA Confederations Cup-winning countries FIFA World Cup-winning countries Laureus World Sports Awards winners National sports teams of France UEFA European Championship-winning countries Fair City 1989 Irish television series debuts 1980s Irish television series 1990s Irish television series 2000s Irish television series 2010s Irish television series Bisexuality-related television series English-language television programming Fictional populated places in Ireland Irish television soap operas RTÉ television programmes Social realism Television Television terminology Video hardware Media formats Performing arts German inventions Russian inventions Scottish inventions British inventions American inventions 1927 introductions Hunting Meat Poultry Game birds Non-timber forest products Ball games Summer Olympic sports Racquet sports Sports originating in England Tennis Roger Federer 1981 births Living people Swiss male tennis players Grand Slam (tennis) champions in men's singles Australian Open (tennis) champions French Open champions Wimbledon champions US Open (tennis) champions Wimbledon junior champions World No. 1 tennis players Olympic medalists in tennis Medalists at the 2008 Summer Olympics Medalists at the 2012 Summer Olympics Olympic gold medalists for Switzerland Olympic silver medalists for Switzerland Olympic tennis players of Switzerland Tennis players at the 2000 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2004 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2008 Summer Olympics Tennis players at the 2012 Summer Olympics Sports world record holders Hopman Cup competitors Laureus World Sports Awards winners People from Basel-Stadt People of Afrikaner descent Swiss people of Dutch descent Swiss people of French descent Swiss people of South African descent Swiss Roman Catholics UNICEF people Münchenstein Football clubs in Switzerland FC Basel Association football clubs established in 1893 Multi-sport clubs in Switzerland 1893 establishments in Switzerland European national association football teams Football in Switzerland National sports teams of Switzerland Switzerland national football team 1995 births Living people Association football midfielders Croatian footballers Croatia under-21 international footballers Croatia youth international footballers Croatian First Football League players NK Varaždin players RNK Split players GNK Dinamo Zagreb players Switzerland Countries in Europe Central Europe Western Europe Federal republics French-speaking countries and territories German-speaking countries and territories Italian-speaking countries and territories Landlocked countries Liberal democracies Member states of the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Member states of the Council of Europe Member states of the United Nations 1997 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 1997 24-hour television news channels in the United Kingdom BBC television channels in the United Kingdom BBC News channels Television stations in Ireland 24-hour television news channels in India 1985 births Living people Footballers from Barcelona Spanish footballers Catalan footballers Association football midfielders La Liga players Segunda División B players Tercera División players FC Barcelona C players FC Barcelona B players FC Barcelona players RCD Espanyol B footballers RCD Espanyol footballers Premier League players The Football League players Swansea City A.F.C. players Wigan Athletic F.C. players Sunderland A.F.C. players Blackburn Rovers F.C. players Spain youth international footballers Spanish expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Wales Expatriate footballers in England Spanish expatriates in Wales Spanish expatriates in England Chelsea F.C. Football club television channels in the United Kingdom Television channels in the United Kingdom 2001 establishments in the United Kingdom Television channels and stations established in 2001 Premier League on television Game theory Metaphors referring to war and violence UEFA Champions League Finals 2014–15 UEFA Champions League 2014–15 in German football Sport in Berlin 21st century in Berlin International club association football competitions hosted by Germany Juventus F.C. matches FC Barcelona matches 2014–15 in Italian football 2014–15 in Spanish football La Liga clubs in Europe  2015–16 UEFA Champions League UEFA Champions League group stages FA Cup Finals 1994–95 FA Cup Manchester United F.C. matches Everton F.C. matches Football League Fourth Division Defunct Football League divisions Defunct fourth level football leagues in Europe 767 deaths Popes 8th-century Italian people 8th-century archbishops Papal saints 8th-century Christian saints 700 births 8th-century popes Stand-up comedy concert films Works by Craig Ferguson Live comedy albums Text editors Technical communication tools UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying 2014–15 in UEFA football 2015–16 in UEFA football UEFA European Championship qualifying UEFA Euro 2016 1932 films 1930s crime drama films American crime drama films American films American black-and-white films English-language films Triad films Films about race and ethnicity Films based on plays Films directed by William A. Wellman Films made before the MPAA Production Code Films set in San Francisco, California Films set in China Warner Bros. films FC Barcelona Football venues in Catalonia Sports venues in Barcelona Sports venues completed in 1957 Les Corts (district) 1992 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues 1964 European Nations' Cup stadiums 1982 FIFA World Cup stadiums Football venues in Spain Sports venues in Catalonia 1964 births 20th-century American writers 20th-century English writers 20th-century Protestants 21st-century American writers 21st-century English writers 21st-century Protestants Alumni of Balliol College, Oxford American Anglicans American magazine editors American male writers American people of English descent American people of French descent American people of German descent American people of Latvian-Jewish descent American people of Lithuanian-Jewish descent American people of Russian-Jewish descent American people of Swiss descent American people of Turkish descent American political writers British comedians Christians of Jewish descent Conservative Party (UK) MPs Converts to Anglicanism from Roman Catholicism Critics of the European Union Daily Telegraph journalists English Anglicans English magazine editors English male writers English people of American descent English people of French descent English people of German descent English people of Latvian-Jewish descent English people of Lithuanian-Jewish descent English people of Russian-Jewish descent English people of Swiss descent English people of Turkish descent English political writers Living people Mayors of London Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for English constituencies People associated with transport in London People educated at Ashdown House People educated at Eton College People from Camden (London borough) People from Crouch End People from Henley-on-Thames People from Islington People from Kensington People from Maida Vale People from Manhattan People from Uccle Politicians from New York City Politicians from Norwalk, Connecticut People of Circassian descent Presidents of the Oxford Union Recipients of the Paralympic Order The Spectator editors The Times people UK MPs 2001–05 UK MPs 2005–10 UK MPs 2015–20 Writers from London Writers from New York City Writers from Norwalk, Connecticut Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata Association football clubs established in 1895 Football clubs in England West Ham United F.C. Premier League clubs Former Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football clubs in London Southern Football League clubs 1895 establishments in England Blackpool F.C. Football clubs in England Sport in Blackpool Association football clubs established in 1887 The Football League clubs Premier League clubs Football League Championship clubs FA Cup winners Football League Trophy winners 1887 establishments in England Football clubs in Lancashire Football League One play-off Finals 2012 Football League play-offs 2011–12 Football League One Sheffield United F.C. matches Huddersfield Town A.F.C. matches 1986 births Living people Portuguese people of Bissau-Guinean descent Portuguese footballers Association football forwards S.C. Farense players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Hull City A.F.C. players Panionios G.S.S. players Premier League players The Football League players Expatriate footballers in England Sportspeople from Lisbon Portuguese expatriate footballers Expatriate footballers in Greece Portuguese expatriates in Greece Portuguese expatriates in Scotland Hibernian F.C. players Expatriate footballers in Scotland Scottish Premier League players Barnsley F.C. players Portuguese expatriates in England West Ham United F.C. players Portugal under-21 international footballers Portugal youth international footballers Portuguese expatriates in Turkey Expatriate footballers in Turkey Akhisar Belediyespor footballers Charlton Athletic F.C. players Fountains Water Garden features Landscape architecture Landscape gardens Architectural elements Outdoor sculptures Public art 1976 births Living people American field hockey players Olympic field hockey players of the United States Field hockey players at the 1996 Summer Olympics Football songs and chants 1968 singles 1983 singles Leeds United F.C. songs Manchester United F.C. songs Tottenham Hotspur F.C. songs South Sydney Rabbitohs Dr. Dre 1965 births 20th-century American businesspeople 21st-century American businesspeople African-American businesspeople African-American film producers African-American male actors African-American male rappers African-American record producers Aftermath Entertainment artists American businesspeople convicted of crimes American chairmen of corporations American corporate directors American hip hop record producers American music industry executives American music publishers (people) American music video directors American people convicted of assault American retail chief executives Businesspeople from Los Angeles, California Death Row Records artists Film producers from California Gangsta rappers G-funk G-funk artists Grammy Award winners Living people Male actors from Los Angeles, California Musicians from Compton, California N.W.A members Priority Records artists Rappers from Los Angeles, California Record collectors Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees Ruthless Records artists West Coast hip hop musicians English-language slang British slang United Kingdom in World War I Boer Wars Urdu words and phrases 2015–16 UEFA Champions League 2015–16 in UEFA football UEFA Champions League seasons Current association football seasons Nice Communes of Alpes-Maritimes Prefectures in France Massalian colonies Champagne (wine) Champagne wine AOCs French products with protected designation of origin French wine Sparkling wines German songs 2002 songs 2003 singles Wir sind Helden songs Pork Meat England national football team matches Germany national football team matches FIFA World Cup qualification matches 2000–01 in German football 2000–01 in English football Events at Wembley Stadium 2000 in London Germany at the 2002 FIFA World Cup England at the 2002 FIFA World Cup England–Germany football rivalry UEFA Champions League Finals 2011–12 UEFA Champions League 2011–12 in German football International club association football competitions hosted by Germany Chelsea F.C. matches FC Bayern Munich matches 2011–12 in English football Association football penalty shootouts