 1988 births Living people Sportspeople from Kinshasa Democratic Republic of the Congo footballers English footballers England youth international footballers England under-21 international footballers Association football midfielders Arsenal F.C. players Birmingham City F.C. players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players The Football League players Premier League players Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Democratic Republic of the Congo emigrants to the United Kingdom English Christians People associated with the University of Bolton Black British sportspeople Alumni of Staffordshire University Living people 1971 births Sportspeople from Rotherham British police officers English football referees UEFA Champions League referees 2010 FIFA World Cup referees FIFA World Cup Final match officials Members of the Order of the British Empire FA Cup Final referees 2014 FIFA World Cup referees Laws of association football Association football referees Association football terminology Sports officiating Bolton Wanderers F.C. 1877 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1877 Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in Bolton Football clubs in England The Football League clubs The Football League founder members Football League Trophy winners Premier League clubs Association football midfielders Association football positions Association football terminology FA Cup Recurring sporting events established in 1871 Football cup competitions in England National association football cups 1871 establishments in England Tottenham Hotspur F.C. 1882 establishments in England Articles containing video clips Association football clubs established in 1882 Commons category with page title same as on Wikidata FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in London Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs Multi-sport clubs in the United Kingdom Premier League clubs Southern Football League clubs Tavistock Group Laws of association football Association football referees Sports officiating English football referees Living people 1964 births Sportspeople from Leeds FA Cup Final referees FIFA World Cup FIFA competitions World championships Recurring sporting events established in 1930 Quadrennial sporting events Premier League Football leagues in England Top level football leagues in Europe 1992 establishments in England Sports leagues established in 1992 Professional sports leagues in the United Kingdom Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. The Football League founder members Football clubs in the West Midlands (county) Association football clubs established in 1877 Premier League clubs The Football League clubs FA Cup winners Football League Cup winners Football League Trophy winners United Soccer Association imported teams Sport in Wolverhampton 1877 establishments in England Manchester United F.C. 1878 establishments in England Association football clubs established in 1878 Association football clubs established in 1902 Companies established in 1878 Companies formerly listed on the London Stock Exchange Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange FA Cup winners Football clubs in England Football clubs in Trafford Football League Cup winners Former Football League clubs G-14 clubs Laureus World Sports Awards winners Premier League clubs Publicly traded sports companies Sport in Manchester Psychology Behavioural sciences Football refereeing in England English football organisations Premier League 1948 Summer Olympic venues Olympic football venues Sport in Haringey Football venues in London Tottenham Hotspur F.C. Premier League venues Sports venues completed in 1898 Football League venues Aging-associated diseases Causes of death Ischemic heart diseases Medical emergencies Articles containing video clips RTT Acute pain Heart Cardiac anatomy Articles containing video clips RTT Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Articles containing video clips Physicians Healthcare occupations Emergency medical responders Healthcare occupations Protective service occupations Medical credentials Hospital buildings completed in 1855 NHS hospitals in London Bethnal Green Bolton Articles including recorded pronunciations (UK English) Market towns in Greater Manchester Towns in Greater Manchester West Pennine Moors 1966 births Living people Sportspeople from Glasgow Dundee United F.C. non-playing staff Republic of Ireland association footballers Republic of Ireland international footballers Republic of Ireland under-21 international footballers Republic of Ireland under-23 international footballers Dumbarton F.C. players Clydebank F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. (1878) players Bolton Wanderers F.C. players Dundee United F.C. players Motherwell F.C. players Dunfermline Athletic F.C. players Ross County F.C. players Airdrieonians F.C. players Falkirk F.C. players St Johnstone F.C. players Falkirk F.C. managers St Johnstone F.C. managers Burnley F.C. managers Bolton Wanderers F.C. managers Wigan Athletic F.C. managers Houston Dynamo coaches Premier League players Premier League managers The Football League managers Republic of Ireland football managers Scottish Roman Catholics Scottish Premier League players Scottish Football League managers Scottish Football League players Scottish football managers Scottish people of Irish descent