Canadian wildfire flare-ups force evacuation of 8,000 more oil workers, officials say
A massive wildfire around the oil sands hub of Fort McMurray, Canada has forced the evacuation of another 8,000 workers from energy production facilities.
The fire jumped a critical firebreak area where plants and trees had been removed to stop its spread, moving north of Fort McMurray into oil sand camp areas.
"The evacuation zone has increased north of the city of Fort McMurray due to evolving fire conditions," the regional municipality of Wood Buffalo said in a statement.
"Several camps are affected by this evacuation. Approximately 8,000 people impacted."
The fire on Tuesday burned the 655-room Blacksand Executive Lodge for oil sands workers about 35 kilometres north of Fort McMurray.
Two others on the same road with a total of 4,000 rooms were at risk.
High temperatures and winds were working against firefighters, and the fire was forecast to move to the east, putting oil operations in its path, officials said.
Eight new fires sprung up over the previous 24 hours, bringing to 19 the total number burning in the province. Five of those were burning out of control.
The largest of these, in and around Fort McMurray, has grown to 355,000 hectares, officials said, and was moving 30 to 40 metres per minute.
Some 100,000 residents and oil workers had already been evacuated from Fort McMurray and its surroundings two weeks ago as the fire raged through neighbourhoods and destroyed about 15 per cent of the city's structures.
With new explosions in the city damaging 10 homes and hot spots still a risk, authorities are not yet allowing residents to return.
Across the rugged province that flanks the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains, there are nearly 2,000 firefighters, more than 160 helicopters, and 29 air tankers battling the blazes.
"This is quite an unexpected u-turn in events," said Jackie Forrest, vice-president of energy research at ARC Financial Corp.
"It's realistic to think this outage is going to last about another couple of weeks.
"The thing about it moving north is that it has potential to impact a much bigger part of the production and impact facilities that were deemed as having no damage."
Suncor, Canada's largest petroleum company, was forced to shutter its oil operations almost immediately after getting them back up and running.
It said it was moving its personnel to housing facilities farther north, and as a precautionary measure "started a staged and orderly shutdown of our base plant operations. There has been no damage to Suncor's assets," the company added in a statement.
It has boosted fire protection around the facilities.
Syncrude, majority owned by Suncor, has evacuated the majority of its workforce to Edmonton but left a minimum staff of about 100 people at its Mildred Lake upgrader and Aurora Mine.
The fire also threatened Enbridge's Cheecham crude oil tank farm south of Fort McMurray.
The blaze was about 1 kilometre from the tank farm, but firefighters had it under control as winds cooperated, officials said.
TransAlta's Poplar Creek cogeneration power plant, which provides power to Suncor, was also shut by early on Tuesday due to the wildfire.
Prior to the latest setback, lost oil production was expected to average about 1.2 million barrels a day for 14 days, or roughly $1 billion in lost real gross domestic product, according to the Conference Board of Canada.
Global oil prices touched a six-month high on Tuesday, with the Canadian outages among factors lending support.