Heavy snow continues, shutting down travel around metro area – The Denver Post
A powerful blizzard on Wednesday left Denver isolated by air and land, and tens of thousands of those stuck at home had no power.
Authorities closed Denver International Airport and Interstate 70. Interstate 25 was closed from Denver north to Loveland and from Castle Rock south to Colorado Springs.
“Some parts of the Denver area — like the eastern area — are getting one to two inches per hour,” National Weather Service forecaster Jim Kalina said. “Other areas are getting maybe half an inch or less an hour.”
The heavy snow started along the Front Range Wednesday morning and quickly made roads hazardous and forced school cancellations for nearly every school district not on spring break.
DIA is closed until further notice. Before closing, the airport reported hundreds of flight cancellations, with the number continuing to rise. All incoming and outbound flights have been put on hold, the FAA announced.
Shelters for stranded motorists are opening around the state.
The Colorado National Guard was deployed to help rescue those stranded by the storm.
Micki Trost, spokeswoman for the Colorado Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, said two group of soldiers are being deployed.
One group is heading to Interstate 25 in the Castle Rock area to help rescue stranded motorists. The other is being deployed to Fort Morgan as a precaution.
Castle Rock Fire and Douglas County are setting up places for stranded drivers in Kirk Hall at the Douglas County Fairgrounds.
Interstate 70 was closed at about 10:30 a.m. from Airpark Road east of Denver to Kansas, according to the Colorado Department of Transportation. It is also closed west of Denver to Silverthorne , the agency said.
Interstate 25 north of Denver has been closed to Loveland. The interstate is also closed south of Castle Rock to Colorado Springs.
RTD suspended light rail service between Federal Center Station and Jefferson County on the W line. Other light rail lines were running delayed.
Denver is under a blizzard warning until 6 p.m. as a heavy band of snow is combining with gusty winds up to 39 mph.
As of noon, snow totals included 21.5 inches in Nederland, 18 inches in Broomfield, 16 inches in Boulder, 10 inches in Denver and 7.6 inches at DIA, according to the National Weather Service. It reported eight inches fell in a four-hour span in Boulder.
Federal Heights was at about 8 inches by 8 a.m. with southeast Aurora at 4 inches and north Westminster clocking in around 6 inches, Kalina said.
Official blizzard conditions include visibility that is a quarter-mile or less, sustained winds and heavy snow that is expected to fall for three hours or more.
Many parts of Denver are meeting this criteria, Kalina said.
“This time of the year, we can get blizzards and big snows,” he said. “If we’re going to get it any time of the year, it’s usually March.”
CDOT sent out an alert just before 7 a.m. that all vehicles driving the interstates in the Denver metro area must follow the traction law.
Denver Public Works said its snowplow crews were out running their routes and warned of slushy conditions.
Denver city government initially began sending non-essential employees home at noon, then closed completely — except for essential and emergency services — at 1:30 p.m. Denver district and county courts, all city libraries, and the auditor’s and clerk and recorder’s offices also closed by afternoon. Recreation centers were set to close at 2 p.m.
The City Council’s central office closed at 1 p.m., but a Neighborhoods and Planning Committee began, as scheduled, at 1:30 p.m. in the City and County Building downtown.
Public safety employees and some public works crews are among those who will continue working.
The Colorado Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management is deploying two group of soldiers, said spokeswoman Micki Trost.
One group is heading to Interstate 25 in the Castle Rock area to help rescue stranded motorists. The other is being deployed to Fort Morgan as a precaution.
By 7:45 a.m., numerous fender benders throughout the area were complicating an already difficult rush hour.
“There’s many accidents,” said Trooper Nate Reid, with the Colorado State Patrol. “I would never be able to give you a number, it is slow going through the whole metro area.”
Officials are asking travelers to check with their airlines before going out to DIA.
SNOW TOTALS: How much did your area get?
The overnight low in Denver was 33 degrees, causing overnight precipitation to remain as rain. Rain turned to snow in the Denver metro area around 4 a.m. and quickly started to accumulate .
“Massive flakes” of snow could fall at inch-per-hour rates in Denver and could reach up to 2 to 4 inches per hour in areas of the foothills, said Kyle Frieden, National Weather Service meteorologist.
The snow has been responsible for downed trees and limbs.
R.B. Fast’s 9-year-old daughter built a snowman in their Barnum neighborhood backyard earlier Wednesday in Denver, only to see the snowman got wiped out by a 7-foot-tall branch that fell from Fast’s 20-foot hedges.
“One of the core pieces of the hedges landed right on it and crushed it,” Fast said.
A big branch from a crab apple tree in her yard also took a dive.
The hedge, from the 1950s, has never been this damaged by the snow before.
“It’s particularly bad this storm,” she said. “We’ve never lost branches like this. We’ve definitely lost more and bigger ones, too.”
Travel is expected to get worse throughout the day as the band of snow hits the I-25 corridor.
“It’s like driving in peanut butter,” Frieden said of the road conditions early Wednesday morning.
LIVE BLOG: Weather and traffic updates from across the state
The temperature in Denver will fall to 31 degrees by noon as winds pick up and snow continues, according to the NWS .
“By tonight it will pretty much get out of here,” Frieden said.
Thursday will be partly cloudy and reach the mid-to upper 40s as a high. The next chance for snow in the Denver area will be Friday night and into Saturday.