6 teens killed, 2 injured when overcrowded SUV flips into pond
Investigators are trying to determine why, but Ohio State Highway Patrol Lt. Brian Holt said Monday that weather was not a factor in what he called the deadliest traffic accident in Trumbull County history -- and the worst in Ohio in at least three years.
None of the passengers was wearing seat belts, the highway patrol said in a statement. It also said that the owner of the SUV reported it stolen on Monday, although the statement did not indicate whether the owner had been aware of the accident.
The divers "did an amazing job," Holt said. "I know that the end result was tragic, but you can't ask for better response, professionalism. They got in the water immediately, and they did what they could do," he said.
WKBN "She was loving. She was silly, and she was a clown. She liked to make everybody laugh even when we were sad," her sister Ashia Cayson told CNN affiliate WKBN in Youngstown, Ohio.
"I got the call that he was in an accident, and when they picked him up they said his heart wasn't working and they tried for hours to get him to come back," Behner told WKBN.
the most recent numbers from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About a quarter of 15- to 24-year-olds who died in 2010 were killed in motor vehicle accidents, according to the most recent numbers from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The motor vehicle deaths significantly outpaced the other top culprits: firearm wounds, homicides, suicides and accidental poisonings.
National Highway Transportation Safety Administration's latest numbers. While the number of young drivers involved in fatal crashes has dropped significantly over the past decade, 15- to 20-year-old drivers were at the wheel in 10% of deadly accidents in 2010, according to the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration's latest numbers.
"We're a community that celebrates our victories together, whether they're in the classroom or on the sports fields and arenas. So we're also a community that pulls together and cares for each other at times like this," Warren Mayor Doug Franklin said.
"Pick up the phone and call your siblings, your family and tell them you love them. You never know what can happen. Tomorrow is not promised to anybody."