QR left scratching its head over train crash
The investigation will also look at reports of a bomb hoax at the station on Wednesday, the afternoon before the derailment and will take into consideration the placement of the station, directly at the end of the track. "It's an investigation which will take everything into consideration, so it will be looking at the black box which is on board all of our trains, which will include information which is contained in the data logger "It will take into consideration the communications between the train driver and our train control centre, it will take into consideration witness statements, it will take into consideration everything (of importance) to this comprehensive investigation." But Mr Benstead said he would not offer any theories or explanations on what happened until the final report, expected to take three months, was complete. Aerial shot of the train crash in Cleveland.
Instead he said he was confident Queensland Rail's commuter trains and rolling stock were safe. "I want to assure everybody that we have a regular maintenance of our rolling stock, regular maintenance of our trains...and that every morning we do a pre inspection check before our trains leave the depot," he said. "There were no red flags, in particular, this train behind us, was last maintained about three weeks ago and that's in line with how regular our maintenance is." Later, after repeated questioning on the safety of the organisation's trains, Mr Benstead reiterated his stance. "If I had any concern on the safety of our rolling stock, naturally they would not be in service," he said.
"I have full confidence that we have a regular maintenance inspection, regular maintenance service that takes place on all our stock...if I had any concern there was a systemic problem with our rolling stock I would remove them from service." Mr Benstead said he was unable to say how fast the train was travelling when it crashed through a concrete bollard, travelling 10 metres into the station, demolishing the men's toilets and badly damaging the women's. The Cleveland service only resumed this morning after the weekend's storms caused it to close. Services had only been running for a few hours when the incident happened and Mr Benstead said it was unlikely they would resume before mid next week. Thirteen passengers were on board the train when it derailed, as well as the driver and a guard.
Some passengers were taken to Redlands Hospital, but all are believed to have been released. Mr Benstead said while he had not spoken to the driver himself, his staff had been in touch with him and he had ensured he was receiving support. "Naturally he is very shaken up and he has some minor injuries and we are giving all the support and care that we possibly can," he said. "And I believe one of our customers on board has some very minor injuries as well. "So we are very lucky in this particular case that there are no major injuries and very thankful that is the case.
Redlands Hospital director of medical services Doctor Rosalind Crawford said nurses and doctors were put on stand-by and patients were moved as the hospital heard news of the Cleveland line crash. The hospital treated 10 people for minor injuries such as cuts, bruises, back and shoulder pain and all of them had been discharged by 12.30pm. “It is our standard practice to prepare for a worst case scenario,” Dr Crawford said. “In the initial stages of the emergency, we did not know how many people were involved, and what their injuries would be. “Staff from across the hospital worked together smoothly and swiftly to prepare for a serious event involving multiple casualties and I’d like to acknowledge their professionalism."
There were 13 passengers in the train's six carriages and five people on the platform at the time of the crash. Police Superintendent Jim Keogh said the male bathrooms bore the brunt of the damage if a person had been in the male toilets "he certainly would have died". Queensland Rail issued a statement reporting all customers and staff had safely left the train and station building by 11.30am. But the crash has sent shock waves through the local community. Brian Scott, from Redlands Realty, ran to the station after he heard a “really loud noise” and saw a “huge cloud of smoke and dust”.
“It was like a big roar, and then a thud - it was pretty frightening,” Mr Scott said. “We saw the train in the air and inside the platform it was unbelievable. Not much exciting happens this end of the world. I think we’ll be talking about this for a while.” Another local man, who did not wish to be named, said he and his friend helped pull the young woman found in the bathroom to safety. "The force had pushed her up against the other wall - she was inside the cubicle," he said. "My mate pulled of the door he grabbed her - she said nothing, she was clearly in shock. "She had her earphones in she hadn’t heard anything."
He said they appeared to have suffered only scrapes and bumps. Queensland Rail cut power to the station after the crash caused damage to overhead powerlines. Passengers should check the TransLink website before traveling or phone 13 12 30 to get the latest update.