ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Officials believe one of the four people who survived yesterday's plane crash in Papua New Guinea was an Australian pilot.
The Airlines PNG Dash 8 was flying from Lae to Madang on the country's north coast when it crashed at about 6:00pm with 32 people on board. Only four are believed to have survived.
It is believed most of the passengers were parents travelling to Madang for their children's graduation ceremony at the Divine Word University.
Local reports say the survivors were taken to a clinic in a village close to the crash site last night.
This morning Australia's Department of Foreign Affairs said "initial indications" were that no Australians had lost their lives.
"Airlines PNG and local authorities have advised that there were 28 passengers and 4 crew on board.  They understand that four people survived the crash, including one Australian pilot and one New Zealand pilot," a DFAT spokeswoman said.
A photo showed a heavily-bandaged Chinese man, one of the survivors, being treated in a local hospital.
Locals said there was a violent thunderstorm in the area as the plane approached Madang.
Sid O'Toole, the spokesman for Papua New Guinea's Accident Investigation Commission (AIC), said the plane went down over land about 20 kilometres south of Madang.
"There were reports of fire and there have been some fatalities," he said.
Mr O'Toole also said there were survivors but did not provide any details.
He said police and ambulances have reached the crash site and investigators would be travelling there today.
More than 20 planes have crashed since 2000 in Papua New Guinea, whose rugged terrain and lack of internal connecting roads make air travel crucial for its 6 million citizens.
A 20-seat Twin Otter crashed in August 2009, killing nine Australians and one Japanese tourist on the short journey from Port Moresby to the popular Kokoda trekking site.
That accident - in which an aircraft ploughed into a mountainside - also involved an Airlines PNG plane, with a subsequent report ruling pilot error was likely at fault in conditions of poor visibility.
PNG has since introduced legislation requiring all aircraft carrying more than nine people to have a cockpit recorder installed.
Australians concerned about family or friends on the plane are being urged to call a DFAT hotline on 1300 555 135.