2 Amtrak workers killed when train strikes backhoe
Chester, Pennsylvania (CNN)Amtrak said Monday it will restore service, albeit with some delays, along the route where one of its trains carrying 341 passengers crashed into a backhoe the day before.
"We're still gathering the facts," said Ryan Frigo, the National Transportation Safety Board official in charge of investigating the crash, which killed two people.
Here's a look at what we know -- and don't know -- so far:
NTSB officials will be looking at multiple factors that may have played into the crash: mechanical, operations, signal, track, human performance and survival.
Frigo said that the event data recorder and forward-facing and inward-facing video from the locomotive have been recovered.
The big unanswered questions: Why was the backhoe on the track near Chester, just south of Philadelphia? Why did the train continue its route from New York to Savannah, Georgia, when Amtrak construction workers may have been on the track?
The two people killed were construction workers for the railroad service, a source close to the investigation said. Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-New York, said the two people killed were the backhoe operator and his supervisor, both Amtrak employees.
The train was carrying about 341 passengers and seven crew members when it crashed, Amtrak said. The impact caused the lead engine of the train to derail.
"I think we crumbled under the pressure," she told CNN. "There's a hole, and it looks as if the train bent, and that was about 2 feet in front of me. It felt like an explosion. I ended up on the ground."
The debris was so thick that it looked like snow on the windows, she said.
He didn't see the backhoe that lay ahead on the track. But "there was a lot of debris in the track, and we started driving through that," the Brooklyn resident said. "There was a lot of gravel noise."
"I looked outside, and it looked like we were in this brown cloud," he said, speculating that the dustiness came from construction or high winds. "We were rolling into this storm, this sandstorm."
"There was tremendous impact on the first car," Hills said. He said the roof of that car was torn open, and several windows were broken.
"It feels like a nightmare," he said. "It felt like this is that experience that I've feared in the past."
In about 12 hours, there were three train accidents -- including the Chester crash -- in the United States on Sunday.
Amtrak initially said it was providing limited service between Philadelphia and Wilmington, Delaware, as the Federal Railroad Administration and NTSB investigate. A later statement said that trains will run as regularly scheduled but that there would be some delays between Philadelphia and Wilmington.
"Unfortunately, no. We rely on it too much in this part of the country."