Christchurch state of emergency lifted
Police and army staff will continue to patrol quake-affected areas, as Canterbury moves into the recovery phase, following the lifting of the state of emergency.
The continuation of Operation Reassurance will mean that police will continue to saturate parts of the city 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Canterbury District Commander Superintendent Dave Cliff said police want to reassure the public that criminals can expect to be stopped by police.
''Residents with any concerns about people acting suspiciously in their neighbourhood should not hesitate to call Police on 111.
"We will continue to maintain a highly visible presence in the community to ensure that people contemplating illegal activity or behaviour are dealt with," he said.
Earlier today the state of emergency in Christchurch was lifted by the city council. Christchurch Mayor Bob Parker said Christchurch was now moving from a state of emergency to a state of urgency. "We will be operating under the new powers  brought in under the Canterbury Earthquake Response and Recovery Bill, but transferring from a civil defence situation and back closer to business as usual." "This doesn't change the fact that many people are still facing great difficulties, and resolving this issues will continue to be a focus as we rebuild our region. As mayors we have jointly dedicated ourselves to finding as many lasting solutions as possible."  The functions of the EOC (Emergency Operation Centre) at the Civic Offices are being transferred over the next two days to the Council's normal operations.
However, Cantabrians are on edge again after the worst night for aftershocks since the days following the big earthquake.
Seven quakes in the space of as many hours jolted many people awake and were a reminder the event is not over yet.   GNS Science duty seismologist Mark Chadwick said some of the aftershocks had been felt quite strongly because they were so shallow.
"There were quite a few that we only five or six kilometres deep, and that is very shallow, and there were others that were a bit deeper at 15 to 18km deep. Unfortunately the bigger ones were the shallower ones.
"Also, some of the smaller ones were closer to Christchurch and would have been felt almost the same as if they were bigger ones further away."
The 10.42pm shake was 4.4 in magnitude, 8km deep and centred between Prebbleton and Lincoln. At 3.13am there was a 4.5 magnitude aftershock only 6km deep near Springston, followed by a 4.3 at 4.35am that was 6km deep and located near Lincoln.
Chadwick said people should not be unduly alarmed by the bad night.
"The general trend of aftershocks is down. I'm hoping it will be a quieter night tonight."
For more information on the aftershocks, see: www.geonet.org.nz.