Flights canceled, fires, power outages amid record heat
San Francisco (CNN)It's so hot in the West that the scorching heat is breaking records, causing massive power outages and prompting flight cancellations.
On Tuesday, Phoenix hit a daily record reaching 119 degrees Fahrenheit, which ranked as the fourth hottest day on record for the Arizona city. Death Valley, California, lived up to its name as it set a daily record at a high of 127 degrees, according to the National Weather Service.
Las Vegas was also scorching and tied an all-time record high at 117 degrees Fahrenheit on Tuesday.
It was a scorcher! Here's a look at some of the records beat or tied, some of which were all time records! #nvwx #cawx #azwx #VegasWeather pic.twitter.com/eMb7HgvvjI
Excessive heat warnings have been issued for inland California, southern Nevada and parts of southwest Arizona until Friday. More than 29 million residents in California are under a heat warning or advisory.
Here's how the sweltering heat wave is affecting the West:
The heat wave was already affecting travel in Phoenix, American Airlines canceled 43 flights Tuesday to and from Phoenix Sky Harbor Airport due to extreme heat, the airline said.
There could be more cancellations later Tuesday, an airline spokesman said. Seven flights were canceled due to weather on Monday, when the temperature reached 118 degrees, rounding out the total to 50 weather-related cancellations in two days.
Somesmaller regional jets cannot take off in temperatures hotter than 117 degrees, it said in a statement.
"Our smaller regional operations -- those that use our CRJ aircraft types -- will be most affected by the heat," the airline's communication specialist Kent Powell told CNN. "We really aren't expecting any change to the operation with our mainline aircraft."
Because hotter air is thinner, planes also need more speed to take off and, thus, require more runway. Sky Harbor's runways are long enough to accommodate most planes in hot weather, American Airlines said.
-- In Phoenix, the 118 degrees on Monday tied the record set exactly a year ago.
-- The record-breaking continued Monday with Sacramento hitting 107 degrees, a step hotter than its 106-degree record from 1988. It could get even hotter on Wednesday, with a forecast temperature of 109 degrees.
-- On Monday, Stockton, California, saw a record high of 109 degrees and Lancaster in southern part of the state had 110 degrees.
Firefighters across California are battling several fires, including one near Big Bear spreading to 950 acres. They dealt with a grass fire in Sacramento that broke out during Monday's evening commute.
Power outages have been reported over the last few days in California's Central Valley, the Bay Area and southern parts of the state.
As temperatures increase, more people turn on air conditioners, which use a lot of electricity and can strain the power system.
reported CNN affiliate KGO. The heat could've been a factor as four lanes of Highway 50 in West Sacramento began to buckle on Sunday. Drivers reported the giant cracks forming on the road and the lanes were repaired, reported CNN affiliate KGO.