Mother, children drown when car plunges into water
A MOTHER and her young son and daughter are believed to have drowned after their car plunged into a flood swollen river in northern NSW this afternoon.
Police have located the submerged car near the northern bank of the Tweed River but are yet to recover the trio’s bodies. Fading light has delayed the recovery until tomorrow.
A NSW Police spokesperson said police drivers are travelling up from Sydney and a crime scene guard will remain at the scene overnight.
The alarm was raised when a 10-year-old girl managed to escape and was seen hysterically screaming to residents at a nearby property for help.
According to Seven News, witnesses said the young girl was screaming that her mother, brother and sister were all trapped in the car.
The vehicle plunged into the river after running off Dulguigan Road at Tumbulgum about 1.40pm.
NSW Police said sonar equipment had located the car submerged about five metres from the river bank about 3.25pm.
The bodies of the mother and her two children are believed to still be inside.
What caused the car to plunge into the river is not yet known.
Nearby residents frantically tried to rescue the occupants of the car but told reporters at the scene, they could see only bubbles rising to the surface.
Retired highway patrol officer Matt Grinham was passing by when he came across the scene.
He told the Gold Coast Bulletinthat he dived into the water and followed the bubbles from the submerged car as it was washed downstream.
“We were going down feet first trying to work out where the car was,” Mr Grinham told the publication.
“Then we tried diving a couple of times but the water was so brown and cold … the flood run off is freezing down there.
“The car was completely submerged when we got there.”
Another witness, Peter Taylor said the girl’s feet were bleeding as she ran up the road desperately seeking help.
“This little girl has run down the road, and she has said her mum and dad or family have gone into the river,” he told Nine News.
“She is only a little thing and her feet were bleeding apparently, that’s what the fireys tell me, and they called an ambulance and called the police.”
The girl has been treated in hospital, where she remains, being cared for by family members.
Northern Region Assistant Commissioner Jeff Loy described the crash as a tragedy.
“This is a tragic event and we’re very concerned a tragic event will unfold over the evening,” he said.
“This is about heeding the warnings of the road closures, this has been a major event and the emergency services don’t take those closures lightly.”
Local road closures are in place near the crash site, as a large emergency services contingent remains on scene.
It’s the latest tragedy in what’s been a devastating few days for flood-hit residents of northern NSW towns.
Two women, 36 and 64, were carried off by floodwaters, while a 46-year-old man died in Murwillumbah from a heart attack when paramedics couldn’t reach him. A 45-year-old man was discovered dead at a South Murwillumbah caravan park, although his cause of death is yet to be confirmed.
A massive clean-up operation is underway as communities pick up the pieces of ruined homes and businesses.
Both NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian and Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull visited the region on Monday to get an update from the State Emergency Service and to let locals know they will be offered financial and moral support. Lismore, Murwillumbah and Tweed Heads residents have been given the all-clear to return home after floodwaters washed through the region over the past three days.
Ms Berejiklian has warned that while this was a “one-in-40-year event” such freak weather incidents were only going to increase.
The premier has also put insurance companies on notice to do right by their customers and process claims quickly.
“No-one is to drag their feet,” she said.
“They’ll be answerable to me.” The prime minister, who got on all fours and washed the floor in a Lismore restaurant, said enormous support was being offered to the town, including means-tested assistance for damaged homes and belongings to be administered through state governments.
Since Thursday, the SES has dealt with more than 2600 jobs and 480 flood rescues.
It is also reminding people to beware of receding floodwaters and drive carefully on damaged roads as they venture back home.
“Many of them are starting to realise that the extent of damage to their businesses and their homes are such that they are probably not likely to get back to any state of normality for weeks, if not months,” SES deputy acting commissioner Mark Morrow told media.
Residents have also been warned to watch out for wildlife that could have taken shelter in homes.
“We had people finding snakes, spiders and rats,” SES spokesman Phil Campbell said.