Australian feared dead in Vietnam boat sinking
Vietnamese immigration police have released a list of those killed in this morning's sinking of a boat in the tourist haven of Halong Bay.
Local authorities still say one Australian man died, but immigration police say that at the moment they do not believe that is the case.
The list of 12 people is not final, but it includes two Americans, two Russians, two Swedes, one Japanese, one French, one Swiss and one British tourist. One Vietnamese tourist and a tour guide also died.
Up to 15 others were rescued and one survivor says he does not believe there were Australians on the boat.
American survivor Greg Fosmire, 23, managed to escape through a window but said he feared his girlfriend and another young woman in their cabin did not escape the rushing waters.
"The whole thing took between 30 seconds and a minute," he said."I had to put my face to the ceiling to suck any air."
All of the bodies are at the Bai Chay Hospital near Halong Bay.
A doctor there has told the ABC they are all young people without identification.
He says three people admitted and treated for shock have been discharged.
The Department of Foreign Affairs says people concerned about the welfare of their family and friends in the area should try to contact them directly.
If contact cannot be made, people can call DFAT's consular emergency centre on 1300 555 135.
The traditional junk sank just before dawn while its passengers were sleeping.
A possible leak in the engine room is being investigated as the cause of the sinking.
It is not the first time disaster has struck at the popular tourist attraction.
In September 2009 three foreign tourists - two from Britain and one from France - died along with their local guide when their vessel overturned during heavy rain on the bay.
Halong Bay, about 200 kilometres north-east of Hanoi, is one of Vietnam's top tourist attractions, drawing tens of thousands of domestic and overseas visitors each year, many of whom take overnight boat tours.
The bay, located in the Gulf of Tonkin east of Hanoi, was declared a UNESCO World Heritage site in 1994.
Its 1,600 islands and islets form a spectacular seascape of mostly uninhabited limestone pillars made famous by the 1992 French movie Indochine.