BP oil spill hits record as Gulf's worst
BP's oil spill, considered the worst in U.S. history for several weeks, today set a new, notorious record as the worst ever in the Gulf of Mexico.
The disaster, begun April 20, has spewed 140.6 million gallons of oil into Gulf waters, based on the highest of the federal government's estimates, reports the Associated Press. That eclipses the previous record of 140 million gallons set by the Ixtoc I spill off Mexico's coast from 1979 to 1980.
The growing total is vital to track, because BP will likely be fined per gallon spilled, Larry McKinney, director of Texas A&M University at Corpus Christi's Gulf of Mexico research institute, told the AP.
"It'll be well beyond Ixtoc by the time it's finished," and eclipsing that record before the normally tourist-heavy July Fourth weekend is unfortunate, Ed Overton, a Louisiana State University environmental studies professor, said in the story. He consults for the federal government on oil spills.
The U.S. government estimates that BP's blown-out Macondo well has leaked a bare minimum of 71.7 million gallons into the Gulf. It takes into account the amount of oil BP has collected.
The BP spill, while the largest ever recorded offshore during peacetime, is not the biggest in history, reports the AP.
During the Persian Gulf War, as they neared defeat in 1991, Iraqi forces opened valves and dumped about 460 million gallons of oil, according to the story.
BP is continuing to drill two relief wells to stop the Gulf oil spill but is not expected to finish before August, reportsUSA TODAY colleague Elizabeth Weise.
Hurricane Alex, which made landfall Wednesday night in northeastern Mexico and has since weakened into a Category 1 storm, has pushed more oil onto Gulf Coast beaches and slowed cleanup efforts. Its high winds and rough seas forced boats collecting oil to return to shore.
The stormy weather, however, has helped break up the oil "very quickly," Coast Guard Cmdr. Randal Ogrydziak told the AP. "Mother Nature is doing what she does best, putting things back in order." He added:
People will be fishing here again. It may take a while, but people may be surprised that it's not taking as long as they thought. Look at the (Ixtoc) oil spill in Mexico. It was massive and now people are back to using those waters.