Swarm of Moderate Earthquakes Strikes Amatrice, Italy; No Deaths Reported
Multiple moderate earthquakes struck central Italy Wednesday afternoon, shaking many of the same towns that were devastated by a pair of devastating tremors last year.
The U.S. Geological Survey said four earthquakes of magnitude 5.1 or higher were located near the town of Amatrice, the first of which struck at 10:25 a.m. local time (4:25 a.m. EST) Wednesday morning. The largest tremor was a 5.7, which was reported 3 miles west-southwest of Amatrice at 11:14 a.m. local time. Preliminary reports showed all of the quakes had a depth of 6.2 miles.
Speaking in Berlin after a meeting with Chancellor Angela Merkel, Italian Premier Paolo Gentiloni said, "Luckily it seems there were no deaths," according to the Associated Press. Shaking was felt as far away as Rome, and as a precaution, the subway was shut down in Rome, and parents were asked to pick up their children from school early, the AP also reported.
(MORE: How to Help the Victims of the Deadly 2016 Italy Earthquakes)
Officials told local media that heavy snow in central Italy crippled travel in recent days, which would further complicate rescue and relief efforts. In some areas, electricity was already knocked out by the storms, and the earthquakes knocked out phone service and sent some residents into a panic.
"The situation is really getting extreme," said Franco Campitelli, the mayor of Canzano. "It's snowing hard. We're without electricity. We hope the army gets here soon with snow plows or we risk being completely isolated," he told Sky TG24.
The region is rebuilding from a pair of devastating earthquakes that collapsed many buildings and killed upwards of 300 last year. In August, a 6.2 magnitude quake largely wiped out towns and killed at least 240, according to the New York Times. Two months later, a 6.6 magnitude tremor – the strongest to hit Italy in more than 30 years – left more injuries and damage in the same areas, CNN reported.
MORE ON WEATHER.COM: The Deadliest Earthquakes Since 1990