WHEN WILL IT STOP? Rising floodwaters menace wary residents
SYDNEY'S Warragamba Dam is at 99 per cent and expected to spill over within hours.
The last time the dam spilled for 14 years ago. Floodgates will open if water continues to rise.
"Once Warragamba Dam is 80mm above its full storage level, the first drum gate opens automatically," said Sydney Catchment Authority acting chief executive Sarah Dinning.
"If the water level rises to 230mm above full storage level, the four radial gates on either side of the drum gate also open.
"Water released through the gates flows down the spillway into a pond, 100 metres below the dam."
The news comes after a downpour that put the state on high alert, with three-quarters of NSW at risk of flood.
Tumut in southern NSW might again be the focus of flood concerns tomorrow as the wandering band of torrential rain which has soaked much of NSW shifts south.
"It could be a hot spot tomorrow - they are expecting a lot of rain again as the rain band drifts south," State Emergency Services spokesman Phil Campbell told thetelegraph.com.au this afternoon.
"The caravan park there has been evacuated twice in three days and they might be doing it again tomorrow."
Mr Campbell said the other areas being watched intently by the Bathurst and western Sydney's Hawkesbury-Nepean valleys.
"The rain band starting dumping on the central west but the town's really well protected by levees and it's a remote chance they'll get major flooding," he said.
"The river can get a half kay or one kay wide but it's not so much a threat to property - the bathurst showgrounds and ovals get covered but homes should be OK."
A severe weather warning remains in place for much of NSW.
The SES said about 800 residents in the city's far west are expected to be flooded today, with major roads and bridges at Windsor and North Richmond submerged.
A moderate flood watch was in place for the Nepean-Hawkesbury Valley, prompting SES incident controller for western Sydney Keith Fitzgerald to warn: "People should think seriously about keeping their children home from school and about changing their normal commuting."
Warragamba was late yesterday at 93 per cent capacity and expected to spill over for the first time in 14 years.
"We initially thought the dam would spill earlier but there was a slight reduction in rain in the catchment - we were expecting more than 140,000 megalitres to flow into the dam before 10pm but it now looks like that will be 130,000 megalitres," Sydney Catchment Authority spokeswoman Karen Smith said.
Emergency service workers yesterday doorknocked about 500 homes and businesses in Cooma, as heavy rain pounded the Monaro region. Nursing-home residents, some on stretchers, were among those evacuated.
Several hundred residents of Goulburn were also told to evacuate from Eastgrove, a suburb east of Goulburn as the swollen Mulwaree River continued to rise.
Some areas in Central Australia had had more than 100mm of rain in the past two days. Typically, the Alice Springs district receives about 286mm a year.
Rain continues to beat down on Victoria
Victoria's northeast is on flood alert as the state prepares for another downpour tomorrow.
The army has also been called in to help towns in Victoria's northeast brace for tomorrow's forecast deluge.
Another 100mm forecast for parts of north and eastern Victoria tomorrow is expected to threaten properties in Albury, Wodonga, Mt Buffalo and East Gippsland.
Up to four Unimog trucks based at Shepparton will assist in ferrying sandbags, food and water to towns such as Tallygaroopna and Katandra West.
It comes as Tallygaroopna residents attempt to relieve water through a nearby channel to prepare the town for further flooding.
Meanwhile, further east, the SES has shifted personnel to towns such as Wangarratta, Beechworth and Mitta Mitta to brace for heavy rainfalls today. Meanwhile, a group of schoolchildren trapped when heavy rain caused a landslide on Mt Buffalo in Victoria's alpine region have been removed safely from the mountain. The two adults and 28 senior students from Mansfield Secondary College spent the night at a mountain lodge after boulders, trees and soil blocked the only access road. Parks Victoria staff led them to safety early today.
Another 100mm forecast for parts of north and eastern Victoria tomorrow is expected to threaten properties in Albury, Wodonga, Mt Buffalo and East Gippsland.
The Victorian Emergency Service received more than 730 calls yesterday as fallen trees caused havoc on the roads, people appealed for sandbags and buildings were damaged.
Residents in Tallygaroopna and Congupna, north of Shepparton, were told to prepare for evacuation as a local waterway was starting to overflow.
Albury-Wodonga copped more than 90mm yesterday while Yarrawonga and Shepparton received up to 73mm. The biggest dump was in Mt Buffalo, which recorded 125mm.
Weather bureau forecaster Andrea Peace said today would be mostly fine in Victoria with scattered showers, but the state should brace itself for a wild weekend. "We will be hit again ... and it will spread across the state," she said.
"February and March are the driest months of the year and it's pretty unusual to see record breaking rainfall," Ms Peace said.
In the ACT, a large dam near Canberra being built after a severe drought four years ago overflowed last night. The spectacular sight at Cotter Dam was captured on the Dam Cam. The old dam, built in 1912, is completely submerged for the first time in its history.
Rains eased over Canberra and the surrounding region overnight, with today's forecast predicting just a few millimetres more today before a return of heavier falls on the weekend.
Emergency services workers in the ACT are still working their way through more than 500 calls for help following wet weather that has caused flooding in some parts of the territory.
The ACT State Emergency Service says more than 100 outstanding requests for help - which are concentrated in the northern suburbs of Canberra - should be completed by tonight, ahead of more rain tomorrow.
In SA, a flood-damaged bridge has closed the Barrier Highway to Broken Hill in the north-east of the state for at least a week.
Detours in place will add hundreds of kilometres to road trips.