Light plane crashes into Tokyo residential area; three people reportedly killed
A light plane crashed into a residential area in Tokyo on Sunday morning, setting fire to several houses and reportedly killing three people, according to officials and local media.
The five-seater plane with a 36-year-old pilot crashed around 11:00am (local time) shortly after it departed from Tokyo's Chofu airport, public broadcaster NHK reported.
NHK said two men inside the plane, which was carrying five people, were killed. A woman who was inside one of the houses was also killed and five other people were injured, the broadcaster said.
Jiji Press said the two casualties aboard were the pilot and a male passenger.
At least five houses and two cars were on fire in the capital's residential district of Chofu near the airport, and the crash also damaged the roofs of other houses nearby, according to the spokesman and local media.
"I heard a tremendous sound like a truck crashed into a house ... When I looked outside from a window, fire was flaring up," an unidentified woman told NHK.
"The fire was blazing up so hard," she said.
"I thought it was flying quite low and then I heard a bang," another local resident who witnessed the crash told NHK.
Television footage showed firefighters battling the inferno, as well as the remains of the plane's tail that had squashed a car. It also showed flames engulfing one of the houses and the plane's front fuselage as black smoke rose from the crash site near a school, a baseball stadium and a shopping arcade.
"This place is close to the airport but I'm surprised because I had never thought that an airplane would crash," an 82-year-old woman told NHK.
The single-engine propeller-driven aircraft was bound for Izuoshima island in the Pacific, some 100 kilometres south of central Tokyo for a one-day training flight, local media said.
"I have lived here for a long time and get used to the noise of light planes, but it was obviously abnormal," Kotaro Sunaga, a 32-year-old businessman, told Jiji Press.
Police have launched an investigation into the accident on suspicion of professional negligence resulting in death, local media said.