Most power restored after India hit by second, even larger outage
first power grid collapse, on Monday The first power grid collapse, on Monday , was the country's worst blackout in a decade. It affected seven states in northern India that are home to more than 350 million people.
Power in New Delhi and in the northeastern region was fully restored; electricity was 86% restored to the northern region, and 79% restored in the eastern region, it said.
During the blackout, one traveler in New Delhi told CNN-IBN that her journey home had taken almost three hours, rather than the usual 40 minutes. "Long night ahead, with no lights -- I've got my trusty solar lamp ready for the night," she said.
An elderly woman said she would rely on candles and flashlights to get through the outage, which she blamed on poor governance.
The cause of the problem was the failure to generate sufficient power to keep pace with surging demand, he said.
Power is considered a luxury in much of India, where a third of households don't have enough to power even one light bulb, according to last year's census.
Some of this summer's increased demand has been caused by farmers using more energy for irrigation and other tasks, in part because rains during this year's monsoon season, which began June 1, are down by more than a fifth. People are also using air conditioning units more to cope with high humidity.
The monsoon rains,which last through September but would normally be at their heaviest in July and early August, not only provide rain for agriculture and hydroelectric power, but serve as a natural coolant, said CNN meteorologist Brandon Miller.
Humidity exceeding 80% makes the mid-90s Fahrenheit temperatures feel like more than 100 Fahrenheit. This makes it harder for buildings to cool at night, and harder for people to cool themselves through evaporation of perspiration, all of which lead to higher energy demands, Miller said.
India -- the world's fourth-largest consumer of electricity -- relies on coal for much of its energy but also uses hydroelectric power, which has been affected by the diminished monsoon rains.
Observers say the crisis has exposed the need for India to update its infrastructure to meet its growing power needs.
"Economic growth is constrained by inadequate infrastructure," among other factors, the U.S. State Department's country report on India says.
"Foreign investment is particularly sought after in power generation," it adds, as well as areas including telecommunications, roads and mining.