Magnitude 6.4 earthquake hits southern Taiwan, topples 17-storey building
A powerful magnitude 6.4 earthquake has toppled a 17-storey apartment building in southern Taiwan, killing at least 12 people and triggering frantic efforts to rescue people feared trapped inside.
The fatalities include a 10-day-old baby girl and two other children, who died when the Wei-guan Golden Dragon Building collapsed as the tremor struck at the start of a Lunar New Year holiday.
Two other victims were killed in different parts of the city by falling debris, the National Fire Agency said.
Rescuers mounted hydraulic ladders and a crane to scour the wreckage, plucking more than 240 survivors to safety, with hundreds taken to hospital, though many were quickly released.
Buildings in nine other locations in the city of 2 million people tilted at alarming angles, but a fire department official said rescue efforts were focused entirely on the apartment block.
"I was watching TV and after a sudden burst of shaking, I heard a boom," said a 71-year-old neighbour who gave his name as Chang.
"I opened my metal door and saw the building opposite fall down."
The quake was centred 43 kilometres south-east of Tainan, at a depth of 23 kilometres, the US Geological Survey (USGS) said.
At least five aftershocks of magnitude 3.8 or more shook Tainan about 30 minutes after the initial quake, according to Taiwan's Central Weather Bureau.
Authorities said there were 96 apartment units in the Golden Dragon Building and 256 registered residents. Late in the day, city mayor William Lai said five people were missing there.
Rescuers used dogs and acoustic equipment to pick up signs of life in the rubble.
Taiwan's defence ministry said 810 soldiers had been mobilised for rescue efforts.
Questions have been raised about the construction of the Wei-guan Golden Dragon Building, after its floors pancaked down on each other when the tremor hit.
The building appeared to have collapsed onto the first storey, where a child's clothes fluttered on a laundry line.
Shortly after the quake, Taiwan's Formosa TV showed images of police, firefighters and some troops in camouflage uniforms at the site and said its reporters could hear the cries of some residents trapped inside.
Firefighters hosed down part of the building to prevent a fire while others used ladders and a crane to enter upper floors.
City officials said it was too early to determine if poor construction was a factor in the collapse.
City government deputy secretary general, Liu Shih-chung, said television footage of the ruins of the commercial-residential building suggested the possibility of structural problems related to poor-quality reinforced steel and cement.
The construction and engineering companies that built the complex are no longer operating, records showed.
Two neighbours said they had felt nervous about the construction when the building went up in the 1990s.
"I looked at it and thought, only people from out of town would buy there. We local people would never dare," said one of the neighbours, Yang Shu-mei.
Taiwan President Ma Ying-jeou visited an emergency centre and hospital in Tainan while president-elect Tsai Ing-wen cancelled appointments to help coordinate rescue efforts.
China's Taiwan Affairs Office, which in is charge of Beijing's relations with the self-ruled island, said China was willing to provide help if needed, Chinese state news agency Xinhua said
Eight shelters were set up around the city, with over 100 people taking refuge there, while restaurants and hotels offered free food and rooms to residents.
"The buildings collapsed, but Tainan will stand again! Please treat here like your temporary home, rest well and freshen up. You aren't alone," said one Tainan hotel called Adagio Travel on its Facebook page.
Utility Taipower said power had been restored to all but 900 households after the quake initially cut power to 168,000 households in Tainan.
Some bullet train services were suspended to the south of Taiwan as inspections were carried out on the tracks for any quake damage, Taiwan High Speed Rail Corp said in a statement.
Taiwan lies in the seismically active "Ring of Fire" zone. It was struck by a magnitude 7.7 quake that killed more than 2,400 people in September 1999.