Highway 401 crash near Newcastle may involve 50-60 vehicles: reports
At least five people have been injured, some critically, in a multi-vehicle collision in wintry weather on a busy southern Ontario highway.
Police reopened the westbound lanes of Highway 401 between Newcastle and Newtonville around 11:40 p.m. ET and the eastbound lanes a couple of hours earlier.
Provincial police said five people were transported to hospital, two with life-threatening injuries, and one was re-routed to Sunnybrook Medical Centre in Toronto.
Aaron Lazarus of Lakeridge Health says police were going from car to car checking for injured people on the closed 10-kilometre stretch of highway about 80 kilometres east of Toronto.
Reports say dozens of vehicles were involved in the Friday afternoon collision, but police say they don’t have a count. Firefighters say one driver had to be cut from his rig.
Provincial police say Highway 401 westbound lanes at Newtonville were closed due to the multi-vehicle collision. Police say all traffic is being diverted off Highway 401 at Newtonville. Reports have said that as many as 80 vehicles could have been involved in the crash.
Police say Toronto Transit is helping transport stranded motorists to a recreation centre in Newcastle, where Red Cross is on scene to provide assistance.
The OPP is reporting that the 401 is closed both ways.
Firefighters say one driver had to be cut from his rig.
Const. Linda Wolf says police are looking into today’s blast of winter weather as a possible factor in the crashes.
“There are no serious injuries at this point, only minor injuries,” she said. Const. Wolf also warned that “anyone who is heading in that area, they should find an alternative route,’ and that it would take ‘several hours’ for officials to sort through the wreckage.
Though snow had been falling in the area at the time, Const. Wolf does not consider weather to be the main factor causing the wreck.
“We’ve never put down weather conditions as a total number one factor (in crashes),” she said.
“Drivers have to take responsibility. If you need to adjust your driving conditions to the weather conditions, slow down, be aware of things down the roadway.”
She also believes serious injury was averted in the crash due to the diligence shown by drivers in wearing their seat belts.
I give credit to everyone that was wearing their seat belts. It’s another time. where you just never know,” she said. “If you always have your seat belts on then it is going to give you protection in your vehicle.”
Spokeswoman Vanessa Thomas said Metrolinx was supplying one bus at the request of the provincial police to provide shelter for the occupants of vehicles involved in the crash.
More as it comes, and reactions and updates from social media below.