UK Snow: Travel networks paralysed as deep freeze persists
Swathes of the rail network were closed, including many services out of London, and regional airports also suffered badly
On the roads, motorists were warned to stay at home as the hazards of snow and ice intensified yet again across much of the country, with temperatures struggling to get above zero.
The travel misery is set to continue today, with forecasters predicting up to 20cm (8in) of fresh snow across the East of England and more blizzards in London and the South East.
Thousands of workers are expected to stay home as an urgent review is launched into how transport operators are coping with the deep freeze.
Officials at Gatwick have already warned the airport will stay shut until at least 6am on Friday, as the persistent heavy snow defied the efforts of ground staff to clear the runway.
A spokesman said: "We are doing everything we can to resume operations, however conditions have deteriorated considerably. Our teams are working around the clock to make the runway safe for aircraft to use and get our airlines and passengers flying again."
Staff at Edinburgh airport said they hoped to reopen the runway by midday, while London City, Southampton, Durham Tees Valley and Robin Hood airports were also closed on Thursday morning.
Rail companies remained at the mercy of the bitter conditions, with Southern cancelling all services until at least 10am on Thursday morning and others offering very limited timetables.
Dozens of passengers were forced to spend Wednesday night on a train between London and Brighton – the third consecutive night that commuters have been stranded on broken down trains overnight.
Police forces across the country warned drivers only to make essential journeys as heavy snowfall made for treacherous driving conditions.
Parts of the M20, A66 and A628 were closed due to dangerous weather conditions, while the M3 was closed northbound at junction 9 because of a jackknifed lorry.
Widespread ice caused major problems nationwide yesterday, with the AA attending more than 11,300 incidents. The RAC also saw call volumes rise to unprecedented levels for this time of year.
In Crawley, West Sussex, a motorcyclist was killed in a crash involving a lorry at 5.10am, and a woman died after falling into a freezing lake at Pontefract racecourse, West Yorkshire.