Death toll rises in gas-line explosion near S.F. airport
SAN FRANCISCO (MarketWatch) -- The official death toll from the natural-gas-line explosion in a San Francisco Bay Area suburb stood at four people Friday, with 38 homes destroyed, as authorities moved to aid victims and determine the cause of the accident.
The explosion in a residential section of the city of San Bruno, located south of San Francisco and near San Francisco International Airport, also caused significant damage to seven houses, authorities said.
A state of emergency was declared in San Mateo County where San Bruno is located. In a Friday morning press conference broadcast on local TV stations, Calif. Lt. Governor Abel Maldonado -- filling in for Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, who was on an Asia trip -- said more than 50 people were treated for injuries. Three of them were in critical condition.
A spokesman for PG&E Corp. PCG, +0.57% said 300 customers remained without gas service and 700 were without electricity Friday morning.
In a written statement, PG&E said: "Though a cause has yet to be determined, we know that a PG&E gas transmission line was ruptured. If it is ultimately determined that we were responsible for the cause of the incident, we will take accountability."
Maldonado also announced that PG&E has committed to offer temporary housing, food and clothing to the fire victims.
The California Public Utilities Commission, local officials, federal agencies and the utility are investigating the cause of the explosion and fire.
In a statement, Democratic House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said the National Transportation Safety Board, the federal agency that investigates pipeline accidents, has sent a team to California. Pelosi, whose congressional district covers San Francisco, added that the Bay Area congressional delegation will work with state and local leaders to deliver aid to the "families of those who have lost lives, the injured and those who have lost their homes."
"The thoughts and prayers of the Bay Area and the nation go out to the victims of the natural-gas explosion in San Bruno," Pelosi said. "Our thanks go out to the hundreds of first responders, who continue to valiantly work to save lives and homes."
Shares of PG&E fell 8.35% to close at $44.21.
The fire started around 6 p.m. local time Thursday. The explosion left a huge crater and caused speculation that a plane had crashed. The state declared a state of emergency for San Mateo County.
The Bay Citizen reported that last week residents had smelled gas in the area and that PG&E had sent workers to investigate.
Officials said more people may have died, and firefighters searched the area for victims. Injured people, including some with critical burns, were being treated at local hospitals, reports said.
The fire hasn't disrupted operations or flights at the airport.