Powerful aftershocks hit Christchurch
ALI MOORE, PRESENTER: Tens of thousands of homes in Christchurch are without power tonight after a series of earthquakes rocked the city. Ten people were injured in the powerful tremors. Residents panicked and rushed onto the streets fearing a repeat of the earthquake disaster in February.
DOMINIQUE SCHWARTZ, REPORTER: The people of Christchurch were once again running from buildings and dodging debris as another series of quakes rocked the city.
VOX POP: It's just really tiring. I think that's what it is: it's just really exhausting. And then you sit here in town and you wonder if the house is standing.
VOX POP II: This quake was like (draws head back), and it just kept rolling like - I've only felt one other quake that rolled like a - like you were on a ship or something. That was freaky.
DOMINIQUE SCHWARTZ: A 5.5 magnitude quake struck early in the afternoon then a magnitude six an hour and a half later.
Buildings in the CBD already damaged in previous quakes took another hit.
VOX POP III: I just said to my colleagues New Zealand should decide whether it's an ash cloud or an earthquake; I can't deal with both.
DOMINIQUE SCHWARTZ: Amateur video and CCTV footage captured the effects of the quakes as people ran from shops onto the street.
Shopping malls and offices were evacuated. Power was cut to 50,000 homes and businesses and roads became grid-locked as thousands of residents fled the inner city.
VOX POP IV: I'm pretty shaken up, actually. I mean, it's a pretty traumatic time for everyone.
VOX POP V: There's bricks over the road, down the streets and stuff again, so it's weaving around them to get out.
DOMINIQUE SCHWARTZ: Houses south of the city were left precariously perched after fresh rock-falls.
In the eastern suburbs, the ground shook so much it turned to liquid. Burst water mains added to the flooding.
JOHN KEY, NZ PRIME MINISTER: For the people of Christchurch, I'm sure they just want this to end. Quite frankly, I'm sure they were over all of this and they want the sense of normality to return, and I think we can all feel their frustration. But they have got to know that we stand beside them, that we are totally committed to re-building the city.
BOB PARKER, MAYOR OF CHRISTCHURCH: Oh, look, everybody is tired. You know, I mean, we've been through more than just about anyone should ever have to even contemplate going through.
DOMINIQUE SCHWARTZ: A coronial inquest into a building collapse which killed 116 in the February earthquake was interrupted by today's quakes. Families who lost loved ones just months ago forced to flee the building.
VOX POP VII: We all go numb for a period of minutes or so.
DOMINIQUE SCHWARTZ: An emergency operations centre has been set up here on the edge of the CBD, and residents are being told to prepare for a long night with the possibility of more aftershocks.