South Carolina flooding: More devastation possible
(CNN)The rain may have stopped, but South Carolina is grappling with a host of new concerns. Dam breaks. Billions of dollars in damage. And rivers that still haven't crested.
"We still have to be cautious," Gov. Nikki Haley told reporters on Tuesday afternoon. "The next 36 to 48 hours are going to be a time that we need to continue to be careful."
Haley declined to provide an estimated cost of the damage -- which she called "disturbing" -- but said state and Federal Emergency Management Agency officials were making assessments.
"It's hard to look at the loss we're going to have," she said. "This could be any amount of dollars."
More than 400,000 state residents were under a "boil water advisory" affecting about 16 water systems, said Jim Beasley, a spokesman for the S.C. Emergency Response Team.
CNN affiliate WCBD-TV "That's somebody's family out there," he told CNN affiliate WCBD-TV . "That's (a) family suffering. That's their family there that popped up from under the ground. And I think it's the human thing to do."
The casket, still adorned with white and pink flowers, carried the remains of a woman buried in May, WCBD said. Another casket, that of the woman's husband, also drifted away, but Dorchester County sheriff's officials later recovered it.
"Even though we lost everything and stuff got stolen, we can rebuild together and help each other and be each other's backbones and carry each other through this time because we need each other," he said.
And the mayor of Columbia, who has said he believes damage "will probably be in the billions of dollars," is bracing for more trouble.
"We aren't close to being out of the woods," Mayor Steve Benjamin said Tuesday, adding that even more dams could be in danger of breaking or being topped by water. "We still expect the water to start coming down from the Upstate, coming downhill to the Midlands."
"It was a garden hose that just kept pouring ashore in one spot, and that spot was South Carolina," he said.
Flooding conditions could force the South Carolina Gamecocks to move Saturday's game against Louisiana State University to Baton Rouge, University of South Carolina Athletics Director Ray Tanner said. The school hopes to make a decision in the next day or two.
The University of South Carolina has canceled classes through Friday, saying that resuming normal operations for its 34,000 students and 6,000 faculty would "place an undue burden on a recovering infrastructure in the city."