Amazing reports about massive Midwest storm
NASA is calling the storm exploding over in the Midwest "one of the largest winter storms since the 1950s." On Monday, we talked about what all of the ice and snow the storm might bring. Now it's well underway.
Here are some Twitter reports aggregated from a variety of sources, illustrating the power, severity and danger of this historic winter storm:
CNNweather: The 13.2" measured in Tulsa breaks the 1-day record, and breaks the record for most snow during the month of February, all in 1 day.
TWCBreaking: An incredible 5" of snow [fell] in 90 minutes in Miami, OK
JimCantore: From Tulsa NWS: MEDIA REPORTS CONTINUE TO INDICATE THERE ARE SEVERAL HUNDRED PEOPLE STRANDED IN CARS ACROSS NORTHEAST OKLAHOMA.
TWC Breaking: Where has the heaviest snow fallen so far? Northeast Oklahoma into southwest Missouri. Roughly 15 to 21".
JimCantore: Radar from Chicago shows intense area of 2" to 3" per hour snowfall rates about 45 minutes south of Chicago metro area [6:30 p.m. ET]
TWCBreaking: What does Lakeshore Drive look like right now? [Photo]
WeatherBugMedia: WOW! NWS CHI: Before making the decision to travel, consider if getting to your destination is worth putting your life at risk.
breakingweather (AccuWeather): More than 1 [million] people from the Midwest to Northeast could be without power due to ice downing tree limbs and powerlines.
CNNweather: Ice Storm Warning issued for Indianapolis. Roads will become impassable due to icing. Widespread, long-duration power outages are likely.
TWCBreaking: Wind chills as low as -36 at Boise City, OK. Per NWS...this is the lowest wind chillrecorded by the Oklahoma mesonet!
TWCBreaking: First ever "hard freeze" warning issued by the DFW [Dallas] National Weather Service. [Link]
WeatherBugMedia: Woodstock Willie - IL's version of @GroundhogPhil - won't be coming out. Organizers have canceled the "Feb. 2 prognostication" for 2011
accuweather: We are heading out to Punxsutawney today to greet the Groundhog. Weather will be worse than any in recent memory.
Sally Forth comic by Steve Alaniz & Francesco Marciuliano; drawn by Craig MacIntosh. H/T Steve Tracton