<font color="black">Live report: 7.0-magnitude quake hits SW China's Sichuan</font>
The Organization Department of the Communist Party of China (CPC) Central Committee has earmarked 3 million yuan ($480,800) to the quake-stricken area. The money will be used for rescue work in the quake zone and relief for CPC members affected by the quake, the department said in a statement on Sunday.
The central Chinese government has allocated 1 billion yuan ($162 million) for disaster relief to the quake zones in Sichuan on Sunday, said the Ministry of Finance.
Update on damages in the Lushan April 20 earthquake:
Sichuan provincial government held conference on Sunday to update damages in the Lushan April 20 earthquake. It said 2986 kilometers of road and 327 bridges damaged, 24 substations and 224 power lines destroyed 724 fixed and mobile communication base stations damaged Communication breakdown in 16 townships.
Military and civilian rescue teams are struggling to reach every household in Lushan and neighboring counties of southwest China's Sichuan Province, badly hit by Saturday's strong earthquake.
A helicopter carrying China Rescue members returned after experiencing unstable, strong turbulence on its way to quake-hit Baoxing county.
Ningkang Dam, damaged in the Ya'an earthquake, has been switched off due to the safety concern over national highway 318, causing water shortage to more than 10,000 residents in Quantian county, The Beijing News reported. Local authorities are laying pipelines to deliver water from the dam to residents.
An earthquake measuring 5.4 on the Richter scale jolted China's Sichuan province at 5:05 pm Sunday Beijing Time, according to the China Earthquake Networks Center. The quake was the largest aftershock since a deadly 7.0-magnititude quake hit Saturday morning.
China on Sunday thanked the international community for offering assistances following Saturday's devastating earthquake in Southwest China's Sichuan province.
"The Chinese government and people are sincerely grateful to various means of assistances offered by some countries," Foreign Ministry spokesman Qin Gang said in a statement.
Stressing the Chinese government is going all out to carry out rescue work, Qin said the country has guaranteed rescue and medical treatment capability and sufficient rescue materials.
"Considering the inconvenient traffic and telecommunications in quake zone, foreign rescue and medical teams and materials are not required now," Qin said, adding that China will make requests if needed.
The Red Cross Society of China has published the ways of contact for international fund assistance, Qin said.
Mother loses two children in two earthquakes
Lu Jingkang lost her daughter from the Ya'an earthquake in Southwest China's Sichuan province on April 20, five years after she lost her son in the deadly Wenchuan earthquake.
"God treats me too harsh, it is too harsh," she said.
Lu's 17-year-old daughter Yue Yushan died when the family's home collapsed during the 7.0-magnitude earthquake in Ya'an, Yangtze Evening News reported. Yue is an “understanding and clever girl”, said the 50-year-old mother. She would have taken the national college enrollment exam next year and dreamed of becoming an English teacher.
Light to moderate rain will sweep the country's quake-hit regions from Monday to Wednesday, China's meteorological authority forecast on Sunday.
The National Meteorological Center (NMC) said in a statement that rain will cause difficulties for those carrying out relief work, and may also bring about secondary disasters including flooding, landslides or mudslides.
The NMC warned local residents to prepare for the rain and take precautions against possible disasters that could happen.
Temperatures in the quake zone will see small fluctuations in the next few days to stay between 14 and 24 degrees Celsius, the NMC forecast.
The Ministry of Justice has ordered judiciary departments to ensure stability of prisons in areas ravaged by the 7.0-magnitude earthquake in southwest China's Sichuan Province.
Minister of Justice Wu Aiying said at an emergency meeting held on Saturday that swift measures should be taken to ensure the safety and stability of prisons and other correctional facilities.
Judiciary departments in disaster areas should try and save injured police officers and other personnel, and ensure they have daily necessities and supplies, she said.
Wu ordered strengthened internal administration in prisons and improved education of inmates as well as those in reeducation programs, so as to maintain normal order.
The ministry has dispatched working groups to quake-hit areas to direct relief work in prisons and other correctional facilities.
Rescue forces have started a comprehensive relief operation in southwest China's Sichuan Province, which was hit by Saturday's strong earthquake, trying to reach every household.
Armed forces involved in the relief mission are required to reach every village and all households in the affected areas to rescue survivors and treat the injured. They are also required to help in re-opening roads, transport materials, build shelters and providing supplies, according to a joint command of the Chengdu Military Area Command (MAC) on Sunday.
Two medical teams of 20 members from Chengdu’s two hospitals will take helicopter to the quake-hit Baoxing county, which was inaccessible for damaged road.
Liming Water Plant in Lushan county, which was hit by a magnitude-7 earthquake on Saturday, resumed operation at 1 pm on Sunday, after two hours’ repair by 15 workers, making it the first water plant to resume water supply in the quake-hit areas, according to Sichuan Economics Daily. The water plant can provide water for 100,000 people in the county, the report said.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs said domestic relief supplies are currently sufficient for the rescues in earthquake-stricken areas in Sichuan province on Sunday.
Qin Gang, the spokesman said the traffic and communication situation in these areas make it unnecessary for foreign rescue teams and relief goods.
China will request for help when necessary, Qin said.
A woman was killed and a man injured in a mountain slide in Hanzhong, Shaanxi province, caused by the quake in Ya'an, Sichuan province.
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang returned to Beijing Sunday afternoon after visiting the earthquake-hit areas and deploying relief work.
A strong quake in Southwest China's Sichuan province has left 181 people dead and 24 missing up to date, the China Earthquake Administration (CEA) announced Sunday.
Of the dead, 164 deaths were reported in Ya'an City and eight in Chengdu City, the CEA said.
At least 6,700 were injured, including 494 in serious condition, it said.
The highway from Lushan county to Baoxing county has been restored, China Central Television reported.
Some 2100 rescuers deployed to Lushan county have rescued 93 people and evacuated more than 2,000. Chen Fei, commander of the efforts said rescue efforts cannot yet reach some townships due to roads damaged, CCTV reported.
Twenty-five people have been confirmed dead and another 25 are missing in Baoxing. 2,500 people are injured in the county, China Central Television reported. Food reserve in the county can only last for two days.