At Least 9 Dead, More Missing After Fire During California Warehouse Party
Anxious families were awaiting word Saturday on whether their loved ones had escaped a raging inferno in Oakland, California, after at least nine people were killed during a late-night party at a converted warehouse.
At least two dozen people remained unaccounted for, officials said. "We expect the number of deceased to go up," said Alameda County sheriff’s Sgt. Ray Kelly. "This is a very, very sensitive time."
Emergency responders have had to delicately trudge through the rubble in the search for more victims, Kelly said. He described a twisted mass of beams, wires, and wood that he called a "maze."
During the fire at the building — known as the Oakland Ghost Ship — the roof collapsed onto the second floor where the party was held, and parts of the second floor collapsed onto the first floor, officials said.
Fire Department Operations Chief Mark Hoffman said he saw no evidence of sprinklers. The first floor was an artists’ collective made up of divided workspaces that Hoffman described as a "labyrinth."
Recovery crews were pulled out after the structure began to shift and became unsafe but later resumed.
"The building is very, very tricky to work," Kelly said, who expected crews to continue to work for the next 48 hours. "We have water that's still coming down on top of our people. There’s beams, there’s all sorts of wreckage and debris that we have to maneuver through."
The blaze happened at about 11:24 p.m. PT Friday (2:24 a.m. ET Saturday), while a party was being held in the "warehouse-type structure," Oakland Fire Department Chief Teresa Deloach Reed said. At least 25 people were unaccounted for, she added.
Hospitals received very few injured victims, Kelly said. "It appears that people either made it out, or they didn’t make it out," he told reporters.
Related:Former Occupant of Warehouse Said Building Was 'Sketchy' and 'Unsafe'
Bob Mulè, a witness, told NBC News the building is a 24-hour artist collective. He said people started to smell smoke during Friday night's party.
"We were trying to figure out where the smoke was coming from and we saw where the fire was, it was on the back left corner of the space," he said. "It all happened really quickly. The fire went up really really quickly."
Mulè suffered burns and was still waiting to hear whether his roommate escaped the blaze.