Blizzard Britain: Latest travel advice on airports and roads
The Siberian blast of icy weather is causing mayhem for UK travellers. Passengers trying to jet away from airports in Scotland have been faced with closures and delayed departures as temperatures have plummeted as low as -20. 
In Scotland, Edinburgh Airport is currently closed due to heavy snow. In Glasgow, flights have resumed this morning after the airport re-opened although passengers should expect delays and further cancellations.
Aberdeen Airport has turned to Twitter to keep passengers informed. Early morning posts on the feed,http://twitter.com/ABZ_Airportsaid the airport was 'operational' and that workers were clearing snow from the runway. 
Newcastle International has currently suspended all flights to and from the airport. In Birmingham, the airport is open as normal although there has been a raft of cancellations this morning. Luton and Jersey have also suffered disruption.
otoring groups have predicted a ‘nightmare’, with roads blocked by snow and ice and cars struggling to start after sitting on driveways in sub-zero conditions all weekend.
And a London Underground strike has crippled the network, causing lengthy delays in the freezing temperatures for millions of commuters.
The sub-zero temperatures have already led to heavy snow blanketing swathes of the country.
Forecasters warned that the mercury will plunge even lower - to minus 20C - as the severe weather continues until next week, with snow due to hit London and the Home Counties tonight.
Snowfall in many areas is likely to be so heavy that even gritted roads will be unable to cope. Disruption is also likely on rail and bus services in parts of the North East and Scotland.
It follows a weekend which saw many areas turn colder than Moscow. The mercury fell to minus 18 in Llysdinam, Powys early yesterday, a record low for November in Wales and the UK’s chilliest for the month since 1985.
Coldest overnight in the UK was Altnaharra in northern Scotland, which recorded a low of minus 16.1C.
Llysdinam, which saw Wales's chilliest ever November reading yesterday at minus 18C, was a bit warmer today at minus 12.9C.
The temperature in Northolt, west London, bottomed out at minus 2.2C but it was colder in the South West, with North Dartmoor recording minus 7.9C.
Blizzard conditions and jack-knifed lorries forced authorities to shut the A9 between Dunblane and Perth, one of the busiest roads in Scotland, last night.
The move led some motorists to abandon their cars and look for accommodation.
Central Scotland Police said the road remained closed this morning and urged drivers to avoid the roads throughout the rest of the force area unless absolutely necessary.
A spokesman said: 'Conditions are horrendous and we would urge caution.'
All schools in Dundee, West Lothian and Shetland were closed this morning.
The weather caused havoc on some roads with cars sliding into ditches, lampposts and fences.
One driver was fighting for his life in hospital after he was hit by an out of control car in snowy conditions on the M1.
The 40-year-old from Wallsend, North Tyneside, was injured in a multiple vehicle pile up near Sheffield  at 8am yesterday morning.
A South Yorkshire Police spokesman said: 'We are urging motorists to take extra care and to take more time for their journeys.'
A man died on Saturday after jumping into the icy waters of the River Lune in Lancaster to save his dog.
And a 37-year-old woman was killed as her car collided with a minibus on the snow-hit A394 at Longsdowns near Penryn, west Cornwall.
The UK’s lowest recorded temperature in November was minus 23.3C at Braemar, in the Highlands, on November 14, 1919.
Up to 2ft of snow has already fallen in Northumberland and northern and eastern Scotland, and 4in in parts of central England and Norfolk. Areas such as Dorset and Cornwall, which seldom see snow so early in the winter, had a generous covering.
London and the surrounding area is expected to be hit by up to an inch by tonight as the bitter easterly winds originating in northern Russia penetrate further into Britain.
Michael Dukes, of MeteoGroup, predicted readings of minus 20C in some parts of Scotland this week.
‘You are seeing some ridiculously low temperatures – like the middle of Scandinavia,’ he said.
‘This is certainly an extraordinary cold snap.’
Many areas will see temperatures remain below zero tomorrow, while the warmest place will be the South East, which will experience a balmy 4C.
The Arctic conditions have been caused by a combination of light winds, snow cover and clear skies - and could see readings down to minus 20C in Scotland later this week.
Met Office severe weather warnings were in place along the east coast today with heavy snow from Scotland, down through the North East, Yorkshire and Humber and East Midlands.
Temperatures struggled to get above freezing, even in the big cities.
The severe conditions could last well into next week, forecasters warned, with rain, sleet and snow.
A number of sporting events were affected by the bad weather over the weekend.
In the Scottish Premier League, matches Dundee United vs Rangers and Motherwell vs Hearts were both postponed after pitches became unplayable and fears were raised about the state of the roads.
And Sandown's big meeting next Saturday is already under threat from the cold spell after frost got to the covered track.
The AA had dealt with 12,000 breakdowns by 3.30pm, more than double the normal amount.
A spokesman said: "It's been an exceptionally busy morning. Wales and the eastern coast of Scotland have been the worst affected but it has been busy across the country as a whole.
'We're also expecting a busy morning tomorrow as people head back to work, particularly if cars have been left sitting over the weekend.
‘A lot of cars haven’t been used over the weekend and when people go to work or school on Monday they’ll find the battery is flat or they can’t get out of the drive.
‘The main concern once they do get going is ice. Even on major roads which have been treated, patches of ice can still develop.
‘They need to leave extra time for the drive itself and to make sure the car is completely clear of snow and ice before they set off.’The RAC urged drivers to consider alternative forms of transport until the treacherous weather improves, saying that calls were up by a third.
Alan Wilcock, RAC patrol ambassador of the year, said: 'This weekend has been extraordinarily difficult for many motorists as the cold and ice have made driving difficult and dangerous.
'With more bad weather forecast, the Monday morning commute is already looking very, very busy.
'Workers who travel by car may want to consider other options, such as working from home or another form of transport.'
So far Scotland and the North East have been worst hit, with 40cm of snow, and police advising people to stay indoors for all but essential travel.
As the front moves west the rest of the country is also likely to be blanketed.
Aisling Creevey, of MeteoGroup, the weather division of the Press Association, said Londoners should also prepare for the possibility of snow tomorrow night.
She said: "The snow will become more widespread from tomorrow evening and most places will get a dusting.
'There will be an increasingly high wind chill during the week and it will feel really raw.'
He urged people to carry warm clothing and a blanket in the boot, and make sure their mobile phones are fully charged.
The Christmas card scenes suggest that robins like nothing better than snow. Yet the opposite is true.
They struggled to find food in the severe cold last winter, when average temperatures fell to a 30-year low.
The result is that sightings of the birds are down by more than a quarter to the lowest since 1997, according to the British Trust for Ornithology.
Spokesman Paul Stancliffe said: ‘Although we think of robins in the winter amongst the snow, they actually do badly in those conditions, as last winter showed.’
Graham Madge, from the RSPB, said: ‘Small-bodied birds like robins are particularly vulnerable to the cold. They lose a lot of heat and can’t find enough food. So they lose energy and perish within a few days. It is disappointing that the numbers dropped.
‘Hopefully the population should bounce back.’
And it is believed that the bitterly cold temperatures may have attracted the rare Arctic buzzard which would not usually be found in Britain in November.
It is commonly known as the rough-legged buzzard, and is believed to be one of the first ever to have been ringed in Britain.
Staff at the Park View Vetinary Surgery a now caring for the buzzard until it can be safely released.
Practice manager Sara Allwood said: 'It certainly brought the weather with it.'
Weirfield spokesman Alison Townsend insists the male bird will be comfortable with the cold snap after a lifetime of dealing with freezing Arctic conditions.
She said: 'I've worked with wildlife for 20 years and I have never seen one before.
'I was quite concerned that he wouldn't survive, but after a few days, he started eating.
'His leg is much better and he is ready to go again, so I will probably release him over the weekend, depending on the weather.'
According to experts, the Arctic buzzard - which differs from the common buzzard by its larger size, pale colours and feathered legs - migrates from the north in autumn and could well now stay in the area until next spring.
The bird will be at home for the time being as the severe conditions could last well into next week, forecasters have warned.