ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
The Mayor of Coonamble in north-west New South Wales is urging residents to remain calm as more than 1,200 people evacuate their homes in preparation for major flooding.
The SES has extended the area of Coonamble that could be affected by the flooding and has asked people from about 400 properties to evacuate their homes.
The town is preparing for its worst flood in more than 50 years with the Castlereagh River expected to peak at 5.5 metres early tomorrow morning, just below the 5.9 metre high barrier.
Phil Campbell from the SES says there are concerns over the flood levee.
"Beyond a height of around 5.4 metres the structural integrity of the levee does become increasingly under question," he said.
"That does mean that there are some concerns about the ability of the levee to be able to withstand a flood of 5.5 metres."
Mayor Tim Horan is urging affected residents to heed the warning and stay with family and friends or go to the evacuation centre at the bowling club.
"Obviously there are some people that disagree with the order and have got their own views on what they should be doing and have decided to stay put," he said.
"But all I can do is urge those people to accept the order and make things a lot easier for everyone and try and find somewhere else on the either side of town."
But he is urging residents not to panic.
"We're speaking with our engineering staff and at present things look okay," he said.
"There are some problems with the levee but they've been identified over a number of years and at this present time we don't anticipate any major problems with it.
"But we've just got to make sure we put in precautions to cover any problems that may arise."
Councillor Horan says the town has not seen flooding like this since 1955, when these properties were not protected by a levee.
"If it reaches the 5.5 metres then we haven't seen those levels for a long, long time, particularly since the levee's been built, so we don't know where water's going to go, what can happen," he said.
"We know we've got some weak points in the levee where there's seepage with the sand."
An evacuation centre was set up at Coonamble High School, but it has now had to be moved to the Coonamble Bowling Club.
The state's Minister for Emergency Services, Steve Whan, says people can leave their pets at the local showground.
"For people who haven't got alternative accommodation, they're heading for the evacuation centre," he said.
"But in most cases, people have friends or family that they can stay with in other parts of the area."
Police will be patrolling vacant properties in the affected areas.
The Bureau of Meteorology in Queensland says flooding in the state's central west is not a threat to homes.
Floodwaters have broken the banks of the Thomson River in Longreach and several other rivers are also in flood.
Senior forecaster Geoff Doueal says it is a result of heavy rain and storms since before Christmas.
"The flooding at the moment around Longreach we're getting up to around four metres now, expected to peak around 4.3 metres at the old guage," he said.
"That's similar to the flood they had in February 09. It won't be a threat to houses because you need to get up to about 5.6 metres before you get a big threat to houses."