With limited ration, no power or internet access, Chennai still in deep water
CHENNAI: As thousands of residents of Chennai and suburbs were rescued from inundated areas on Thursday , several more were confined to their homes, surrounded by sheets of water. Electricity supply was cut, in many places for days together, and residents were also deprived of basic essentials like food and milk. With their routine completely thrown out of gear, residents struggled to cope with life without mobile phones and wifi and broadband connections as well. Connectivity was a huge problem as networks of service providers went haywire. This proved a major setback to several flood-hit residents as they tried to reach out to friends and relatives for help. Almost entire south Chennai has been under water since Wednesday , including buildings on arterial roads like Anna Salai and Cha miers. “We have cut power in several areas like Guindy,KK Nagar, Perungudi, Alandur, Velachery, Poonamallee, Nanganallur, Thiruvanmiyur, Madipakkam, Thirumulaivoyal, Korattur, Padi, College Road, Perumbakkam, West Mambalam, Nandanam, Kotturpuram, Tambaram and Mudichur as there is several feet-deep water in buildings as well as roads,“ said a senior Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB) officer, seeking anonymity. Most of these areas are without power since December 1 when it rained continuously. The flooding of the Adyar estuary that runs through south Chennai has been in spate, flooding the banks. “Until the water re cedes, we cannot restore power in these areas. Even in our office at Anna Salai, there is water stagnation up to two feet,“ said the senior officer. There was shortage of milk in several areas as Aavin suspended its supply on Wednesday . This is because water entered the Ambattur dairy. “We have closed the Ambattur Dairy as water from the Korattur lake has entered the dairy. It will take at least two days for it to re-start,“ said a senior Aavin official. After an aerial survey of the flood-hit areas, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday announced an immediate release of Rs 1,000 crore for relief and rehab works in Tamil Nadu. He was flanked by CM J Jayalalithaa. Railways has shut down the city's two major railway stations, Chennai Central and Egmore, cancelling all departures and arrivals until December 5 because of heavy rain and flooding of tracks.Passenger trains, however, were operated from Tiruvallur, Arakonam and Chengalpet. Even as passengers contined to be stranded at Chennai airport, AAI is considering operating flights on just 5,000 feet of the total 12,000-footlong runway that's usable.Airport officials are planning to resume ops on Sunday while Air India started evacuating those who wished to fly to Bengaluru and Hyderadad. Ministers have fanned out to rain-affected areas.Housing minister R Vaithilingam visited Kotturpuram, Natham R Viswanathan, Sellur K Raju and S Gokula Indira went to Dr Radhakrishnan Nagar, and O Panneerselvam, Edappadi K Palaniswami, B V Ramana and S Abdul Rahim waded in Porur.