Floods in NSW and Queensland claim more lives
Roads in the northern New South Wales community of Corndale were covered by floodwaters on Friday, March 31, after heavy rain fell across the region, brought by ex-Tropical Cyclone Debbie. Drone footage shows the extent of the flooding across the regional town, about 16km northeast of Lismore, where residents were forced to evacuate as a levee overflowed. Credit: YouTube/Joe Paine via Storyful
THE bodies of two more people have been discovered this evening as police continue to search for three people missing in flood-hit southeast Queensland.
The death toll ftrom ex-cyclone Debbie now stands at four, and is expected to rise.
The body of a 45-year-old man was located at a caravan park at Tweed Valley Way, South Murwillumbah in New South Wales just after 1.30pm on Saturday.
Police are investigating the man’s death and will prepare a report of the coroner.
Police confirmed Nelson Raebel, 77, from Eagleby, had also been found deceased.
He was found by emergency crews at 3.50pm on Saturday not far from where he was last seen near Eagleby Road, south of Brisbane.
Police continue to search for David Heidemann, 50, who was last seen around 8pm Thursday (local time) leaving an address in Mondure, northwest of the Gold Coast.
He told family he was meeting a friend on nearby Campbells Road, theCourier Mailreported.
He was reported missing after failing to meet his friend and failing to return home.
“Police hold grave concerns for David as parts of Campbells Road are currently subjected to flooding,” police said.
Another man, in his 60s, has been missing since Wednesday after he went bushwalking at Lamington National Park.
Landslides have made it difficult for police who have had to bring in bobcats to clear roads before search on foot.
Police are yet to release details of a third missing person.
A couple who planned their wedding at a Kingscliff resort in New South Wales have told of how they had to fly by helicopter over floodwaters and “hitch-hike” to make their ceremony.
Newlyweds Carissa and Tyson Kolkka told Seven News of how their wedding plans fell apart. The couple, who were successfully married on the day, said their wedding party resorted to foraging the foreshore for flower arrangements and ended up getting a lift by a kind police officer who navigated them through floodwaters.
“If we can overcome this, we can overcome anything... I hope,” Karissa told Seven.
With the roads disrupted, Logan local Diane Bullpitt decided to use a different mode of transport - a neighbour’s tinny - after her property was inundated. While her house was spared major damage from the turgid floodwaters, she said she needed to leave by boat to attend a function.
“It’s been so unpredictable. There’s been areas that have gone under that never went under before,” she told AAP.
“It’s come up really, really quick.” But she said the water would still have to come up “a long way” before hitting any houses.
As for her own, she hoped to make it back by Monday.
Ashleigh McGrogan and her husband Adam only moved into their three-bedroom house in December but will have to replace all the flooring and skirting boards after the nearby creek’s muddy overflow swamped everything except a strip of their verdant backyard.
Before buying the three-bedroom house they were told there was only a one per cent chance it would flood.
“Let’s just clean it up and pretend it was a bad dream.”
On Friday, the body of a 64-year-old woman was found submerged in four metres of water on Friday afternoon, the day after her car was swept off a causeway at Gungal in the Hunter Valley.
The discovery came after the body of another woman was found on a property south of Murwillumbah.
While the water is receding in Lismore, it could be days before residents are able to access the damage.
Murwillumbah has suffered significant damage and the repair bill is expected to run into the millions.
Tweed Shire Council general manager Troy Green said water mains had been destroyed, along with waste-treatment plants.
Ballina, Byron, Kyogle, Lismore, Richmond Valley and Tweed local government areas have been declared natural disaster zones.
The Aboriginal community on Cabbage Tree Island was evacuated, deputy acting commissioner Mark Morrow said.
A major flood warning is in place for both the Richmond and Wilsons rivers. Of the rescues carried out overnight, most involved people stranded on cars and building roofs.
Mr Morrow said many of those rescued were told to evacuate but had decided to stay.
“There’s a lesson here for people in the downstream areas that are yet to get this flood,” he said.
“Don’t do what they did. Make a decision about what you need. Pack early and leave.”
Since Wednesday, SES volunteers have rescued more than 400 people and responded to more than 2220 calls for assistance.
Further north of Lismore, residents in Billinudgel, Ocean Shores and New Brighton were also told to leave.
The Pacific Highway has been cut off by water at Chinderah south of Tweed Heads. Large parts of Lismore remained under water overnight.
Flood warnings are current for the town and its surroundings as well as Chinderah and Murwillumbah.
Flood levels in Lismore and Murwillumbah have already broken the records set in 2005 and 2001, respectively.
The Wilsons River at Lismore peaked at 11.6m on Friday, which was the highest flood peak since 1974.
But there was some good news, with the SES saying “no significant” rainfall had been recorded around Lismore since early on Friday.
Moderate flooding was still occurring along the Richmond River at Woodburn. However, that could change with the river expected to peak at 4.2m today and spark a major flood event for the Woodburn community.
Meanwhile, emergency teams worked to rescue three women and two babies as parts of Logan braced for a fresh wave of flooding.
The Queensland Fire and Emergency Services said they were working with the swift water rescue team to bring the five in Waterford West to safety, the Courier Mail reports.
More than 300 properties, including more than 200 houses, were at risk of being swamped by “unprecedented” floodwaters in southeast Queensland.
The area’s much-loved Yatala Pie Shop fell victim to rising waters, while the new $15 million John Muntz Bridge was ripped apart by the raging Coomera River.
Low-lying areas of the Brisbane metropolitan area of Logan is expected to be among the worst affected as the Albert and Logan Rivers swell to never-before-seen levels.
The Logan River is expected to peak at about 10.5-metres at Waterford West around 2pm (local time) today, in what mayor Luke Smith said will be the biggest flood in the area in more than 40 years.
“That’s higher than we saw in 2013 and 2011 and it’s getting very very close to that 1974 mark,” he told ABC Radio.
Elsewhere in the city the clean-up operation is underway, following record flooding in the Albert River at Beenleigh on Friday.
Flood-hit Scenic Rim residents are being urged to only use their tap water for drinking after all the water treatment plants were knocked out in the region.
More than 22,000 homes remain without power across southeast Queensland, two days after the remnants of ex-cyclone Debbie tore through the region, bringing down about 700 power lines.
The central Queensland city of Rockhampton has been told to prepare for what could be its biggest flood in more than 60 years.
The Bureau of Meteorology has warned the Fitzroy River could reach 9.4 metres at Rockhampton on Wednesday, which would equal the level of the city’s 1954 floods.
It is expected homes in the Depot Hill area and low-lying parts of Berserker, Allenstown and Kawana will be inundated when the Fitzroy reaches the major flood level of 8.5 metres on Monday afternoon.
The city’s airport will also be closed when the river level hits 8.7 metres, according to the local council.
Major flooding has already been recorded in the Mackenzie, Connors and Isaac rivers that flow into the Fitzroy following heavy rainfall from ex-cyclone Debbie.
Minor flooding has also occurred upstream in the Fitzroy, and major flooding is expected in the Yaamba area, north of Rockhampton, on Monday.
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk will travel to north Queensland to see the destruction wrought by Cyclone Debbie, after wild weather caused widespread damage across the state.
On Saturday, she chaired a disaster management meeting in Brisbane before heading to the Mackay and Whitsunday region, which was severely battered by the storm.
The restoration of electricity is of particular concern, with 50,000 properties in the Bowen, Mackay and Whitsunday regions still without electricity days after Debbie crossed the coast.
It is slowly being restored to petrol stations and other essential services at Airlie Beach, after generators were brought in on trucks on Friday.
The Mackay district’s sugar crops have also been hit hard by the cyclone’s wrath, with industry figures estimating $150 million damage had been done to local canegrowers’ operations in the area.