Death toll in Fiji rises to 44 after catastrophic Cyclone Winston tore through the country
Fiji is in a state of natural disaster and its people are in urgent need after Cyclone Winston ripped through the Island nation and left a trail of destruction and heartbreak with 44 dead, more than 35,000 homeless and everyone - babies, families and the elderly - with nothing. 
Devastating images show the impact of Fiji's biggest ever storm, with debris scattered everywhere and nothing but single walls standing for some homes. 
Mothers cradle children in the wreckage of their homes, children huddle together as they seek refuge at evacuation centres and fragile, elderly citizens are forced to fend themselves, left with nothing but the shirt on their backs. 
A state of natural disaster and a nationwide curfew had been declared for the next 30 days by the Fijian Government, who has initiated the clean-up process by clearing the huge amounts of debris scattered everywhere. 
Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama is warning his devastated nation it faces a long and difficult recovery.
'Almost no part of our nation has been left unscarred,' Mr Bainimarama said in a national address on Wednesday. 
He said Winston, believed to be the most powerful storm ever to hit Fiji, had left 'a terrible trail of destruction in its wake' and created a need that is great and urgent.
'Right now the priority is on restoring essential services and supplying our people with sufficient food, water and shelter,' he said.
The immense scale of destruction across the Pacific nation is becoming apparent as rescue workers reach outlying areas in the hard-hit north and west of the main island as well as remote islands exposed to the full fury of the Category 5 storm.
Cyclone Winston struck with 325km/h gusting winds on Saturday night, destroying thousands of homes, knocking out power across the islands and leaving a death toll that has risen steadily as news filters back from cut-off areas.
Aid workers with UNICEF Australia have delivered emergency water and sanitation kits plus medical and education supplies to Koro Island - a small outpost between Fiji's two largest islands which was among the worst-hit.
Clean water and food are becoming urgent problems for remote areas as power and communications remain down across large parts of Fiji.
'The scale and reach of this disaster is enormous and the needs for this response are immense,' UNICEF Fiji aid worker Alice Clements said.
'Whole villages have been wiped out - where there was once a house, there's now a concrete slab.'
Local media are reporting new stories of devastation regularly: the government-owned Fiji Broadcasting Corporation said only eight of 161 houses remained standing in one province in the centre of Fiji's largest island, Viti Levu.
The Fiji Times Online reported more than 34,000 people remain in 424 evacuation centres across the country, most of them in the Western Division of the main island.
Australian Defence Minister Marise Payne says HMAS Canberra will be dispatched to assist Fiji and should arrive on March 1.
Four Globemaster cargo planes have already arrived, carrying 19 tonnes of supplies along with aircraft and personnel while Australia has also sent a six-person medical assistance team, 32 defence personnel and staff from the immigration and trade departments to help Australians get home.
People wishing to donate to the relief effort can do so through a number of charities including UNICEF's Fiji Children's Emergency Appeal at www.unicef.org/fiji and CARE Australia's Cyclone Winston Emergency Appeal at www.care.org.au
A full list of humanitarian groups is available on the Australian Council for International Development website.