ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Mandatory evacuations have been ordered for the southern Queensland town of St George as authorities predict the Balonne River to peak at up to 15 metres in a record flood.
The Bureau of Meteorology says the river is rising quickly and is likely to reach 14 metres by 9:00pm Monday evening and continue to rise throughout Tuesday, reaching a peak of up to 15 metres overnight on Tuesday.
Residents are being told to leave town via the Moonie Highway before it is closed later this evening.
For those without their own transport, buses will leave the St George Showgrounds at 5:00pm and 7:00pm and take residents to Dalby. There will be a community information session at 4.30pm at the St George Showgrounds.
Air evacuation to Brisbane is being organised to ensure evacuations can continue after the Moonie Highway closes and an RAAF Hercules aircraft has already begun evacuating patients from the town's hospital.
The patients are being transferred to Brisbane and the Gold Coast hospitals.
Queensland Premier Anna Bligh flew into the town this morning and has met with local disaster coordinators.
She has urged people to evacuate the town while they still can.
"We really urge people if you can voluntarily evacuate now is the time to do it, while the Moonie Highway is open, while you can do it in an orderly fashion, while you can take your pets if you have any and if you need accommodation, evacution centres are being established in Dalby," she said.
St George Mayor Donna Stewart says 20 homes were inundated when the town flooded in 2010 but she expects the damage will be worse this time.
"These homes were outside the last levee bank and now they're inside it so there'll be quite a considerable number more and just how many I haven't got a figure for," she said.
The town's publican Murray Strasek says quite a few people who have already opted to leave.
"Especially families with little kids. Everybody is resigned to the fact that we're going to possibly get flooded and like I said it's only the mums with the babies and children who seem to be going at the moment," he said.
Nationals Senator Barnaby Joyce lives in St George and says locals are struggling to deal with the third flood in two years.
"They've just finished renovating their house... they've just got themselves back on their feet," he said.
"At 14 metres it goes into the irrigation areas so we lose the cash flow, the business plan for the next year. And that puts immense pressure on many farms."
The weather bureau says the flood will have an impact downstream, with concern for Diranbandi, but hydrologists say there will be no forecast until the extent of flooding is seen in St George.
Further north, searchers have recovered the body of a womanwho had been missing in floodwaters in Roma.
The woman was reported missing on Friday after her car was swept off a causeway into floodwaters.
Her body was found near the bridge at Arthur Street this afternoon.
Bungil Creek in Roma has now dropped more than a metre and residents have begun cleaning up.
About 208 people slept at evacuation centres in Roma after about 300 homes in the town were swamped.
Maranoa Mayor Robert Loughnan says residents are trying to clean mud away before it dries.
"It's quite awful. It's got a very strong fishy smell about it this year," he said.
"We've had three consecutive years of major floods in Roma and it doesn't make it any better.
"It doesn't seem fair to the people of Roma and of course the people of Mitchell who've had such an incredible impact."
The Maranoa River at Mitchell has dropped about 30 centimetres from its peak of 10 metres but authorities say the town is a mess.
Locals have told the ABC they are furious at the lack of help they have received from the State Government.
One woman says 300 people slept on concrete in an evacuation centre and there were limited toilets.
Meanwhile, flood levels are continuing to drop slowly in Charleville, where levees have so far held back the water.
Further rises are not expected in the Warrego River but residents say they will not be able to relax until the water drops another metre.
Mayor Mark O'Brien says the river is likely to remain above seven metres until at least tomorrow night.
Charleville resident Neil was one of 600 people who stayed at the town's evacuation centre overnight and says floodwaters were not the only problem.
"Where I was sleeping out in the back of my ute at the showgrounds last night I was nearly going tie myself in with a rope the mossies were that bad," he said.
"They'd pick me up and take me out."
*This map shows the weather situation in St George. Zoom out to see the situation in the rest of Queensland.