China Raise Emergency Response for Typhoon Fanapi as It Nears
China raised its emergency response for Typhoon Fanapi ahead of the storm striking the country today, the China Meteorological Administration said.
The agency raised its response to Level Two from Level Three and said Fanapi may reach coastal areas from eastern Guangdong to central Fujian during the day. The government warned on Sept. 18 that Fanapi may be the strongest storm to strike the country this year, according to a statement posted on the website of the National Meteorological Center.
Fanapi swept through Taiwan yesterday with winds gusting as high as 180 kilometers (112 miles) per hour, downing electric lines, forcing evacuations and closing schools, offices, airports and ground transport. Some 45 people were injured, the Central Emergency Operations Center said.
Power outages struck 313,596 households on the island, the Ministry of Economic Affairs reported on its website, adding that electricity was restored at 140,000. Emergency workers evacuated 10,468 people from 13 counties and 53 townships prone to landslides, the Central Emergency Operations Center said.
Fanapi made landfall south of Hualien on Taiwan’s central east coast yesterday morning and was 20 kilometers southeast of Penghu, heading west towards China at 20 kilometers per hour, the Central Weather Bureau said on its website at 8:30 p.m.
President Ma Ying-jeou’s government mobilized more than 19,000 emergency workers to prepare for any disaster caused by Fanapi, boosting precautions this year after Typhoon Morakot battered Taiwan for three days in August 2009, killing more than 600 people and causing at least NT$110 billion ($3.47 billion) of damage.
Ma, whose popularity dropped to a record low 29 percent in the wake of that destruction, was at the Central Emergency Operations Center yesterday and the day before.
Majia township, in Pingtung County, received an accumulated 954 millimeters (37.6 inches) of rain, the most reported, and further downpours were forecast, the bureau said. That compares with the single-day record of 1,415 millimeters Morakot dumped on Taiwan.
The accumulated rainfall was reaching the levels that fell during Morakot, the Central Emergency Operations Center said.
Evacuation areas included Kaohsiung and Chiayi counties, which were among the worst hit by Morakot last year. Schools and offices at Kaohsiung city, Kaohsiung County, Taitung county and Pingtung county are closed today, the Central Personnel Administration said on its website. Schools and offices at capital Taipei city will be open, it said. Taiwan’s stock exchange will be open as well, Wen Li-chung, an official at the bourse, said by mobile phone yesterday.
Fanapi forced the cancellation of 213 domestic and 73 international flights, according to an e-mailed statement from the Ministry of Transportation and Communications. 22 flights were canceled between Hong Kong and Taiwan yesterday as of 4:30 p.m., according to Hong Kong’s Airport Authority. Traffic on 36 roads was blocked as of 7 p.m. last night.