Final Air France crash report says pilots failed to react swiftly
Air France Flight 447 A series of errors by pilots and a failure to react effectively to technical problems led to the crash of Air France Flight 447 , France's Bureau of Investigation and Analysis said Thursday in its final report on the disaster.
When ice crystals blocked the plane's pitot tubes, which are part of a system used to determine air speed, the autopilot disconnected and the pilots did not know how to react to what was happening, the report said.
"In the first minute after the autopilot disconnection, the failure of the attempt to understand the situation and the disruption of crew cooperation had a multiplying effect, inducing total loss of cognitive control of the situation."
Some of the recommendations have already been implemented, but it could take years for others fully to come into effect, chief investigator Alain Bouillard told reporters as he introduced the report.
The use of automatic systems on planes has improved safety overall, he explained, but "when it comes down to it, safety will always be based on the capacity of the pilots and the signals which they are given, which they have to understand and react to."
It was an "exceptional" inquiry because of the scale of the disaster, the number of countries involved and the difficulty of locating the plane's data recorders, he said. The intense media coverage of the crash added to the pressure, Bouillard said.
It's a crash that never should have happened, said CNN's aviation specialist Richard Quest. The industry will be studying the human factors of the crew on the plane for many years to come.
The Bureau of Investigation and Analysis said its report does not examine the issue of responsibility for the crash, which is the subject of a separate judicial inquiry.
The icing-up of the pitot tubes was "a phenomenon that was known but misunderstood by the aviation community at the time of the accident," the report pointed out.
It took four searches over the course of nearly two years to locate the bulk of Flight 447's wreckage and the majority of the bodies in a mountain range deep under the ocean.
The recorders revealed the pilots had failed to discuss repeated stall warnings and "had received no high altitude training" to deal with the situation, the bureau said.
They failed to regain control of the aircraft, and no announcement was made to the passengers, of 32 different nationalities, before it plummeted from the sky.