Australia: fires rage and temperatures soar on day of 'catastrophic' danger
Temperatures have begun to soar in the most populous state, New South Wales, and fast-moving fires are spreading towards rural communities.
Several towns have been warned that it is too late to try to flee the incoming flames.
By lunchtime today, 102 fires had broken out in the state, including 20 which were out of control. In Sydney, temperatures hit 41 degrees Celsius and were continuing to rise.
The severe fire conditions were expected to replicate those of 2009, when "Black Saturday" wildfires in Victoria state killed 173 people and caused billions of dollars worth of damage.
The city faced an early scare as a fire broke out in a nuclear research facility in the southern suburb of Lucas Heights, which contains two nuclear reactors. It is understood cables overheated in an electricity substation at the back of the facility and caused two rooms to fill with smoke. The fire was later brought under control.
Hot, dry winds have led to furnace-like conditions across the state, while recent rains have produced thick undergrowth in bushland areas that can swiftly burn. All national parks have been closed as a result of the fire danger.
Authorities say 90 per cent of the state is facing a severe threat and the conditions today are as dire as predicted.
"There was a hope that something would abate this weather condition as it moves across NSW, but the fact is that it has not," said Mike Gallagher, the state's emergency services minister.
The state's rural fire service commissioner, Shane Fitzsimmons, said: "It's a long way ahead. We have got a lot of daylight left and a lot of nighttime under these conditions. There's a lot of heat left in this day." In rural areas and towns across the state, thousands of residents have fled their homes.
"We grabbed the photo albums, suitcases, clothes and jewellery and ended up getting out while we could," said Hallie Fernandez, who runs a bed-and-breakfast in the town of Brogo in the state's south-east.
"We did have guests staying last night and they were supposed to be checking out this morning and they wanted to stay and help us, but we were like, 'No, please go'." In the state of Victoria, several fires are blazing across the south-west and forced small farming townships to flee.
In the island state of Tasmania, where wildfires have already destroyed 100 properties and forced thousands of people to evacuate their homes, fires have again flared up and are threatening towns in the south-east.