Mississippi River rise has River Parishes residents worried
As the Mississippi River continues to rise and more bays are opened in the Bonnet Carre’ Spillway, elected officials across the River Parishes are fielding more questions about what will happen next.
“It’s a part of everybody’s conversation,” said St. Charles Parish Councilman Billy Raymond Sr., who encounters residents as he walks along the river levee in Hahnville. “It’s not so much questions, but everybody is watching.”
In St. John, Parish President Natalie Robottom declared a state of emergency late Wednesday, but called it a “precautionary measure” that allows parish officials to access all necessary resources available.
St. John Parishspokeswoman Paige Braud has been sending out email alerts to residents, assuring those who are watching the rising river in Reserve that no flooding outside the levee system is expected, provided the Morganza Spillway in Pointe Coupee Parish is opened to divert some of the water flowing downstream from the Midwest away from this area.
The Morganza Spillwaynear Simmesport is expected to be opened when the river’s rate of flow exceeds 1.5 million cubic feet of water per second. That is expected to happen on Saturday morning. The decision to do so rests in the hands of the Mississippi River Commission, a panel of presidential appointees headed by Army Corps of Engineers Maj. Gen. Michael Walsh.
Gov. Bobby Jindal said Wednesday that he is confident that the Morganza Spillway will be opened under those conditions.
Although there has been some water seepage under the levee at Reserve that has happened before during winter rises in the river and residents shouldn’t get alarmed.
“We don’t want people to overreact,” Braud said. “We’re monitoring the situation and keeping in close contact with the Corps.”
One resident asked parish officials if the spillway opening would impact lake levels.
“It’s not, but if you live that close, it’s a reasonable question to ask,” Braud said.
St. Charles Parish Emergency Preparedness Director Scott Whelchel said residents have called asking about the possible impact in the Bayou Gauche area, and had other questions.
But he said the parish is making emergency equipment available to Terrebonne Parish, where some communities are certain to be impacted by backwater flooding once the Morganza Spillway is opened.
“People have been asking why the levee districts are cutting the grass on the levees, but that is part of the flood-fighting strategy. They want to be able to see if there’s a problem,” Whelchel said. “But they’re doing a straight-line cutting. They aren’t making any turns that could make ruts in the levee.”
St. Charles Economic Development Director Corey Faucheux said parish officials have been meeting with industry representatives to discuss the situation.
“What we’re hearing is that some of them may be shutting down units because they can’t move product out or get feedstock in from the river,” he said.
Lily Galland, a spokeswoman for the Shell/Motiva refinery in Norco said Thursday that plant officials are switching away from maritime transportation to rail transportation when possible.
At Dow’s Hahnville and Baton Rouge complexes, the dock operations have been shut down and maintenance crews are being staffed to repair any damage, said Stacey Chiasson, public affairs leader for the company’s Louisiana operations.
She said the company also is working to re-route shipments of product and raw materials to ensure that there is a minimal impact to customers.