Tsunami warning after earthquake hits off Indonesia
AS IT HAPPENED: A magnitude-8.2 aftershock has followed a massive 8.6 quake that struck off the western coast of the Indonesian island of Sumatra, sparking scenes of panic and triggering a tsunami warning across the Indian Ocean.
8.58pm Roger Musson, a seismologist at the British geological survey who has studied Sumatra's fault lines, says the temblor was a strike-slip quake, not a thrust quake. In a strike slip quake, the earth moves horizontally rather than vertically and doesn't displace large volumes of water. "When I first saw this was an 8.7 near Sumatra, I was fearing the worst," he said, noting one of the initial reported magnitudes for the quake. "But as soon as I discovered what type of earthquake it was, then I felt a lot better." 8.53pm A geophysicist with the US Pacific Tsunami Warning Center in Hawaii, Victor Sardina, told AFP the tsunami was "not anywhere near" as large as the devastating tsunamis that struck Asia in 2004 and Japan last year. He said the tsunami measured a mere 35cm near Padang, Indonesia, but could swell to as high as 1m near Sri Lanka, adding that US scientists were still carefully monitoring the situation. 8.48pm There has been no sign of the feared tsunami wave - which authorities feared would hit about 8.40pm (AEST), AP reports. Damage also appears to be minimal.
7.47pm The quake was felt in the Indonesian city of Medan. Hotel guest Timbang Pangaribuan has recounted his experience to El Shinta radio: "I was in the shower on the fifth floor of my hotel. We all ran out. ... We're all standing outside now." He said one guest was injured when he jumped from the window of his room.
7.36pm A reporter from the Jakarta Globe has told Sky News there are reports of panic in Sumatra, after power was cut. 7.33pm Amy Vaughn, from the USGS, told Sky News that experts were working to determine precisely where the earthquake occurred and how strong it was. "With an earthquake of this magnitude ... what happens is that basically a large body of water is disturbed by the movement of the fault," she said. "Being this close to the west coast of Sumatra, it could be devastating for the region."
People on Twitter said tremors were felt in Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia and India. High-rise apartments and offices on Malaysia's west coast shook for at least a minute.
Sky News reported that evacuations were under way in Sumatra.
An Indian Ocean-wide tsunami watch was put in place immediately following the quake, the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center said.
A tsunami watch means there is the potential for a tsunami, not that one is imminent.
According to the Joint Australian Tsunami Warning Centre, the undersea earthquake struck at 6.38pm (AEST). The centre said there was no tsunami threat to the Australian mainland, islands or territories.
Indonesia straddles a series of fault lines that makes the vast island nation prone to volcanic and seismic activity.
A giant 9.1-magnitude quake off the country on December 26, 2004, triggered a tsunami in the Indian Ocean that killed 230,000 people, nearly three-quarters of them in Aceh.