Relief reaches worst quake-hit areas
NEW DELHI: Two days after the earthquake that hit Sikkim, the road connecting the worst affected town of Mangan was reopened on Tuesday. And as relief and rescue teams started reaching the worst affected interior areas of the state, the death toll is likely to mount. "The road from Gangtok to Mangan is open. The number of deaths as reported by the Sikkim government is 50. This may increase further as rescue and relief teams reach the interiors," Union home secretary R K Singh said on Tuesday. Even as large-scale rescue and relief work continues under 'Operation Trishakti Madad' launched by the armed forces, the strategic 14,140-feet Nathu La mountain pass, which connects Sikkim with the Tibet Autonomous Region of China, remains physically cut-off from the rest of the country. Efforts are in progress to repair the strategic road from Gangtok to Nathu La near the India-China border, said Army's deputy director general of military operations, Brigadier Ranbir Singh. Military and ITBP personnel have, meanwhile, managed to reach most of the far-flung areas devastated by the earthquake. "An Army contingent, in fact, also managed to reach Mangan, the epicenter of the earthquake, with troops providing food and medicines to the local population," said Brigadier Singh. IAF, on its part, has conducted 34 sorties of transport aircraft and helicopters in the last two days, ferrying over 23 tonnes of relief material and personnel, including doctors and army jawans to the affected areas. The sorties are taking place from Delhi, Chandigarh, Kolkata and Agra, with Bagdogra in West Bengal made as the hub of the relief operations. The home secretary said five teams of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) were in Gangtok. One of them left for Mangan on Tuesday morning while arrangements are being made to airlift another NDRF team to Chungthan. Besides, the home secretary said, two helicopters were being pressed into service so that officials of NDRF and the Sikkim government can conduct an aerial survey of affected areas to ascertain the damage and casualties. The Sikkim government has conveyed that they have opened relief camps in each district and senior secretaries of the state government have been deputed in each district, he added. The home ministry too has deputed a joint secretary to Sikkim to coordinate the relief operations. "Food packets have been airdropped in the northern areas of North District this morning," Singh said.