Australians missing on Southern Cross boat alive and well, but tsunami death toll rising
NINE Australians feared lost in the wake of the Indonesian tsunami are safe, but local villages are devastated, with more than 100 people dead.
Fears had been growing for a vessel which was carrying eight Sydney surfers, including former NSW MP and Pittwater mayor Alex McTaggart, and skippered by Melbourne-born Chris Scurrah. But after more than 20 hours with no word, the men finally made contact late last night with the Padang-based company Sumatran Surfariis that owns the charter boat Southern Cross. "They are now safe, they have been found," staff member Yuli Rahmi said. "They only lost their phone signal, they didn't even feel any tsunami." They are now on the island of South Pagai. Sandra Scurrah, mother of skipper Chris, almost wept with relief when told her son was alive. "I'm so relieved, we were really really worried this time," she said. His boat did not have a satellite phone, was out of radio range and in a mobile phone black spot. It was near the epicentre of the 7.7 magnitude quake, which split the ocean floor next to the Mentawai Islands, off West Sumatra, at 9.42pm on Monday local time (early yesterday morning AEDT). About 113 people have died on nearby islands, with hundreds more injured and scores missing.
With few rescuers able to get to the islands to help with searches, fisherman have been left to find the dead and look for the living.
Mentawai district chief, Edison Salelo Baja said corpses were strewn about because there were not enough people to dig graves.
Though hundreds of disaster officials were unable to get to many of the villages on the Mentawai islands - reachable only by a 12-hour boat ride - they were preparing for the worst.
"We have 200 body bags on the way, just in case," said Mujiharto, who heads the Health Ministry's crisis centre.
Harmensyah, the head of the National Disaster Mitigation Agency in West Sumatra, said: "There are no Westerners who have died or are injured. They are all safe."
For Mr Scurrah, it is the second time he has been caught up in a tsunami scare in Indonesia. He survived last year's deadly 7.6-magnitude earthquake in Padang, texting his family that he was running inland. "There has been so many times before [that he has been out of contact] but this time feels worse because we knew he was on the spot that it happened," Mrs Scurrah said. "It's just wonderful, wonderful news." Others believed to be on board the Southern Cross include Northern Beaches police officer Chris Papallo, Gary Mountford, Jeff Annesley, Colin Steele, Steve Reynolds and Neil Cox. The 3m tsunami produced incredible survival stories of other Australians hit by the force. The wave tore two charter boats with Australian surfers on board from their anchorages at the Macaronis break on Pagai Selatan Island. The boats collided and one vessel, the 22.5m motor cruiser MV Midas, burst into flames, forcing eight surfers from the Gold Coast and a New Zealander to leap into the water. Some of the men - and the Midas's skipper Rick Hallet, from Mona Vale on the Northern Beaches - were swept hundreds of metres into the jungle by the tsunami. They were forced to cling to trees until the surge subsided. Six Sydney men on the charter boat Freedom III, a 22m powered catamaran, which collided with the MV Midas, were not injured. The tsunami also devastated the luxury Macaronis Surf Resort on the island but the 13 Australians there were believed to have only minor injuries.