Mexico gas blast: Nurse and two babies killed and dozens of newborns injured in explosion at maternity hospital in Mexico City
A gas truck has exploded outside a maternity hospital in Mexico City, killing a nurse and two babies and injuring dozens of newborns.
Hundreds of rescuers, some with dogs, scoured the rubble of the maternity and children's hospital in the Cuajimalpa borough after the huge blast.
Officials were hopeful that nobody remained trapped.
"I remember the cries of the babies under the rubble and the screams of my colleagues," said Ivonne Ortega, a nurse who was injured as she helped evacuate the newborns.
Mexico City health secretary Armando Ahued said a nurse and a baby died on the spot and a second baby succumbed from injuries in another hospital.
He said another 73 people were injured and that nine babies were in a delicate condition.
Around three-quarters of the building collapsed after the blast, which took place at around 7:00am (local time) after workers were unable to control a pipe leak.
The truck's three operators were detained, and two of them were in hospital.
Their employer was identified as Nieto Express, which has serviced the city since 2007.
Mexico City mayor Miguel Angel Mancera said a bigger tragedy was avoided because many people had been evacuated from the hospital before the gas leak turned into an explosion.
Officials said around 100 people were in the building.
By midday, nobody was reported missing but Mr Mancera said the search would continue until authorities are "100 per cent" certain no one is trapped under the rubble.
Officials gave conflicting death tolls during the day, at one point reporting four babies dead, before retracting.
Mexican president Enrique Pena Nieto expressed his "sadness and solidarity" with the victims and their families and said soldiers were deployed to help the search for survivors.
Mexico has been hit by other gas explosion tragedies in recent years.
In February 2013, 37 people died in the headquarters of the state energy firm Pemex in Mexico City following a gas build-up in the skyscraper's basement.
In May 2013, 25 people died when a gas tanker's container came loose on a highway north of Mexico City, setting nearby homes and cars on fire.
Last year, three people died in the north-eastern state of Tamaulipas when a gas leak caused an explosion in a shopping centre.