Shanghai fire leaves at least 42 dead
At least 42 people are believed dead and scores more injured after fire ripped through a block of flats in Shanghai this afternoon, state media reported.
Residents clambered along scaffolding to escape as flames engulfed the 28-storey building. Some made their way down to the street, while others waited on the rooftop in the hope of being rescued by helicopter.
The Shanghai Daily website reported that fire crews finally extinguished the blaze at around 7pm, five hours after it began. Firefighters could be seen carrying bodies from the building. The government said that more than 100 fire trucks were called to fight the blaze.
The building was under renovation and a witness quoted by the state news agency, Xinhua, said the fire had broken out among construction materials. It then spread rapidly along the scaffolding, with flames soon tearing through the block.
A number of residents rushed to the roof and a photograph posted online showed at least one person being winched off by a helicopter. But Xinhua said thick smoke had hampered rescue efforts and it is not known if the others were saved.
According to Shanghai Daily, there were more than 150 households in the block. Several flats belonged to retired teachers. The city government said 100 people had been rescued, but it is not clear if that included the injured. A doctor at the city's Jing'an hospital said it had admitted more than 20 seriously injured people.
At Jing'an hospital, the father of Wang Yinxing, a 30-year-old woman who lived on the 22nd floor of the building, searched a list of survivors at the hospital but could not find his daughter's name.
"She called her husband and said: 'It's on fire! I have escaped from the 22nd floor to the 24th floor,' but then the phone got cut off," the father, Wang Zhiliang, 65, told AP. "That was the last we heard from her."
Residents in nearby buildings said their windows had become too hot to touch and that several blocks had been evacuated.