Airports, Highways, Cities Close as Historic Northeast Blizzard Looms
Tens of millions of people in the Northeast hunkered down on Monday for a historic blizzard that was expected to drop more than 2 feet of snow, whipped around by winds approaching hurricane force — enough to bring New York, Boston and most of the northeast corridor to an eerie standstill.
More than 7,000 flights were scrapped, and the major airlines warned that practically nothing would take off or land in New York, Boston and Philadelphia as the worst of the storm sweeps in overnight and Tuesday morning.
Store shelves emptied, schools shut their doors, and authorities either pleaded with people to stay home or outright closed the roads to all but emergency vehicles.
The snow began to lighten up in New York around 8 p.m., but Mayor Bill de Blasio warned residents not to drop their vigilance. He cited forecasts for snow to fall at a rate of 2 to 4 inches per hour overnight, although meteorologists later predicted only about 1- 2 inches per hour in the city around midnight.
By 12:30 a.m. Tuesday, there was 5.5 inches on the ground in New York's Central Park, with forecasts for an additional 5 to 8 inches, according to The Weather Channel. Boston's Logan Airport had 2.3 inches after midnight with 15-24" more expected, and Hartford, Conn., had 2 inches with another 10-16" on the way.
"This snow is going to come in very fast. There’ll be fast accumulation, there’ll be drifts, there’ll be visibility problems, there’ll be high winds,” de Blasio said, adding that gusts in the city could surpass 60 mph. “That is a dangerous situation.”
City subways and suburban commuter rails stopped running at 11 p.m. ET Monday under orders from New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo. A road travel restriction began at the same time, meaning that all cars other than emergency vehicles were banned in 13 counties, including those in New York City and Long Island.
"It’s dangerous to be out there now. It’s going to get more dangerous. And at one point it’s irresponsible,” Cuomo said.
A similar travel ban in New Jersey began at 11 p.m. ET, Gov. Chris Christie announced. The move excludes emergency and public safety personnel, utility companies and others assisting in storm recovery. It will be "subject to revocation at daybreak depending on conditions then," Christie said on Twitter.
Boston suspended all public transit for Tuesday and Massachusetts officials pleaded for people to go home and keep put. "The bottom line is it's going to be the kind of night where the best thing anyone can do is to stay inside," Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker said.