Flights resume at Dublin Airport amid snow chaos
Flights into and out of Dublin Airport have resumed for the time being, as snow and ice continues to cause disruption across the UK and Ireland.
Dublin Airport Authority (DAA) closed the facility after 1200 GMT to allow teams to clear runway and taxi area.
It opened it again at 1840 GMT. A DAA spokesperson said up to 100 flights were affected by the closure on Thursday.
There has been minimal disruption at Belfast's two airports.
However, flights to London Gatwick and Edinburgh have been affected.
Passengers have been asked to check with airlines before setting out.
Belfast International Airport is some taking diverted air traffic bound for Dublin Airport.
By Thursday afternoon, two CityJet flight had arrived at the airport. Three Dublin-bound Aer Lingus aircraft from Barcelona, Berlin and Malaga are due to arrive on Thursday night.
On Wednesday, the airport accommodated eight diversions from Dublin.
Uel Hoey, Business Development Director at Belfast International said: "Weather-wise, we have managed to escape the worst of the Arctic weather enveloping a large part of Ireland, which means that we can cater for quite large numbers of diversions.
"As the second largest airport on the island, we have the space and the capacity to accommodate these aircraft without interrupting our normal day-to-day operations. We remain on stand-by to take further diversions."
The Consumer Council of Northern Ireland has encouraged passengers, hit by cancellations, to make sure they know their rights.
Scott Kennerley, Head of Transport at the Council, said: "Airlines have a responsibility to provide information and assistance to passengers. If this does not happen it is easy to understand why consumers get so frustrated when things go wrong.
"Passengers can request a free copy of Plane Facts from the Consumer Council by phoning 0800 121 6022."
City of Derry Airport is also open for business, but passengers have been warned to check with their airlines in case of problems elsewhere.
Mark Beattie from George Best Belfast City Airport said some flights had been affected because of bad weather elsewhere.
More snow is set to fall across Northern Ireland during rush hour on Friday morning and is expected to cause widespread chaos.
Up to 3cm to 6cm is likely and temperatures are expected to drop as low as -10C in Western areas on Thursday night.
The Road Service has asked drivers not to make any unnecessary trips and to watch out for black ice. The area surrounding the Mourne Mountains is particularly treacherous.