TN remains at state of emergency; more than 60,000 without power
All of Tennessee remained at a state of emergency on Tuesday as crews worked to clear roadways, address power outages and help stranded motorists.
The Tennessee Emergency Management Agency declared a state of emergency and activated the Tennessee Emergency Management Plan on Monday night.
As of 4 p.m. Tuesday, 61,000 customers were still without power in 17 Tennessee counties. According to TEMA, the highest number of outages were reported in Bedford, Knox, Coffee and Monroe counties.
With the threat of roads re-freezing overnight, emergency officials once again urged people to stay home if they can.
Nashville Mayor Karl Dean held a press conference on Tuesday to update the city's response to the weather.
"If you don't need to be out on the roads, then please don't," Dean said.
Dean focused on the cold weather and transportation. He asked everyone not to stay outside for extended periods of time and to look out for the homeless.
Dean said on Monday night, city shelters were either full or over capacity. He said the Nashville Rescue Mission is always open and thanked churches for their efforts to house the homeless.
There have been three deaths related to the weather, including two in Williamson County.
TEMA officials said interstates in Middle Tennessee remained hazardous with reports of slow-moving traffic, stranded motorists and lane closures.
Roads and bridges are still slick across the state, with secondary roads being the most hazardous.
Tennessee Department of Transportation spokesperson Heather Jensen said crews focused on interstates on Tuesday. Jensen said all lanes of travel have been plowed and salted on I-24, I-40 and I-65 in Middle Tennessee.
Jensen said possible snow in the next 24 hours will bring its own challenges. Crews are prepared to continue their operations for clearing the roadways.
Monday night, the National Guard, the Tennessee Department of Transportation, TEMA, the Tennessee Highway Patrol, Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency and other agencies responded to a 12-mile back up on Interstate 40 eastbound in Humphreys County.
TEMA said more than 675 vehicles were stuck at the time. Traffic has since reopened but is still moving slowly.