Investigators find black box after Nunavut plane crash kills baby
Investigators have located the flight data recorder that may hold clues to a plane crash that claimed the life of a six-month-old infant in Nunavut.
Julie Leroux, a spokeswoman for the Transportation Safety Board of Canada, says officials will be studying the black box located by the RCMP to help determine what happened.
She says the agency has launched a full investigation.
The RCMP say a chartered plane with nine people on board crashed on Saturday shortly after 6 p.m. Eight survivors are all being treated for non-life threatening injuries.
The Perimeter Aviation LP aircraft went down in the community of Sanikiluaq, located on the Belcher Islands in the southeastern corner of Hudson Bay.
A release from the RCMP said the Fairchild Metro 3/23 twin-engine turbo prop crashed near the end of the runway of the airport, which sits on the north tip of Flaherty Island, roughly 150 kilometres from the Quebec shoreline.
Airline president Mark Wehrle said there were two crew members, six adult passengers and one infant on board the plane.
The co-pilot was flown to Winnipeg for treatment while the captain was treated at the scene, Mr. Wehrle said.
Flight 671 originated in Winnipeg and was chartered for Keewatin Air, which schedules three trips a week between Winnipeg and Sanikiluaq.
Mr. Wehrle said Keewatin usually flies people from the small community in and out of Winnipeg for medical treatment.
He said that six staff from Perimeter and Keewatin were heading to the community.
“We’re arranging to go up and meet with the community and all the people involved and work with the authorities to determine the cause and go from there.”
The Transportation Safety Board, along with the Nunavut Coroner’s Office and the RCMP, will all be involved in the investigation of the crash.
Perimeter Aviation is based in Winnipeg and operates more than 30 aircraft. Its website says it offers air ambulance, charters and cargo services to destinations throughout North America.