Magnitude 6.7 earthquake hits Nagano in Japan, injuring at least 39 and destroying 10 houses
Central Japan has been hit with a magnitude 6.7 earthquake, injuring at least 39 people.
The earthquake hit the mountainous Nagano Prefecture and caused the collapse of 10 homes, temporarily trapping 21 people.
The quake caused landslides blocking eight routes into the affected areas and water and electricity were cut in about 1,500 homes.
More than 80 people spent the night in an evacuation shelter.
The earthquake originated at a depth of 10 kilometres at its epicentre but no tsunami alert was issued.
There were 21 aftershocks in the 90 minutes following the quake.
Chief cabinet secretary Yoshihide Suga told reporters an advanced party of Japan's military had been sent to the area and others were on standby.
An aftershock of magnitude 4.3 registered in northern Nagano at 10:37pm as tremors continued, the meteorological agency said.
"There is a possibility that an aftershock registering upper 5 [which is mid-range in the JMA's scale of seismic intensity] could occur in the coming week," an agency official said.
The agency revised the estimated magnitude from an earlier announced 6.8.
The quake was felt in wide areas from Tohoku in north-eastern Japan to central Japan.
East Japan Railway Co said all bullet train systems in the region - Tohoku, Yamagata, Akita, Joetsu and Nagano - were temporarily stopped.
Their operations resumed shortly including a section of the Nagano line that experienced a longer suspension.
There were no signs of irregularities at Tokyo Electric Power Co's Kashiwazaki Kariwa nuclear plant, a spokesman for the utility said.
The plant, where all seven reactors are currently off-line, is the world's largest power station.
NHK quoted an official in the village of Ogawa near the epicentre as saying there was a long tremor and documents fell off shelves.
"On the second floor of our house, the tremor was too strong to stand," said Sakiko Hagiwara, an NHK employee in the area.
"Pictures fell off the wall," she said, adding there were no cracks in the walls.
NHK also said there was a report of a landslide blocking roads near Hakuba.
Japan, situated on the "Ring of Fire" arc of volcanoes and oceanic trenches that partly encircles the Pacific Basin, accounts for about 20 per cent of the world's earthquakes of magnitude 6 or greater.
On March 11, 2011, a 9.0 magnitude earthquake struck under the ocean off the coast of the northern city of Sendai.
The quake triggered a massive tsunami that devastated a wide swathe of the Pacific coastline and killed nearly 20,000.
It also devastated the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, causing meltdowns in the world's worst nuclear disaster in 25 years.