Gaspé flood victims to get $7-million in relief
The Quebec government is stepping in with emergency funding for flood victims in the Gaspé peninsula after heavy rainfall this week flooded houses, businesses and roads in several communities and forced dozens of families to evacuate their homes.
The government declared a state of emergency in several communities throughout the region. On Thursday it announced $7-million in emergency relief was being made available immediately to victims of the floods.
At least ten communities were hit by more than 260 millimetres of rain that started to pour down on the region on Monday. The heavy precipitation began to subside late Wednesday but not before high tides and strong winds caused the flooding of homes along the shoreline and near rivers, forcing more than 250 people to find refuge in emergency shelters.
As the weather stabilized and the water slowly subsided, some families started to return to their homes. Yet, as of Thursday, more than 100 people were still living with family, friends and in emergency shelters.
Many roads, including stretches of the main highway linking the communities, were seriously damaged. The flooding caused millions of dollars in damage to local infrastructure.
“There’s never been anything like this in terms of precipitation and damage caused by a rainfall,” said deputy premier Nathalie Normandeau, the minister responsible for the region, after a helicopter tour of the town of Gaspé. “On a humanitarian level, it is a catastrophic situation. … The government’s role is to act as a facilitator for the victims.”
The $7-million emergency relief package announced on Thursday by Public Security Minister Robert Dutil will allow people to claim a maximum $100,000 for damages to their homes. Mr. Dutil acknowledged that under the current program some homeowners won’t be able to recover the entire cost of the damage but that more help may be on the way.
“We aren’t closing the door to other measures. But right now, the program we have, responds to the current needs,” Mr. Dutil said, adding that the priority was to make sure people were safe and help them get back into their homes in time for Christmas. “We want to make sure people find a certain comfort. The holiday season is upon us and it’s normal that everybody want to celebrate Christmas.”
For some residents, the floods have damaged their homes beyond repair. One man lost his home, his store, his livelihood.
“We are now aware that just days before Christmas, there will be many people who will have a very difficult Christmas. We are very sensitive to that,” said Gaspé MNA Georges Mamelonet.
The flooding was not unlike that in 2007 in the small town of Rivière-au-renard near Gaspé that killed two people and caused considerable damage to the community.
Ms. Normandeau noted that this week’s disaster was the second such flooding to hit the region in three years and consideration needs to be given to moving homes from low-lying areas to safer ground.
“Three years after the Rivière-au-renard episode, this situation confirms that we must deal more and more with these types of recurring events,” she said.
“This will require for both the [provincial] government and municipalities to be better prepared.”