Philippines braces for Typhoon Rammasun / Glenda
Thousands of people living in coastal areas of the Philippines are evacuating as the first major storm of the rainy season barrels towards the archipelago.
Typhoon Rammasun is expected to make landfall tonight in the eastern Philippines, and pass over the capital Manila of more than 12 million people.
The Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration says Rammasun has intensified into a Typhoon, and is moving slowly west toward the Bicol region.
At 4am local time, it was around 270 kilometres east of Legazpi City, Albay, and packing peak winds of up to 120 kilometres an hour and gusts of up to 150 km/h.
Rammasun, known locally as Glenda, is expected to hit fishing communities in the eastern Philippines late Tuesday and then bring heavy rain to Manila and other heavily populated northern areas, civil defence officials said.
The Philippine Red Cross says the typhoon has strengthened as it crosses the western Pacific Ocean, but may weaken after making landfall.
Secretary General Gwendolyn Pang has told Radio Australia the Red Cross is preparing for the impact of the typhoon and its after-effects.
"In the past, as we have observed, even with slight rain we have flooding in central Manila," he said.
"So this one, if it's brought by a typhoon, we're expecting heavy flooding, because with slight rain we are experiencing flooding already."
Even the central Philippines province of Leyte which was devastated by Typhoon Haiyan late last year with more than seven thousand people killed or missing, has been placed under a storm alert.
Several tents of Haiyan survivors have been damaged by rains from Typhoon Rammasun.
Food and other items have been readied by government agencies.
Schools are closed today, and thousands of passengers have been stranded as sea travel, and several domestic and international flights have been cancelled in the northern and eastern regions.
The Philippines is hit by about 20 major storms a year, many of them deadly, and Rammasun will be the first to make landfall since the rainy season began last month.
Authorities said they were taking every precaution to avoid fatalities, after Super Typhoon Haiyan left about 7,300 people dead or missing when it tore across the central Philippines in November last year.
"We are already warning the public to be on alert for possible effects of the weather disturbance: landslides, flash floods, strong rains and winds," said Alexander Pama, head of the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council.
Miguel Villafuerte, governor of Camarines Sur province in southern Luzon which is expected to be hit hard by the storm, said many people in vulnerable areas were already being urged to flee.
"We are extra-cautious because of what happened with Yolanda last year," he said, using the local name for Haiyan.
The disaster management council said it had already alerted over 1,300 villages susceptible to floods or landslides they were in Ramassun's direct path and residents should be prepared to shelter in evacuation centres.
The second level of a three-step storm alert has been raised over the Bicol archipelago southeast of Manila, where the storm is expected to first hit. Classes on all levels have already been suspended.
Storm alerts have also been posted for the more than 12 million people in Manila.
The new storm is expected to bring 7.5 to 15 millimetres of rainfall per hour, the disaster council said.
Council spokeswoman Mina Marasigan warned that the storm could become even more powerful as it moves across the sea.
She said there were concerns it might bring rainfall comparable to Typhoon Xangsane in 2006, which killed more than 200 people and displaced nearly two million due largely to widespread and heavy flooding.