Man who plowed car into crowd at SXSW charged with capital murder
A driver who plowed into a crowded street at a popular festival in Austin this week, killing two people, was charged with capital murder, police said Friday.
Rashad Charjuan Owens allegedly tore through the crowd while drunk, running over people and hitting other cars. At least 23 others were injured.
Authorities have not released names of the dead, but they were a Dutch man on a bicycle and a local woman on a moped, Austin Police Chief Art Acevedo said.
"During the eight years that Steven worked for MassiveMusic, we got to know him as an unstoppable force, full of life, love and laughter," it said. "This is an irreplaceable loss for the MassiveMusic family, and we are grateful for the years we spent with him. Our thoughts are with Steven's family and friends."
"It looked like something out of a movie," Russ Barone said. "A few people lying on the street ... with their friends around them trying to get them up, trying to get them back to life. Hopefully, they are."
"I've never seen nothing like it. I felt like I was at a war or something," Barone said. "I was down here for the music ... we were having the best time ever. And then it turned into the worst thing I've ever seen."
Twenty-three others were initially hospitalized, some with multiple internal injuries. Most of the victims are in their 20s, said Dr. Christopher Ziebell, medical director at the University Medical Center Brackenridge.
Ziebell said it was fortunate the incident occurred so close to the hospital, and applauded the Travis County paramedics, who had just undergone training for a similar scenario.
A patrol officer attempted to stop the car near a crowded gas station, Acevedo said. The driver, the chief said, allegedly acted as if he was pulling over into the gas station, but he continued through the parking lot and exited, accelerating down the street.
The officer attempting to pull him over couldn't follow him because the parking lot was so crowded, Acevedo said. Another officer working barricade control had to jump out of the driver's way as he allegedly accelerated for about two blocks, striking pedestrians and vehicles, the chief said.
Photos and video posted to social media showed people sprawled on a street for about a block with first-responders kneeling over them. In one instance, paramedics are seen performing CPR.