San Bruno explosion and fire destroys dozens of homes; four dead, many injured – The Mercury News
In a frightening conflagration fueled by a broken 24-inch gas main, a massive fire in San Bruno on Thursday destroyed 53 homes in the hillside community, killed at least six people, critically injured two dozen and sent scores of residents fleeing as firefighters battled the ferocious blaze.
Early this morning the fire chief said that at least six people have died and that authorities fear the death toll may rise as more homes are searched, according to according to ABC7-TV..
Motorists from nearby Interstate 280 and eyewitnesses described the towering flames reaching as high as 60 feet into the air more than an hour after the huge fireball ignited with a sudden explosion in the packed residential community, a few miles from the San Francisco International Airport.
Yasmine Kury, who lives in an apartment complex near the fire’s origin, saw black smoke drift over Interstate 280, after a thunderous explosion rocked the Crestmoor community in the area of Skyline Boulevard and Sneath Lane about 6:15 p.m.
“We heard it and felt it, and everyone ran out of the building,” Kury said. “It was just a huge explosion.”
The noise was so deafening that residents at first thought a plane had crashed, but Pacific Gas & Electric officials said one of its natural gas pipelines had erupted, fueling the flames that quickly began devouring homes and forced a wide-scale evacuation. PG&E, however, said the cause of the blaze had yet to be determined.
About 200 firefighters from across the Bay Area rushed to help control the huge fire that had already damaged 120 homes. As of 11 p.m. Thursday, fires continued to burn, turning the neighborhood into an apocalyptic scene. Only half of the fire had been contained.
Two brothers, Bob and Ed Pellegrini, live near the house at the center of the explosion, reported to have occurred at Claremont and Glenview drives. As the ground shook violently, they thought an earthquake had rattled the Bay Area. Then they saw the flames outside their window.
“It looked like hell on earth. I have never seen a ball of fire that huge,” Bob Pellegrini said.
It was too hot to escape out the front door, so the brothers ran out the back and up the hill, the fire chasing them. It felt like a blowtorch on the back of their necks, they said. Then they saw that their house and four cars were destroyed in the fire.
“The house is gone,” Ed said. “I have nothing. Everything is gone. We’re homeless.”
As helicopters dropped water and fire retardant on the leaping flames, San Mateo County opened emergency centers and a shelter at the San Bruno Recreation Center while activating a reverse 911 message system to alert residents. Many of the injured victims were taken to San Francisco and Daly City hospitals.
Fire officials confirmed one fatality, but there were late reports of two others dead. City officials declared the city a disaster area, as it seeks state and federal resources.
The California Public Utilities Commission, meanwhile, is investigating the cause of the explosion and fire, working with local officials and federal agencies as well as PG&E. Some residents in the neighborhood reported “a really strong smell of gas” last week, with PG&E responding at the time.
At Bayhill Shopping Center, residents huddled together in shock and tears as they watched the terrifying scene unfold on television.
Patty Blick, who lives on Claremont Drive, was driving home from work when she was suddenly met with flames and heat. “My house is gone. I’m just not really here right now,” she said, sniffling. “I just don’t want to leave even though I know nothing is there. I keep thinking I will find something.”
John McGlothlin, who lives on the same street, was at home when the explosion happened.
“To me, it felt like an earthquake. Hearing rumbling, movement, stuff like that,” said McGlothlin, who was buying a sweatshirt and other essentials at the shopping center where police initially directed many of the displaced residents.
In the San Bruno neighborhood where the explosion rattled the largely residential community, emergency vehicles blanketed the area.
Marilyn Siacotos, a neighbor who lives at the intersection of Fairmont Drive and Concord Way, drove by and picked up a family of four who lost their cat in the fire.
Siacotos, 76, escaped through the back door because the flames were licking down the front of her street.
“I didn’t look back,” she said. “I just got out before anybody (emergency responders) came.”
Siacotos, and the family members, who did not want their names used, said the explosion originated at a home in the immediate vicinity of Fairmont Drive, a one-block road enclosed on both sides by Claremont Drive.
None of them had any time to grab any belongings before fleeing the scene.
Many described a chaotic scene, with residents scrambling for their lives, some suffering burns and cuts as they escaped the intense, radiating heat.
Retired San Bruno Fire Battalion Chief Bob Hensel, who also had to evacuate, said it was the biggest fire he had seen in decades. When he left the house, with his two cats left behind, he saw his wife’s car bumpers melt from the heat.
“I heard a big whooshing sound and there was a boom. Stuff started hitting the house and then it got yellow outside and then real warm,” Hensel said.
Though Thursday’s explosion may have resulted from a possible ruptured natural gas main, it brought reminders of a similar incident in the Bay Area.
In November 2004, a fuel pipeline killed five construction workers in Walnut Creek — the deadliest gasoline pipeline explosion since one that killed six people in Texas in 1983.
“What makes this fire so devastating and so difficult is essentially it creates the equivalent of an eight-alarm fire in the heart of a residential neighborhood,” retired Contra Costa Fire Battalion Chief Dave George said. “It behaves differently than most other fires because it grows in all directions at the same time. Whatever it wants to do, it does.”
George said the heat of the fire would be upward of 1,200 degrees, which could create radiant heat hot enough to burn a couch inside a brick home through the window.
“This is really a worst-case scenario,” he said. “The closest thing to something like this is when a wildland fire hits a residential neighborhood.”
Bay Area News Group staff writers Sean Maher, Aaron Kinney and Roman Gokhman contributed to this report. Contact Sandra Gonzales at 408-920-5778.