Floods in Assam: 85 dead, 58 districts affected: Centre says damage due to floods in northeast 'unprecedented'
seen the extent of damage
GUWAHATI: The Centre on Thursday said the in the three northeast states of Assam , Manipur and Arunachal PRadesh was unprecedented and directed authorities to use services of experts from space technology and ISRO to assess the damage. Chairing a review meeting in New Delhi, minister for Development of North Eastern Region (DoNER) Jitendra Singh said that the damage caused by the rainfall is unprecedented and a total of 58 districts have been affected due to floods and landslides in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Manipur. Around 85 lives have been lost, he added. Till Thursday due to drowning and electrocution reached 50 while 14 of a family were buried alive in a massive landslide in Arunachal Pradesh on Tuesday. A central team of representatives from NITI Aayog and National Disaster Response Force led by Union Minister of State for Home Kiren Rijiju carried out a ground assessment of the flood situation in Assam. Rijiju later took stock of the situation at Laptap village in Arunachal Pradesh’s Papum Pare district where the 14 people were killed by landslide. Rijiju said, “We have and an initial assessment has been carried out. Centre will provide all support after the preliminary damage assessment report.” Chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal said that DoNER minister called him and expressed concern over the damage caused by the devastating floods in Assam . “He also conveyed Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s deep anguish for the loss of lives and properties in the current wave of floods in the state,” Sonowal said. Expressing his deep concern over the flood caused by the torrential rain in the state as well as upper reaches of the Brahmaputra, Singh said, “The Centre is very much with the people of Assam at this time crisis and assures all possible help to normalise the situation”. Kiren Rijiju during a meeting with senior officials to discuss the flood situation at Lakhimpur district in Assam on Thursday. (PTI photo)The DoNER minister at the review meeting said that the damage caused by the floods and landslides has been contained to large extent by the state governments and central teams. He also suggested that essential items like staple food and baby food be made available to the affected people. The minister said that he has approached the health ministry to undertake measures to prevent outbreak of epidemics and telecom ministry for restoration of communication lines. He also asked the resident commissioners of northeastern states to work in close coordination with DoNER ministry and PMO to further monitor the situation.