Four missing in Queensland as Logan braces for record flood peak
Floodwaters are rising to record levels in Logan, while authorities continue to search for four missing people in southeast Queensland.
Curious locals have gathered in pockets of the city south of Brisbane to observe floodwaters, which are creeping into backyards and across roads.
The Logan River is expected to peak at 10.5 metres at 2pm on Saturday, and again later in the afternoon at Beenleigh and Eagleby.
Logan Mayor Luke Smith says it will be the biggest flood in the area in more than 40 years.
Young families, couples and shirtless teens armed with cameras have gone to the Waterford Bridge at Waterford to witness the record-breaking event, ignoring authorities' advice to stay away.
"We are asking people to stay away from the area and please don't drive around the roads, don't stop and look at waterways," Mr Smith said.
"If you are in low-lying areas it is time to move to high ground - you have to two o'clock this afternoon to find somewhere else to go just during the few hours of that peak."
More than 300 properties, including 211 homes, could be inundated in Logan.
Swift water rescue workers helped three women and two babies escape floodwaters at Waterford West in Logan on Saturday morning.
Authorities say they fear four missing people may have fallen victim to floodwaters in the southeast.
Queensland State Disaster Coordinator Deputy Commissioner Stephen Gollschewski said desperate searches were now underway.
Among the missing is David Heidemann, 50, who failed to meet friends as planned after leaving his Mondure home near Murgon, northwest of Brisbane, on Thursday night.
He was due to meet friends at a road that was experiencing flooding at the time.
A serach is also underway for 77-year-old man Nelson Raebel from Eagleby who was last seen near Eagleby Road at Logan on Friday afternoon.
A third man, in his 60s, has been missing since Wednesday after he went bushwalking at Lamington National Park.
Landslides have made it difficult for police who have had to bring in bobcats to clear roads before search on foot.
Police are yet to release details of a fourth missing person.
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk on Friday said the height of floodwaters at Beenleigh, where the local train station was swamped, were unlike anything seen before.
Further south, the famous Yatala Pie Shop also fell victim to the rising floodwaters and has reportedly lost 3000 pies.
Yatala Pies has lost 3000 pies in the flood. Source: @JessMumme/ Twitter
Meanwhile, flood-hit Scenic Rim residents are being urged to only use their tap water for drinking after all the water treatment plants were knocked out in the region.
More than 22,000 homes remain without power across the southeast, two days after the remnants of ex-cyclone Debbie tore through the region, bringing down about 700 power lines.