Video: Indonesian authorities reveal crashed plane was carrying 54 passengers and bags of cash
Rescuers are rushing to reach remote mountains in Indonesia where a plane carrying 54 passengers – and four bags filled with cash - is believed to have crashed.
As authorities tried to reach the Okbape district in the province of Papua, postal officials revealed that the Trigana Airlines flight was carrying four bags containing £300,000 (Rp 6.5 billion) in cash.
The money, accompanied by four postal officials, was due to be distributed to the poor as part of a government programme.
“There were four officials from our office accompanying the delivery of funds,” said Haryono, who uses only one name.
“We have continued to coordinate with Trigana officials and security authorities to follow up this case.”
The Trigana Airlines plane was flying south from Jayapura to Oksibil airport
The ATR42-300 twin turboprop plane, carrying 49 passengers, including five children, and five crew, lost contact with air traffic control on Sunday afternoon during a 50-minute flight between the cities of Jayapura and Oksibil. Trigana officials said the weather in the area was “very unpredictable”.
Authorities have located the crash site, about 12 miles from Oksibil, but teams of police, military personnel and rescue officials have been unable to reach the area. It is not yet known whether there were any survivors.
"The area is steep and is covered by dense forests.... There is no road, no access at all," said Teguh Pudji Rahardjo, a military spokesman.
The plane lost contact with the airport minutes before it was scheduled to land (file photo)
Families of the passengers – believed to be all Indonesian – have expressed frustration at the lack of news.
"My family and I have been gathered here for hours. We want to know the fate of my brother, Kepi Deal, who was on board the plane," Rifan Wea, one of about 100 relatives at Jayapura airport, told AFP.
"We want to know whether he is dead or alive."
Indonesia is known for its poor safety record and has numerous airlines – including Trigana – that are on the European Union’s list of carriers banned from European airspace.
Last December, an AirAsia passenger jet crashed during a two-hour flight from the Indonesian city of Surabaya to Singapore, killing all 162 people on board. The government subsequently introduced tougher air safety regulations.
A final report on the crash is due to be released this month but authorities have indicated the disaster was caused by an attempt to avoid heavy weather.
In June, more than 100 people died after a military plane crashed into a residential neighborhood in Medan, the country’s third-largest city. The president has promised a review of the air force's ageing fleet.
Analysts say Indonesian regulators have struggled to keep a watch on the airline sector, particularly the large number of low-cost carriers which have emerged in recent years to ferry people around the sprawling archipelago of 17,000 islands.
The government has pledged to introduce tougher air safety regulations.