State of Emergency Declared After at Least 272 Killed
"We have buildings at three to four stories high just, you know, pancake effect, and they are all in the basement now," said resident Juan Fernando Rojas.
Correa said the temblor was the strongest quake to hit Ecuador since 1979. He said some areas had lost power and warned people to be careful to avoid fallen debris and poles.
States of emergency were declared for the provinces of Esmeraldas, Los Rios, Manabi, Santa Elena, Guayas and Santo Domingo. The quake was strongly felt in country's capital, Quito, about around 100 miles away.
Vice President Jorge Glas said that 10,000 military troops and 3,500 police officers were dispatched to the affected areas and that $600 million in credit was allotted to the emergency. Meanwhile, the Home Ministry said five helicopters and more than 80 buses ferried 4,000 police to the quake zone.
By Sunday night, the government was calling on an additional 2,000 officers to help "reinforce security" in the region, the country's vice minister of internal security, Diego Fuentes Acosta, said at a news conference. He added that the government was at "100 percent of its operational capacity" there.
More than 1,200 Red Cross volunteers were also helping to render first aid and search for an unspecified number of missing people. Glas said. However, the heavy machinery couldn't be used in rescues because such equipment could put wounded people at greater risk. He pleaded with people who flooded into the streets, in the absence of shelter, to "be quiet so rescuers can listen for survivors."
Vanessa Santos said authorities were telling her that her entire family was buried. "I need to find my baby," she said. "It's been five hours since she disappeared."
Authorities said landslides, crumbling bridges and roads were making it difficult for emergency workers to reach the hardest-hit towns.
"We're trying to do the most we can, but there's almost nothing we can do," said Gabriel Alcivar, mayor of Pedernales, a town of 40,000 near the quake's epicenter, according to The Associated Press.