Tropical Storm Javier (RECAP)
Tropical Storm Javier developed from an area of low pressure, called a Tehuantepecer, and moisture from the remnants of Hurricane Earl that crossed mainland Mexico in early August. 
By later that day, the tropical depression developed into a tropical storm. Winds gusted to 46 mph in Manzanillo when Javier was near the southwest coast of Mexico.
On August 8, Javier intensified into a 65 mph tropical storm near Cabo San Lucas. Over the next day, Javier paralleled Baja California as it moved toward the north and began to weaken. 
Scattered showers and storms mainly on the periphery of former Javier's circulation continued to produce locally heavy rain and flash flooding of normally dry washes and arroyos into the following week. 
As with many tropical cyclones tracking near Baja California, Javier has helped to pull a surge of moisture northward into the Southwest U.S. For more details on that story, click the link below.
Javier formed partially from the remnants of Hurricane Earl, which impacted Belize, Honduras and Mexico in early August.
How often does a "ghost" or remnant of a past tropical storm or hurricane help form a new one in a different basin?
According to NOAA's Hurricane Research Division, it's more common than it sounds.
It most recently occurred in October 2014 when eastern Pacific Tropical Storm Trudy made landfall in Mexico. After that, NOAA/HRD says the following occurred:
It's happened in the opposite direction, as well.
In 2001, Iris made a devastating landfall in southern Belize as a Category 4 hurricane after a less-than-five-day cruise through the Caribbean Sea, spun down to a remnant low, then was reborn as Tropical Storm Manuel in the eastern Pacific Ocean, lasting over a week in that basin.
NOAA-HRD documented 15 total cases of remnants of tropical storms or hurricanes from one basin helping to form new tropical storms or hurricanes in another basin, dating to 1923. They caution that due to lack of satellite data, some other cases prior to the 1970s may have gone undetected.
This has occurred 11 times since the 1970s, or once every 3 to 4 years, on average. One of these cases involved 1974's Hurricane Fifi, responsible for anywhere from 3,000 to 10,000 deaths (primarily due to rainfall flooding) in Central America.
Another bizarre case involved a Category 5 landfall in Belize (Hurricane Hattie in 1961) whose remnant helped form eastern Pacific Tropical Storm Simone.
But there's more.
Simone's remnant then ended up back in the Bay of Campeche, merging with another disturbance to help form Tropical Storm Inga.
To recap, that was Atlantic to eastern Pacific back to Atlantic Basin.
Has an eastern Pacific tropical cyclone spawned from an Atlantic remnant ever made landfall in Mexico?
Several have come close, but officially, it has only happened twice, according to NOAA-HRD: