ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)
Rescue crews have been pulled out of parts of central Christchurch amid fears that one of the city's tallest buildings may be about to collapse in the wake of yesterday's terrifying earthquake.
Police and firefighters cleared a two-block exclusion zone around the Grand Chancellor Hotel in the city centre, forcing a halt to rescue work on some of the buildings worst hit in Tuesday's 6.3-magnitude quake.
Among the buildings where the search for survivors was suspended was the CTV building, where up to 50 people were believed to be trapped.
The building was smashed to pieces in yesterday's devastating 6.3-magnitude earthquake that claimed the lives of at least 75 people, including an Australian resident, with 300 people still missing.
Earlier today there were incorrect reports that 15 people had been rescued from the CTV building.
The national commander of the fire and rescue service, Mike Hall, says it is possible people are trapped in the building, but there has been no sign of life for eight hours.
Rescue crews are now concentrating their efforts on the Pyne Gould Guinness building and it is believed they are in contact with up to four people trapped inside.
Rescue teams spent last night sifting through the rubble in the desperate search for survivors and that task has intensified today with specialist teams from Australia now at the disaster zone and others from around the globe flying in.
Police say rescuers have had to amputate limbs to free survivors from collapsed buildings.
Aftershocks continue to fray the nerves of residents sheltering in welfare centres.
The city's water system and electricity grid are still nowhere close to functioning properly and it may continue that way for months.
New Zealand's prime minister, John Key, says time is of the essence and has declared a national emergency.
"In practice this enables the strongest possible focus of local, national and international resources working together to achieve the best possible response in the shortest timeframe," he said.
Mr Key says the national declaration gives civil defence authorities greater powers in the disaster zone.
"On behalf of New Zealand, we feel your pain as only a small nation can," Mr Key said at a press conference this morning.
"This devastating event marks the start of a long journey for your city. It will be a difficult journey but progress is certain ... Christchurch will rise again."
This morning, Prime Minister Julia Gillard confirmed an Australian resident was among those killed in the earthquake, and said there were concerns for four more Australians.
Ms Gillard told a Canberra press conference "a long-term Australian resident of New Zealand origin has lost his life in this disaster".
She said a stranger tried to help the man in the last hours of his life, and she thanked him for his efforts.
"Reports are sketchy and we are still working through the details, but it appears this person is a family man and our condolences go to his family," she said.
"I'm sure many Australians have watched with a great deal of admiration as New Zealanders get about the task of search and rescue. This is a very, very difficult time for the people of New Zealand - it is also a difficult time for Australians waiting for news.
"We will be doing everything we can to work with our New Zealand family."
Ms Gillard said officials had confirmed the safety of 417 Australians in Christchurch, but said 1,511 Australians had been registered as being in the city.
Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd says there are concerns for three Australians who were known to be in the downtown area of Christchurch when the earthquake struck and have not been found.
Mr Rudd says authorities are also trying to find a woman who had phoned a Melbourne media organisation from under a collapsed building.
"We have sought to, of course, immediately contact her on that telephone number without success," he said.
"We immediately provided those details to the search and rescue authorities. That search is ongoing."