Chile earthquake: At least five dead as president declares northern disaster zone
At least five people are dead after a magnitude 8.2 earthquake struck in the Pacific Ocean off Chile, triggering a tsunami that generated two-metre waves.
The earthquake hit shortly before 9:00pm (local time) at a relatively shallow depth of 10 kilometres and was centred 86 kilometres north-west of Iquique in northern Chile.
The first waves struck Chile's northern coast within 45 minutes of the quake, with roads left gridlocked as residents abandoned their coastal homes for higher ground.
Geophysicist Brian Shiro with the Pacific Tsunami Warning Centre described the resulting tsunami as "fairly big".
"The rule of thumb to issue a tsunami in the first place is one metre. So this is more than twice that," he said.
Interior minister Rodrigo Penalillo says the victims were four men and a woman who died in the cities of Iquique and Alto Hospicio, either of a heart attack or after being crushed by debris.
President Michelle Bachelet has declared parts of northern Chile to be disaster zones, including the regions of Arica, Parinacota and Tarapaca.
"The country has faced these first emergency hours very well," she said.
She is expected to visit the region in the coming hours, when daylight will reveal the full extent of the damage.
The president has ordered military be sent to affected areas to prevent looting and disorder, but already a government minister has said 300 female inmates have escaped from a prison.
Authorities say a number of those prisoners have been recaptured.
Landslides, blackouts and fires have also been reported.
Shortly after the earthquake struck, tsunami warning sirens blared along Chile's coastline, urging people to head to higher ground.
Hundreds of thousands heeded the call, evacuating their homes and grid-locking roads with heavy congestion.
Freelance journalist Tom Asapati told the ABC from Santiago that authorities wasted no time issuing the warning.
"People have moved out of the danger areas as quickly as they can and now they're waiting for the authorities to give the all-clear so they can go back to their homes," he said.
Coordinator with the Chilean Red Cross Leticia Escamilla said evacuations were relatively calm.
"People who have experienced past earthquakes ... have reported feeling more prepared and have shown actions where they are more prepared," she said.
"This is a very seismic country, so people are always kind of alert. People do seem more prepared and knowing what to do this time around."
Hostel owner Kurt Hertramph said guests at his Arica hostel evacuated to higher ground.
"Everybody's gone, everybody's gone. Mostly they are Dutch, and there is a couple from Australia," he said.
"Everybody's out in the hills in this moment. We got an evacuation plan for that. It's running good at the moment and the police are in the area."
Northern Chile has felt a number of aftershocks since the massive earthquake struck.
Kevin McCue from the Australian Seismological Centre says the aftershocks could go on for months and could be as strong as magnitude 7.
Earthquakes are a common occurrence in Chile. In 2010 an 8.8-magnitude earthquake killed more than 300 people.