Germanwings co-pilot accelerated plane during descent
Initial reading of data recorder shows Andreas Lubitz used automatic pilot to begin descent and then repeatedly sped up plane, investigators say
The co-pilot of the doomed Germanwings flight 9525 repeatedly accelerated the plane as he used the automatic pilot to descend into the Alps, the French air accident investigation agency has said.
The new detail from the BEA agency is based on an initial reading of the plane’s black box data recorder, found blackened and buried at the crash site on Thursday.
It strengthens investigators’ initial suspicions that co-pilot Andreas Lubitz intentionally destroyed the plane, though prosecutors are still trying to figure out why. All 150 people on board flight 9525 from Barcelona to Düsseldorf were killed in the crash on 24 March.
The BEA said the preliminary reading of the data recorder shows that the pilot used the automatic pilot to put the plane into a descent and then repeatedly adjusted it to speed up the plane. The agency says it will continue studying the black box for more complete details of what happened.
On Thursday, Düsseldorf prosecutors said Lubitz researched cockpit doors and suicide methods online in the days leading up to the crash.
Ralf Herrenbrück, the German prosecutors’ press spokesman, said a tablet computer found in the co-pilot’s apartment had been analysed. “The browser history had not been deleted. In particular, search terms called up using this device in the time from 16 March to 23 March 2015 could be reconstructed,” he said.
“According to these, the user was on the one hand looking into medical treatments and on the other learning about the different methods and possibilities of committing suicide.”
On at least one day, according to the statement, Lubitz spent several minutes entering search terms about cockpit doors and their security arrangements.
The user name, personal correspondence and search terms found on the tablet all appeared to confirm that the device belonged to Lubitz, Herrenbrück said. He said officials would not be releasing the exact search terms used, and the device was still being examined.
The French public prosecutor Brice Robin said 40 mobile telephones had been found in the wreckage of flight 9525, all of them in a “very bad state”. This week Paris Match magazine claimed it had seen a video recorded on a mobile phone by a passenger in the final moments of the flight.
Robin also said search teams had found 2,285 DNA strands giving 150 different “profiles”. “This doesn’t mean we have identified all the 150 victims and I stress this point. We have to compare this postmortem DNA with the DNA of these people before they died provided by the families. This work will begin as soon as possible next week. At each identification, the victim’s family will be notified, I promise that,” he said.
Robin said the return of body parts could only happen when all 150 victims had been identified and following a meeting of all the legal, civil and judicial authorities.
There has been growing public anger in Germany about some of the media coverage of the crash. After a pupil at the Joseph-König high school in Haltern wrote a blogpost complaining of the press siege outside her school, the organisers of a vintage plane air show posted an open letter, addressed to an unnamed press agency, in which it explained why it would not answer a request for footage that might contain images of Lubitz. The letter described mass media coverage as “serving low voyeurism and generating circulation through horror”.
On Thursday, German politicians attempted to show they were taking action to improve safety and security in the aftermath of the crash. The transport minister, Alexander Dobrindt, announced the launch of a taskforce for optimising flight safety. Following a meeting with representatives of the airline industry association BDL and the civil aviation authority, he said the taskforce would re-examine cockpit door mechanisms and the medical and psychological tests for pilots.
The interior minister, Thomas de Maizière, said it was time to review European Union regulations for passport checks inside the Schengen area. “We need to know for security reasons who is on board a flight,” he told Bild newspaper. “At first, it wasn’t even clear who was on board the flight.”
The comments were condemned by opposition politicians. “A pure placebo reaction to a human tragedy,” the Green party MEP Jan Philipp Albrecht told Der Spiegel magazine.