Sherpa who scaled Everest 19 times missing after avalanche in Nepal
Chhewang Nima was attempting to reach the summit of Mount Baruntse when he was hit
A leading Sherpa who scaled Mount Everest 19 times has gone missing after getting caught in an avalanche while on an expedition.
Chhewang Nima, 43, highly respected in mountaineering circles for scaling the world's highest peak, was fixing ropes near the summit of Mount Baruntse when he and another guide were hit by the avalanche.
Nima, who is married with two children, had been part of a British expedition attempting to reach the summit of the 7,129 metre Baruntse peak in eastern Nepal.
Other members of the expedition team, were reported to be unharmed. They said they had tried to find Nima by digging in the snow but were unable to locate him.
A rescue helicopter had been sent to search for him and his fellow guide yesterday but was unable to take off due to high winds, and will try again tomorrow .
Jeevan Ghimire of the Sherpa Shangrila Trek and Expedition agency, which organised the expedition, said: "It was a big avalanche that swept him away in windy conditions. He is one of the most accomplished Sherpa guides on Everest. It is very unfortunate that he got caught in a dangerous avalanche at Mount Baruntse."
Ghimire said Nima had worked for the company for a decade and that if anyone knew how to survive perilous conditions it was him. "He's a good climber, he knows how to survive," he said.
On the EverestNews.com mountaining website, the president of the Nepal Mountaineering Association, Sherpa Ang Tshering, said: "The search for Chhewang Nima is still ongoing and I can only pray that he is still alive ... a helicopter search party will be dispatched to the area, accompanied by his family members."
Nima was one climb short of the world record for climbing to the top of Everest, a record held by fellow Nepalese Sherpa Apa who has reached the summit 20 times.
On Sherpamagic.com, a website designed to help people find Sherpas, Nima, from Khumbu, north-eastern Nepal, is described as "one of the world's most respected and accomplished Sherpas."
It said: "His gentle demeanor and unwavering work ethic make him one of the most reliable members of the high altitude climbing community. His participation in any expedition is a great asset."
Mountain climber Alan Arnette said it was tragic news. "My deepest hope is that he will be found alive," he said.