Winter storm Linus leaves 1,000 flights on Monday cancelled
A slow-moving winter storm has delivered heavy snow and near blizzard conditions to a large swath of the Midwest and by Sunday evening had begun to have an impact on the Northeast.
Winter storm Linus put the metropolitan Chicago area's more than 9 million people under a blizzard warning and another 65 million people were also under a winter storm warning across 18 states.
On Sunday afternoon, snow was falling simultaneously all the way from eastern Nebraska to central Pennsylvania, a distance of more than 1,100 miles.
By 3 p.m. on Sunday, parts of Iowa had received up to 14 inches of snow. In Chicago more than 8 inches of snow had fallen at O'Hare International Airport and just to the west at Midway Airport, more than 9 inches of snow had fallen.
A blizzard warning remained in effect for the Chicago Metro Area until midnight local time for gusty winds blowing snow around and creating white-out conditions.
More than 2,000 U.S. flights were canceled on Sunday, many of them in and out of Chicago, according to Flightaware.com, an online flight-tracking service. Already for Monday, more than 1,000 flights have been scratched.
The snowstorm is expected to be the most far-reaching of the season to date, according to the National Weather Service.
By Sunday evening, the snow was continuing to fall from Chicago to Detroit and areas of light snow were predicted to overspread cities from Pennsylvania to New York and New Jersey.
A wintry mix and areas of heavy rain was expected further south from Indianapolis to the mid-Atlantic.
Parts of New England still digging out from a storm early last week were readying for yet another round of snow to arrive Sunday and last through Monday.
Forecasters also said the storm was moving unusually slowly, meaning accumulations of between 10 to 16 inches of snow are possible for parts of northern Illinois, Indiana and northwest Ohio. Similar amounts of snow are expected for the Northeast later Sunday and throughout Monday.
'It's not wise to travel, unless you have an emergency,' said David Beachler a National Weather Service meteorologist in the Chicago area.
'The streets will stay plowed and passable so people will be safe and secure,' Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel promised at a news conference Sunday. More than 350 pieces of equipment, including plows and salt spreaders, fanned out across the city, officials said.
Chicago Public Schools canceled classes for Monday, according to its Twitter page.
The storm will move east and affect major metropolitan areas such as New York City and Boston on Monday.
The National Weather Service issued a Winter Storm Warning beginning at 7 p.m. Sunday, cautioning New York City residents to expect snow and sleet, winds up to 30 mph, and temperatures in the upper 20s. 
New York City can expect 2 to 5 inches of snow, Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Sunday, but added that 'a lot can change between now and the early morning hours.'
The mayor said the biggest threats are ice and wind gusts.
'Keep your time outside limited tomorrow night,' de Blasio said. 'Don't go outside if you don't need to.'
New York City schools are expected to be open Monday, although a final decision will be made early Monday morning.
'If we have a situation where we don't think school can be put together properly, we of course call it off,' the mayor said. 'We feel good about the ability to have a pretty normal day.'
'The biggest threat in this case would be ice. We would expect a lot of icing on our roads and sidewalks -- up to a quarter inch of ice in some places, and a lot of that would happen in the early morning hours, so we'd want people to be very, very cautious tomorrow,' he told reporters.
Parts of New England - still recovering from a blizzard early last week that buried the region in snow - braced for Monday.
The weather service said that many parts of New England could get between 8 and 14 inches of snow and that parts of western Massachusetts and Connecticut could get as much as 16 inches. Boston schools were scheduled to be closed Monday.
Southern Vermont was expected to get its first flakes around 3 a.m. Monday, and snow should start falling in Concord, New Hampshire, and Portland, Maine, a few hours later.
Philadelphia International Airport officials said they were gearing up to deal with the winter storm expected overnight, including pre-treating runways with chemicals.
More than 1,950 flights were canceled in the Midwest, the vast majority of which were flights in or out of Chicago's two airports.
Chicago's Department of Aviation said about 1,300 departing flights were canceled from O'Hare International Airport and 300 at Midway International Airport. At Detroit Metropolitan Airport, more than 350 departing flights were canceled, and more delayed. About 20 flights were canceled from Omaha's Eppley Airfield.
The winds - gusts up to 45 mph were expected in the Chicago area - made road travel tricky too. Illinois Gov. Bruce Rauner cautioned against any travel and put state agencies on alert.
The Illinois Department of Transportation dispatched 350 trucks to clear and salt Chicago-area roadways ahead of Monday's morning rush hour. In eastern Nebraska, several sections of Interstate 80 were closed Sunday due to accidents in the icy conditions.
The weather led to power outages Sunday, including roughly 18,000 ComEd customers in Illinois, most of them in suburban Chicago. The weather cut power to nearly 8,000 northern Indiana homes and businesses.
In Nebraska, a truck driver and a 62-year-old woman were killed in separate traffic accidents on snowy roads.
New York City firefighters battled a seven-alarm fire for more than 24 hours after it first broke out at a storage warehouse in Brooklyn.
Firefighters struggled to tame the blaze in freezing temperatures on Sunday which had turned the warehouse into an ice castle overnight, with their fire hoses leaving a layer of ice everywhere they spray. 
Firefighters were first called to the CitiStorage facility on North 11th on the corner of Kent Street in the upscale neighborhood of Williamsburg around 4:30am on Saturday, and they promptly extinguished a fire. 
However, they were called back to the same location just two hours later for a much bigger fire that was ripping through the building.  
It's still unknown what initially sparked the second blaze, but it should be noted that waterfront property in Williamsburg is some of the most highly-valued in the New York City area. High-rise buildings take up most of the waterfront space and even grander developments are currently in the planning stages for the soon-to-be demolished Domino sugar factor just a few blocks south of the fire.
The blaze quickly turned into a seven alarm fire with more than 275 firefighters brought to the scene to put out the flames, both from trucks on the street and boats in the East River. 
In addition to the elements being against them, the fire was also difficult to put out because it was being fueled by the papers documents stored inside.  
The facility hosts scores of paper files kept by several New York City health and education agencies as well as the New York court system. 
FDNY Chief James Leonard told the New York Times that the conditions could not have been worse for his firefighters who had to endure stiff winds and ice forming on fire hydrant and pump trucks. He said crew could continue to work at the scene for several weeks.   
Aerial pictures of the fire showed a massive plume of smoke carrying eastward across Brooklyn, and charred bits of documents floated across the borough.The fire was so massive that the smoke was visible from every part of the city.   