Train crashes into station on Brisbane's bayside
Queensland's rail safety regulator is investigating this morning's train crash at Cleveland on Brisbane's bayside.
Fourteen people suffered minor injuries when a passenger train overshot the end of the tracks and slammed into the station at 9.30am (AEST).
The train travelled 10 metres inside the railway station, demolishing a toilet block in the process.
There were 13 passengers on the train, along with the driver and a guard, while two people were on the platform and there were two staff in the station office.
Ten people were taken to hospital with minor injuries and have since been discharged.
The impact all but demolished part of the station, bringing down power lines.
Brian Scott was working nearby and says it happened without warning.
"We were in the office and all of a sudden we heard this loud roar, then a thud," he said.
"We raced out the front and saw this big cloud of dust and smoke and looked over and there was this train up on an angle into the platform."
Police Superintendent Jim Keogh said miraculously everyone escaped with only minor injuries, including the train driver who was in shock.
"As you can see it's quite a dramatic accident there, he's come close to being hurt," he said.
"Certainly it's a case where he got out of it by the skin of his teeth - we had to actually cut the power first up then force the way in to get the passengers out."
Queensland Fire and Rescue staff at the scene had to wait about an hour for power to be disconnected before passengers could leave the train.
Station officer Rob Hauxwell says once the scene was safe the passengers were out within minutes.
"We could see that there was still passengers on the train," he said.
"We directed them down to the rear of the engine, or the rear of the train itself, did a head count then we conducted a primary search right to the front of the train.
"That took maybe another five or 10 minutes."
Translink and Queensland Rail are investigating whether the crash was caused by power or braking problems.