First Winter Storm of the Season Kills Four in Minnesota
The snow and cold forced rescue crews to postpone a search for a boater who went missing on the Mississippi River over the weekend in Winona County, Minnesota, the sheriff's office told NBC station KTTC of Rochester.
School was canceled Tuesday in some districts in Wisconsin and Minnesota, and some Veterans Day events were called off. The so-called polar vortex scrapped a few dozen flights at the Minneapolis, Chicago and Detroit airports, but nothing like on Monday, when more than 300 were wiped out in Minneapolis.
At Green Valley Golf Course in New Philadelphia, Ohio, David Phillips and a couple of friends were getting in one last round of golf Tuesday.
"You can see the vortex coming in," Phillips told NBC station WHIZ of Zanesville, adding: "I probably won't be able to play" until spring.
Farther west, up to 12 inches of snow fell on parts of southern and eastern Montana, with drifts up to two feet near Brusett, in northeast Montana. State advisories discouraged travel in parts of North Dakota and much of western Minnesota.
Later in the week, temperatures in some of the areas that got the heaviest snow in the northern Plains and the Upper Midwest could dip below zero, potentially locking much of the ice in place for days, said Jon Erdman, a forecaster for The Weather Channel.
The frigid air took hold across the center of the country Monday, sending temperatures plunging by up to 30 degrees in less than an hour. The arctic air should reach the East Coast by week's end — bringing temperatures more normal for January than November. Dallas, which was close to 80 degrees on Monday, dipped just below freezing Tuesday morning.
By Friday, low temperatures are expected to be below freezing across a huge stretch of the U.S., from Oregon across to Maine and south to Texas and Georgia.
"It's horrible. It's really cold out," Jon Dempsey, a homeless man who's staying at the Gospel Mission in Medford, Oregon, told NBC station KOBI.
The National Weather Service said temperatures could fall as low as 22 below zero Wednesday morning in Butte, Montana, and would stay well below freezing into the weekend.
Erin McClam and Alexander Smith of NBC News contributed to this report.