Sudden 'noise' on black box as Russian plane broke up in flight
A "noise" from an undetermined source was heard immediately before the black box of a Russian airliner that crashed one week ago in Egypt's Sinai suddenly went dark, the head of the Egyptian investigation team said Saturday.
Ayman el-Muqadem told a news conference in Cairo that the team was "considering all possible scenarios for the cause of the accident" and has not yet reached any conclusions. The Egyptian-led team also includes members from Russia, France, Germany and Ireland.
El-Muqadem said the committee is still in the "information-gathering phase" and had been hampered since Wednesday by bad weather at the site of the crash in the Sinai Peninsula. The plane was en route from the Egyptian resort of Sharm el-Sheikh to St. Petersburg with 224 people aboard when it broke up in flight 23 minutes after takeoff Oct. 31. All passengers and crew were killed.
In recent days, Britain, France, Ireland and Russia suspended flights to the Red Sea resort until an investigation is completed. U.S. and British officials say the plane, carrying mainly Russian tourists, may have been blown up by a bomb. Islamic State extremists claimed they brought down the Airbus A-321 but provided no evidence.
El-Muqadem took a pointed swipe at U.S. and British speculation on the possibility of a bomb, saying the committee noted media reports and analysis "some of which claim to rely on official intelligence which favors a certain scenario" for the cause of the accident.
"The committee was not provided with any information or evidence in this regard," he said. He "urged the sources of such reports to provide (the committee) with all information that will help us undertake our mission."
His remarks echoed those made earlier Saturday by Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh Shourky who said Egypt expected the information that had caused some countries to suspend flights to Sharm el-Sheikh "would be communicated to us instead of being broadcast” in the media.
More than a dozen British and Russian planes arrived in the resort town Saturday to begin flying out tourists stranded after several nations banned regular flights in the wake of the crash. Denmark, Norway and Finland warned their citizens against traveling to Sharm el-Sheikh.
The disruption in service has left as many as 20,000 British tourists and 80,000 Russians stuck in Egypt, mainly at the resort town.
A limited number of British flights were departing Sharm el-Sheikh on Saturday, but with a backlog of evacuation flights, many were canceled.  Hotel lobbies were filled with heaping luggage and passengers waiting to know if they would fly.
Some passengers questioned how safe it was to take airlines' advice to go to the airport for information.
"They are saying the security risk is the suitcases, that they can't guarantee the safety of the suitcases. They've got 120 tons of luggage currently sitting at the airport, and they are telling us all to go to the airport to get their flight and hotel information," said Ashley Hurley, who spent a week on a diving boat and was scheduled to fly back to Birmingham, England, with Monarch Airways on Saturday before his flight was canceled.
"It doesn't make sense to me and it seems like a safety nightmare," he added.
Hurley, who said he was not notified that his flight had been canceled but found out on his own by calling home, placed blame on his airline.
"It's understandable, these things happen, and the government has been hard on them, but they are not giving us information," he said of Monarch. "I was tweeting earlier to get information, and that's not how I should have to get information in a situation like this."
Samantha King, a hairdresser from London who had been told she would fly early Saturday morning, said she arrived at the airport at 6 a.m. "There's a little bit of a queue ... they were checking my hand soaps and things, then when we got to the airport the flight was canceled," she said. "The easyJet people were surprised we hadn't been notified."
King was told that if she did not receive a call by 4 p.m. Saturday, she would not be flying home.  Despite the uncertainty, back at the resort, she said she was trying to enjoy the extra days at the beach.
Russia, which reversed course and suspended regular flights after initially dismissing the possibility of foul play in the crash, sent 10 planes Saturday, according to Russian deputy prime minister Arkady Dvorkovich. He said at least 1,200 Russian tourists have been flown out since Friday, Russia's Interfax news agency reported.
More than 100 Russian passengers stayed behind early Saturday because they didn’t want to leave their luggage. For security reasons, tourists leaving Sharm el-Sheikh are only being allowed to carry hand luggage on board. The Russian Emergencies Ministry said it’s sending planes to Egypt to bring back the checked baggage.
Five British planes, two from Metrojet, two from Monarch Airways and one from British Airlines, were also sent. In addition, several British planes were reportedly on standby in Cyprus awaiting permission to fly to the resort, Al Jazeera reported.
Egyptian airport and security officials said an investigation has been launched into any local staff and ground crew in Sharm el-Sheikh that came into contact with the downed Russian Metrojet flight.
The officials told AP on Saturday that authorities were questioning airport staff and have begun surveillance on those who worked on the jet. The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they are not authorized to brief reporters.
The airport at Sharm el-Sheikh has long seen gaps in security, reports the AP, including a key baggage scanning device that often is not functioning and lax searches at an entry gate for food and fuel for the planes, according to seven security officials at the airport.
One of the officials, involved in security for planes, also pointed to bribe-taking by poorly paid policemen monitoring X-ray machines. "I can't tell you how many times I have caught a bag full of drugs or weapons that they have let through for 10 euros or whatever," he told the AP. Egyptian President Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi has said British officials sent a security team to evaluate the airport 10 months ago, in cooperation with Egyptian officials, and were satisfied with the results.
Russian Emergency Situations Minister Vladimir Puchkov said experts are testing plane wreckage that has been brought to Moscow for potential traces of explosives, according to Russian news agencies cited by the Associated Press.
An unnamed crash investigator told France 2 television station Friday that the voice recorder aboard the flight captured the sound of an explosion that wasn't associated with engine failure.
In a related development, the British government and the tourist agency Thomson said a plane carrying British tourists to Sharm el-Sheikh in August came within 1,000 feet of a rocket The Guardian reports.The alleged near-miss involving a Thomson jet carrying 189 passengers happened on August 23.
The British Department for Transport said its investigation concluded it was not a “targeted attack,” while Thomson said there was “no cause for concern” for further flights.
A spokesman for the Tui groupk which owns Thomson, said investigators concluded the object was likely only a flare, according to The Guardian.
Ahmed Abu Zeid, spokesperson of Egypt's Ministry of Foreign Affairs dismissed as "preposterous" and "completely inaccurate" an account of the incident by the Daily Mail.
The Daily Mail account said the plane "dodged a missile above Sharm el-Sheikah" with just "seconds to spare from disaster."
"Egypt and UK govs fully aware that plane was in no danger," Zeid said on Twitter. "Airliners previously informed of military exercise & instructed of procedures."
He said the incident involved ground-to-ground fire exercise at a military base a few miles from the Sharm el-Sheikh airport and that "no ground-to-air" firing was involved "whatsoever."