Two killed, dozens hurt in Amtrak collision
LOS ANGELES (Reuters) - At least two people were killed and dozens injured on Friday when a tractor-trailer rig crashed through closed rail crossing gates and collided with an Amtrak train on a rural Nevada highway, authorities said.
The truck drove into the side of an Amtrak train carrying 204 passengers and 14 crew members at a rail crossing about 70 miles east of Reno, Nevada, Highway Patrol spokesman Dan Lopez said.
Lopez said that at least two people, including the driver of the truck, were confirmed killed in the fiery crash on U.S. Route 95, which sent a plume of black smoke billowing into the air over the scene.
“We haven’t been able to gain access to the train to make sure there’s no one else in there,” Lopez told Reuters by phone from the scene. “There could be further fatalities.”
He said investigators were trying to determine why the driver ignored the closed crossing arms and flashing red lights before hitting the train.
“The truck did in fact strike the train at the fourth car and according to witness statements the gates and lights were operational,” Lopez said.
About 60 people were taken to Banner Churchill Community Hospital in Fallon, about 30 miles away, hospital spokeswoman Aimee Fulk told Reuters.
Fulk said the 10 most seriously hurt patients were admitted to the hospital’s emergency room, while the remaining 50 were treated for lesser injuries.
“They were minor injuries where they able to walk and probably just need to be checked over just in case,” Fulk said, adding that some had already been released by late afternoon.
Fulk said she had no further information on the condition of the patients taken to the emergency room but was not aware of any life-threatening injuries among them.
She said some crash victims may have been taken to other hospitals. Authorities arranged overnight shelter for others at an elementary school in Fallon.
“I visited with those affected by today’s train crash this afternoon at the shelter in Fallon. Our hearts go out to the victims and their families. Kathleen and I will keep them in our thoughts and prayers,” Nevada Governor Brian Sandoval said in a written statement.
The westbound California Zephyr was en route from Chicago to Emeryville, California when it was hit by the gravel truck.
Amtrak said in a written statement that representatives for the passenger rail service, which is partly owned by the U.S. government, were headed to the scene, along with those of track owner Union Pacific.
“We are saddened by any injury and appreciate the emergency response by local and state agencies,” Amtrak said in the statement. “We ask the news media to be respectful of our customers, our employees and their families.”