MH17 recovery operation completed, say investigators
The Dutch Safety Board, which is leading the investigation into the tragedy, said the week-long operation had been wound up with the remains of the Boeing 777 eventually being taken to the Netherlands.
The crash happened on July 17 this year in an area where pro-Russian separatists operated. The plane was on its way from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur.
A preliminary report by the board in September said wreckage was “consistent with the damage that would be expected from a large number of high-energy objects that penetrated the aircraft from outside”.
Up until this month, the board had had only limited access to the crash site. But recovery work was able to begin on November 16.
The board said: “With the transport from Torez to Kharkhov the recovery operation has ended. After a considerable period of planning, the actual recovery of wreckage started November 16. In the week following as much wreckage relevant for the investigation as possible was recovered.
“Despite the complex circumstances and local safety situation, the team was able to work as planned under the guidance of (European security organisation) OSCE. ”
The DSB went on: “Although this recovery operation has ended, there is still wreckage left at the crash site — mostly smaller pieces of wreckage with no value for the investigation. Local services will remove those pieces of wreckage from the site as was agreed by the recovery team.”
The board has said that as part of the investigation it intends to reconstruct a section of the aircraft.
Despite the difficulty in accessing the site due to fighting in the area, the black box flight recorders were recovered early on and were passed to the board after being inspected at the UK Air Accidents Investigation.
The board said pieces of wreckage were pierced in numerous places and that most likely there had been “an in-flight break-up”.
It said that it aimed to publish a full report within one year of the date of the crash.